Making every moment special ANNUAL REPORT and FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 ABOUT OUR REPORTING FINANCIAL OVERVIEW 10.6bn GROUP REVENUE 2.2%
INTERIM AND FINAL DIVIDEND 10.3% 63.5% GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX AND ADJUSTED ITEMS GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX 12.6% 70.7% ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE NAVIGATING THE REPORT Throughout this document a series of icons demonstrate how weve integrated information about our business model with details of our strategy and risk.
REPORTING PERIOD This year we are reporting on the 52weeks to 1 st April 20 1 7 compared to last year when we reported on a 53week basis as every six years an additional week is included to ensure that the yearend date stays in line with the end of March.
To provide a meaningful comparison with this year all  nancial movements are reported on a 52week basis and excluding the 53rd week last year unless otherwise noted.
Details of the 53week comparisons can be found in the Financial Review p26.
ALTERNATIVE PERFORMANCE MEASURES This report provides alternative performance measures APMs which are not de ned or speci ed under the requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards.
We believe these APMs provide readers with important additional information on our business.
New for this year we have included a glossary on page 1 33 which provides a comprehensive list of the APMs that we use including an explanation of how they are calculated why we use them and how they can be reconciled to a statutory measure where relevant.
PLAN A Plan A is integrated throughout this report demonstrating how it is embedded in every part of our business.
This makes it easier for shareholders to see how our sustainability programme is creating value in our diff erent divisions. iteplana2017.
ONLINE INFORMATION We have comprehensive  nancial and company information on our website.
To register for noti cationssite investors and follow the Electronic Shareholder Communication link.
A PLAN A RISK R READ MORE STRATEGY  REMUNERATION LINK Read more on p0809 01 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS MandS IS ONE OF THE UKS LEADING RETAILERS.
WE ARE COMMITTED TO MAKING EVERY MOMENT SPECIAL FOR OUR CUSTOMERS THROUGH OUR HIGH QUALITY OWNBRAND FOOD CLOTHING AND HOME PRODUCTS WE OFFER IN OUR 1433 STORES WORLDWIDE AND ONLINE.
INTRODUCTION
STRATEGIC REPORT DIRECTORS REPORT OUR BUSINESS 02 At a glance 04 Chairmans statement Market and customer insights Chief Executives strategic update 12 Creating sustainable value 14 Connected value Value creation in action OUR PERFORMANCE 18 Key performance indicators Our People Our Performance review 26 Financial review 30 Risk management
34 Chairmans Governance overview 36 Our Board 39 Succession and induction 40 Board activities 42 Board eff ectiveness review Responsibilities oversight and independence 44 Stakeholder engagement 46 Nomination Committee Report 48 Audit Committee Report 53 Pensions governance 54 Remuneration overview 56 Remuneration at a glance 58 Full Remuneration Policy
66 Remuneration Report
79 Other disclosures 84 Independent auditors report FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Consolidated  nancial statements Notes to the  nancial statements Company  nancial statements Notes to the Company  nancial statements 132 Group  nancial record 133 Glossary 135 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Directors Report Shareholder information forms part of the Directors Report.
WHATS IN THIS REPORT 02 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT AT A GLANCE Making every food moment special is the aim of our Food business which accounts for 60% of our UK turnover.
Through the innovation quality and choice that we off er customers know they can come to us for every occasion whether it is healthy cooking ideas delicious meals from around the world or convenient food onthego.
We sell food through 942 UK stores including 253 owned and 383 franchise Simply Food stores.
We sell beautifully designed high quality ownbrand clothing and homeware through 343 fullline storessite website.
Our Womenswear Menswear Kidswear Lingerie Beauty and Home products account for 40% of our UK turnover.
With our focus on contemporary style and wardrobe essentials we are the UKs biggest clothing retailer by value.
We are also the market leader in Womenswear Lingerie and Menswear.
5.6bn FOOD REVENUE CLOTHING and HOME REVENUE 24% of range NUMBER OF NEW LINES NUMBER OF CUSTOMERS 3.8bn 2.7% FULLPRICE SALES NUMBER OF CUSTOMERS OUR BUSINESS FOOD CLOTHING and HOME Read more on p23 Read more on p23 4.2% 2.8% 03 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS We export the best of MandS Clothing and Home and Food around the world with stores across Europe Asia and the Middle East.
We also have a growing international online business.
Following a strategic review of our International business we are focusing on our established joint venture and franchise partnerships and operating fewer whollyowned markets.
In January 2007 we launched Plan A to address the key environmental social and ethical challenges facing MandS.
After ten years and two further updates Plan A continues to lead the sustainable business agenda.
This year we are launching a new set of commitments which have been developed to transition Plan A into a new way of working and engaging with our customers.
1 0.7% 04 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT
This is my last Annual Report as Chairman after more than six years at MandS.
It has been an extraordinary honour to serve this company.
Since Steve Rowe became Chief Executive he has set out clear plans to accelerate the pace of change across MandS.
By simplifying the way we do things and by focusing on the customer we have laid solid foundations for growth.
We repositioned our Clothing and Home business made important decisions about the future shape of our UK and International store estates and put in place fairer pay and bene ts for our employees.
It has been a year of great change outside MandS as well.
Last summers vote to leave the European Union has caused inevitable uncertainty.
Nobody yet knows what the longterm eff ect of Brexit will be.
Like many businesses we have been impacted by the depreciation of sterling but it is our job to seize the opportunities ahead and prepare for all eventualities.
We have made some hard decisions.
Some have led to signi cant adjustments to our pro ts this year and also in the case of repositioning our Clothing and Home business to some shortterm reduction in our adjusted pro ts.
However these changes needed to be made for the longterm health of the business.
Decisive action and strong execution have never been more important to compete in a fastchanging retail environment.
These actions allow us to embrace the future from a position of strength well equipped for a digital age and with a sustainable business model.
PERFORMANCE
I believe our food is without exaggeration among the best in the world.
Once again we delivered a good performance in a tough market.
Sales grew as customers responded to the quality of our food and the convenience of our stores.
We are very pleased with the overall performance of the Simply Food stores opened during the year.
The return on capital from the format remains compelling.
With product innovation remaining the backbone of our Food business and a strong but measured store opening programme we have a clear path to growth.
We repositioned our Clothing and Home business for sustainable growth by ending a damaging cycle of promotions and discounts.
We also refocused our ranges on stylish wearable greatquality essentials.
By implementing a sensible competitive pricing architecture for our customers we have seen encouraging improvements in fullprice sales.
As expected fewer promotions and less discounting resulted in lower sales.
There is much work still to do but we are beginning to see signs of recovery.
Steve made it clear a year ago that this repositioning would have a short term negative impact on pro ts but would set us up for sustainable performance and a stronger business in the long term.
A year on we are even clearer that this was the right thing to do.
Our International business had a challenging year.
However we announced a clear strategy to focus on our strong franchise partnerships and our established joint ventures and operate in fewer owned markets by exiting ten owned lossmaking markets and 53 stores.
Overall adjusted pro t before tax was 6 1 3.8m down 10.3% on last year.
However due to charges of 437 .4m Group pro ts fell to 1 76.4m.
The main elements of the charges relate to the cost of implementing the new pay and pensions arrangements and the cost of the International store closures.
I was Chairman when about half of these 53 stores opened and so must accept my full share of the responsibility for this disappointing result.
However consumer behaviour has changed in the intervening years.
We had already signi cantly scaled back our ambitions in owned markets before we announced these closure plans and just as there was a rationale for opening the stores then there is one for closing them now.
It is essential that we adapt to our customers changing needs and recognise the current realities of the markets in which we operate despite the shortterm cost.
Having the right stores in the right places is also why we are reshaping our UK store portfolio as we focus on having less more inspiring Clothing and Home space and growing our Food space.
At the end of this veyear programme we will have increased our space overall and employed more people.
Our stores will be more relevant to the changing needs and habits of our customers in a digital world.
This year Steve has set out clear and decisive plans.
I will leave an MandS that is well equipped for the digital age and totally focused on its customers.
This more relevant MandS is underpinned by eff ective succession planning good governance and active shareholder engagement which have been my focus during my time as Chairman.
ROBERT SWANNELL CHAIRMAN
PAID ON 13 JANUARY 201 7
TO BE PAID ON 14 JULY 201 7 TOTAL DIVIDEND FOR 201617
STATEMENT
OUR BUSINESS 05 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS HIGHLIGHTS OF THIS YEARS GOVERNANCE REPORT The Governance report provides A clear and honest review of the year A clear map illustrating our stakeholder considerations and engagement The outcome of our independent Board Evaluation Greater disclosure around Board discussions and associated actions and Our approach to risk and risk appetite.
As a Board we regularly discuss Strategy and performance Culture and behaviour
Ecommerce
Cyber and IT The MandS brand
Supply chain
Property
Plan A VALUES AND PLAN A Our values of Inspiration Innovation Integrity and In Touch run through everything we do at MandS.
This is a business that tries to do the right thing and this is demonstrated in many ways from our Long Service Awards to helping disadvantaged people into work to the charity support delivered through Plan A.
This isnt new it is part of what has de ned us for over a century.
In 1964 Lord Sieff our then Deputy Chairman spoke about our values.
The main purpose of building up a great business should not be merely to make money Lord Sieff said.
A company has its responsibilities not only to shareholders but also to the staff  the customers and the whole community in which it trades.
Unless it gives satisfaction and even happiness to all concerned it will fail in its aims in the long term.
His comments are as pertinent as ever and this philosophy continues to guide the way we do business at MandS.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of Plan A.
I am extremely proud of the work we have done.
From becoming a zero waste to land ll business and sourcing raw materials more responsibly to our ambitious programmes to support workers throughout our global supply chain we have sought to lead the way on truly sustainable change.
We recently relaunched Plan A and the latest version is aimed at being even more relevant to customers and the communities in which we trade.
BOARD CHANGES Since I became Chairman in 201 1 I have consistently focused on succession planning as one of the most important tasks for the Board.
Last year after a rigorous process we appointed Steve as Chief Executive the  rst internal appointee for many years.
Steves strategy is  rmly in place so this is now the right time for a new Chairman to take over as plans for growth in the longer term are developed.
After an equally rigorous process led by Vindi Banga and our Nomination Committee I will be replaced as Chairman by Archie Norman in September.
Archie brings a breadth and depth of relevant experience to MandS and an extensive track record in retail and brands.
I am delighted with Archies appointment and I wish him great success in this role.
SHAREHOLDER RETURNS AND DIVIDENDS We know how important our dividend is to shareholders.
Our policy remains progressive with dividends broadly covered twice by earnings.
Despite a reduction of 10.3% in our adjusted pro ts we have decided to maintain the total dividend per share for the year at the same level as last year with the proposed payment of a  nal dividend of 1 1.9p per share this dividend remains well covered on a cash basis.
Given the cash costs associated with our strategic change and the uncertain market conditions we consider it is prudent not to make additional returns of cash to shareholders under our enhanced return programme.
A STRONGER COMPANY I will leave MandS a stronger company.
We are now set up to compete with a modern distribution and logistics backbone and excellent digital design and sourcing capabilities.
I have been committed to strong governance throughout my tenure and your Board today has a balanced breadth of talent both among the executives and the nonexecutives.
We have worked to increase engagement with our shareholders and employees.
Over the last six years we have engaged our major institutional shareholders in depth in our business to ensure as much transparency as possible.
Now through our Shareholder Panel we are engaging with our private shareholders in an unprecedented way.
In addition through channels such as my regular meetings with the Chair of our Business Involvement Groups BIG MandSs network of elected employees and his attendance at our Board we are engaging with our people as never before.
Having focused on these three pillars governance succession and engagement I believe MandS is now better prepared for the further changes ahead.
There is no business I would have been prouder to chair than MandS.
I will miss being part of it its values and the place it holds in customers hearts.
My colleagues at MandS are the most dedicated I have ever worked with and I never fail to be impressed by their commitment to the business.
They want MandS to succeed and they know what doing the right thing means.
The last six years have seen profound changes in retail and at MandS technology has transformed the way that people shop.
Under Steve change will continue unabated it must.
To meet the challenges ahead MandS must be bold ambitious and decisive.
It must think big and execute eff ectively.
And as Lord Sieff said it must also give satisfaction and happiness to its customers its employees and its communities.
Finally I would like to thank our customers our employees and our shareholders for their support.
It has been an unforgettable privilege to be Chairman of MandS and I wish the business every success in the years ahead.
ROBERT SWANNELL CHAIRMAN
In May we announced that Archie Norman will join MandS as Chairman on 1 September 201 7 .
Archie has signi cant retail experience and a longterm track record of value creation in several major British companies.
He has led transformations of major businesses in the UK and abroad and served on the boards of several others most recently as Chairman of ITV plc.
ARCHIE NORMAN CHAIRMAN DESIGNATE Read more on p3483 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our rich network of stakeholder relationships upholds the values on which MandS was founded.
These remain vital to building a sustainable business.
COMMUNITY
Annual General Meeting AGM Our 2016 AGM was well attended and all our proposed resolutions were passed with votes in favour ranging from 90.53% to 99.99%.
Shareholder Panel Regular discussions between the directors and groups of private shareholders.
Performance Overview Our annual business overview designed and written speci cally for the private shareholder.
Monthly CEO updates We have introduced a monthly CEO update to c.50000 employees via social media.
Your Say survey Our March 201 7 employee survey showed that engagement was up by 3%.
Listening groups In early 201 7 our colleagues shared their views on a range of customer focused questions.
Director breakfasts Discussions between directors and groups of employees from all levels within the business.
Business Involvement Group BIG Engagement with our employees is facilitated through BIG our network of elected employee representatives from each store and business area.
Customer Insight Unit CIU Our CIU gathers feedback through surveys reviews and focus groups to learn what customers want from MandS.
Customer Research Panel Our dedicated panel of c.23 1000 customers gives us valuable input on products in development.
Consumer Barometer Each month we listen to c.70000 customers to create a snapshot of consumer sentiment.
Sparks Card 5.6m customers now receive tailored off ers plus the chance to engage with a Plan A charity partner.
Over 2m has been raised to date.
Marketing We created our 2016 Christmas With Love campaign in direct response to feedback from thousands of customers.
Marks and Start Training work placements and employment have been provided to thousands of disadvantaged people.
Spark Something Good Over the last two years 4000 employee and customer volunteers have helped over 240 community projects across 1 2 cities.
Global Community Programme We continue to improve the lives of over 40000 people across our global supply chain.
Business community engagement We help shape our business environment by responding to government and industry consultations and contributing to industry discussions and events.
Exhibitions and events Our Marks in Time exhibition and programme of events brought MandSs heritage to life for 38000 people during 20161 7 .
Schools programme Our awardwinning programme has reached 12000 pupils since 2012 having recently broadened its reach through videoconferencing.
Partnership with University of Leeds Now in its  fth year our strategic partnership delivers collaborative research projects and unique student work opportunities.
Reminiscence work We provide support to people with dementia and their carers through dropin sessions and the newly launched Memory Caf.
Making Every Moment Special We held an extensive programme of instore events to  nd out from our employees how we could make every moment special for our customers.
Crunch Costs In 2016 we asked all our employees how we could drive down costs and ineffi ciencies.
We used the 20m saved to add over 3000 colleagues to our stores.
Quarterly Skype updates Our quarterly CEOCFO trading updates are broadcast via Skype to our store management teams.
Ongoing engagement Members of our senior management and Investor Relations teams held 406 meetings with 245 diff erent institutions during 2016.
Annual Governance Event The Chairman hosts this annual day of dialogue and debate between directors and the Companys largest investors.
Annual perception study Each year the Board receives an independent report from Makinson Cowell into our major investors views on our management and performance.
Annual Report and Accounts We go beyond our obligations to provide a holistic and engaging view of the business.
Webcasts We have been providing live webcasts of our AGMs and preliminary and interim announcements for over ten years.
CUSTOMERS
MandS
Company
Archive
Plan A
Private shareholders SHAREHOLDERS CUSTOMERS COMMUNITY EMPLOYEES We are always looking for ways to develop our engagement with shareholders.
This year we introduced our regular Shareholder Panel where a small group of private shareholders is invited to participate in facetoface discussions with members of the Board and senior management.
For our large institutional investors and investor advisory  rms we continue to hold our Annual Governance Event.
Our 201 6 event was hosted by the Chairman and attended by the Senior Independent Director the committee chairmen Group Secretary and a senior representative from our Plan A team.
Our Customer Insight Unit constantly gathers feedback from our customers to understand what they want from MandS.
Key insights are shared with the directors and are critical to informing strategy.
During the year customer feedback resulted in a number of store improvements including additional staff on shop  oors.
We also engage with our customers to create marketing campaigns that are relevant to them such as Christmas With Love in 201 6 and the creation of Spend It Well.
For more on customer insight and engagement see Market and Customer Insights on pages 67 and Engaging Our Customers on page 25.
201 7 marks the tenth anniversary of Plan A our social and environmental sustainability programme.
Central to Plan A is our goal of creating a positive impact in society and improving peoples lives be they employees customers workers in our supply chain charity partners or local communities around the world.
Find out more at marksandspencer. complana.
This year also marks the  fth anniversary of the MandS Company Archive whose educational and social activities have enriched the lives of thousands of local people.
Visit the Archives website at marksintime.
The Boards engagement with the Companys 85000 employees is facilitated through our Business Involvement Group BIG a network of 3500 elected employee representatives from across all parts of the business.
Local BIG teams regularly feed back to National BIG whose chairman in turn represents the collective employee voice through regular meetings with the Chairman and CEO plus annual attendance at Board meetings.
However employee engagement extends far beyond BIG One example from the year was a collaborative exercise where we asked our store colleagues what we all needed to do diff erently to Make Every Moment Special for our customers.
Through 75 regional leadership events and 1500 events involving all our store employees we found new ways to help empower our people to put customers at the heart of the business more about this on page 8.
Engagement can also start in the community Through Marks and Start we off ered work placements to over 2900 disadvantaged people in Over 6 5 % of those who c omplet ed the programme went on to  nd work either with MandS or other employers.
For further details about how we engage with our employees see Employee Involvement on pages 8 182.
SHAREHOLDERS
Institutional
A PLAN A Our pioneering social and environmental sustainability programme continues to underpin the way we do business at MandS.
MandS COMPANY
Our archive safeguards MandSs heritage and shares it with the public through exhibitions and events as well as online.
OUR STAKEHOLDERS HOW WE LISTEN and ENGAGE
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 The main purpose of building up a great business should not be merely to make money.
A company has its responsibilities not only to shareholders but also to the staff  the customers and the whole community in which it trades.
Unless it gives satisfaction and even happiness to all concerned it will fail in its aims in the long term.
LORD SIEFF DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF MandS 1964 06 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT UNDERSTANDING OUR CUSTOMERS Our Customer Insight Unit CIU gathers feedback through a number of diff erent channels including store exit surveys online surveys and reviews till surveys the Customer Contact Centre and focus groups to build a comprehensive picture of what our customers want from MandS.
This year we carried out over 700000 customer interviews either in person or through online surveys.
Within CIU we have created a centralised data analytics team to ensure we have a single accurate view of our customers.
Through anonymised data analysis we can better understand how our customers are shopping with us by examining purchasing behaviours and patterns both in our stores and online.
By understanding how our customers choose to spend their money and time at MandS we can ensure we are always working to deliver the products and shopping experience they want.
Our Consumer Barometer gives us a regular snapshot of how consumers are feeling about their household  nances and the economy in general.
Every month we talk to 70000 MandS customers across our key customer groups as well as those who dont shop with us regularly to take the nations pulse.
We overlay this insight with external market data such as weather patterns travel time to our stores local footfall data and the competitor environment to build a solid understanding of our customers and our position in the overall retail landscape.
But gathering this crucial data is only half of the equation  its how we use it to put our customers centre stage thats important.
By carefully analysing all the information that we have we can ensure we are in touch with consumer attitudes and lifestyles.
The data allows us to identify patterns and groups of customers.
By understanding these groups in detail we can build our strategies from the customer upwards rather than from the boardroom downwards.
In short the information allows us to do a better job for our most important stakeholders  the people who shop with us  so that we are more relevant more often.
By understanding and knowing our customers through careful and detailed data analysis we can put customers right at the heart of everything we do.
WHAT CUSTOMERS ARE TELLING US After holding up reasonably well over Christmas consumer con dence in general dipped in the early months of 201 7 .
People started to feel a little less certain about the wider economic outlook due to concern around issues such as rising in ation the falling pound and uncertainty as a result of the UKs decision to leave the European Union.
When asked about their future spending intentions all consumers  rather than MandS customers in particular  said they were likely to trim back their discretionary spending in the months ahead due to these economic concerns.
They also said they were more likely than before to put their money into experiences and events such as trips to the cinema gym membership or meals out rather than into buying consumer goods on the high street.
Net optimism a measure of how positive people are feeling increased by 5% over the year.
In terms of their biggest concerns in the immediate future people cited rising food prices worries about the Brexit negotiations and geopolitical uncertainty following the American presidential election last November.
But despite all this consumer con dence is still relatively high compared with the period between 2008 and 201 3 when it suff ered a prolonged slump due to the credit crisis.
More of our food shoppers say that they would recommend us to family and friends.
Our Net Promoter Score NPS which measures customers willingness to recommend MandS in Food is up four points.
In Clothing and Home while overall NPS was broadly level we saw an improvement in ratings from our most frequent customers and in our larger stores so we know customers are noticing the diff erence.
Although our Clothing and Home business is still recovering customers can see we are doing the right things.
Customers site easy to navigate and customer satisfaction has signi cantly improved over the last year.
HOW WE USE OUR INSIGHTS The information we gather gives us a crucial insight into the context in which were trading.
Our insights mean nothing unless we act on them.
We share the information with all our business units and use the results to help us inform our business decisions.
From product development and design to the content we put on our website to our online delivery proposition  they are all guided by what our customers tell us.
This year there were many examples of how we took insights from our CIU and used them to improve our customers experience for example We changed the layout of our clothing departments because of customer feedback that our stores were sometimes confusing to shop in.
Until this year we organised Womenswear by subbrand such as per una or Limited Edition.
But this led to a fragmented shopping experience and product duplication where sub brands had similar garments.
Our stores now have clear product departments with the key products for the season brought together at the front of the store leading to a more intuitive shopping experience.
We have used our insights to increase levels of personalisation for our 5.6m Sparks members who now receive tailored off ers based on their interests and shopping habits.
We invite them to special Sparks events and experiences such as wine tastings or fashion shows depending on MARKET and CUSTOMER
OUR BUSINESS Our actions are driven by listening to our customers and analysing the market to build a rich and robust picture of our customers shopping habits and outlooks.
Everything we do as a company is  ltered through the lens of what we know about our customers and every decision starts with them.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS how many Sparks they have and what we know they are passionate about.
We are also being more targeted in our email communications by sending customers updates speci cally related to their local store and area so they only get the information that is most relevant to them.
We used quantitative data from 7000 customers to guide our investment in improving service in our stores.
This research told us customers wanted to see more Customer Assistants in our stores.
We responded by putting over 3000 more colleagues into the departments where our customers told us they value service most including Fitting Rooms Bra Fit Mens Suits and Footwear.
We showcase our clothing collections to the fashion press twice a year  Autumn Winter in May and SpringSummer in November  so our customers get to see some of whats coming next season.
This year we responded to feedback that customers increasingly want to buy into new season trends as soon as they see them with See Now Buy Now capsule collections enabling customers to shop key pieces from the new season straight away.
The Clothing and Home research panel we use for product development has a customer interaction every  ve seconds through our dedicated panel of around 23 1000 customers.
With this we gain invaluable feedback on new products during design development so we can increase the buys on customer favourites and eliminate products that score less well at the concept stage ensuring we are shaping collections that most resonate with our customers.
For this years Christmas campaign we listened to thousands of customers to understand what they want to see from MandS at Christmas.
The feedback we gathered said they wanted us to own Christmas in the traditional sense but in a way that was surprising and diff erent.
So we created the Christmas with Love campaign starring the often unsung hero of Christmas Mrs Claus who epitomised the huge eff orts our customers put in to making the festive season special.
This is just the beginning.
The next few years present exciting opportunities.
For example since the launch of Sparks in 201 5 nearly 1.5m people have downloaded our MandS app.
This combination of technology and loyalty is powerful.
It brings us closer to our customers and will allow us to further enrich our proposition.
It will allow us to increase customer engagement.
And it will allow us to drive frequency of purchase across channels and categories.
Smart use of data can boost sales and therefore create value for everyone our customers our employees and ultimately our shareholders.
MandS TODAY UK FOOD MARKETPLACE We face stiff competition across the UK food sector with rising in ation recovery among the main four supermarkets and the continued growth of the discounters.
Food retailers and suppliers also face cost headwinds due to rising raw material prices and the depreciation of sterling.
However through listening to our customers and monitoring the market we keep on top of changing shopping habits.
Consumers remain as savvy as ever and relish innovation.
They are also doing smaller convenience shops.
These trends play to our strengths.
UK CLOTHING MARKETPLACE The market remains highly competitive with retailers facing cost pressures due to increasing commodity prices and the impact of the fall in sterling.
At the same time households are managing their  nances carefully due to fears of in ation and political uncertainty.
Customers still love treating themselves but consumer con dence dipped in the early months of 201 7 .
Spending on clothing is also coming under pressure as consumers spend more on experiences and retailers are vying with cinemas and restaurants for spend.
However we believe we can attract consumers by focusing on off ering high quality stylish products that are competitively priced.
Source GfK M F J D N O S A J J M A M F J D CONSUMER CONFIDENCE INDEX NUMBER OF CUSTOMERS CLOTHING and HOME CUSTOMERS 62% OF OUR CUSTOMERS ARE FEMALE 38% OF OUR CUSTOMERS ARE MALE WEBSITE VISITS PER WEEK 52% OF ONLINE ORDERS ARE MADE THROUGH TABLET AND MOBILE 40% FOOD CUSTOMERS SHOP FOR TONIGHT OF CUSTOMERS SHOP FOR BOTH CLOTHING and HOME AND FOOD 40% 23% OF CUSTOMERS UNDER 35 08 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT
A year ago I started in my role as Chief Executive by posing a series of questions that I hoped would help unlock the future of MandS giving us a platform from which to  rst recover and then to grow.
201 61 7 has been a year of change as we started to answer these questions which I address below.
The steps we are taking are making a diff erence and we are making progress.
However as we said when we set out our plan it has resulted in some shortterm pain.
Some of the action needed has been costly and pro ts are down.
Clothing and Home sales were down yearonyear as we reduced promotions and markdown activity.
We expected this and we still believe we are doing the right thing for the future of our business.
We have seen encouraging signs from the increase in fullprice Clothing and Home sales and in the sales growth during the key Christmas trading period.
And in Food we continued to grow ahead of the market with new stores outperforming expectations.
The business has adapted well as we start to build a sustainable foundation for the future.
We have laid a lot of the groundwork for our recovery however we are not there yet.
I want to see consistent delivery over time and I want to see us move out of recovery.
Even as our performance improves we cant stand still.
While we are still focused on recovering our business and we have a lot more to do I am also starting to look to future growth opportunities some of which I outline at the end of this update.
OUR CUSTOMERS We asked how we could put customers at the heart of everything we do.
Due to the changes weve made we are now a more datadriven organisation where decisions are made based on what we know about our customers not what we think we know.
We conduct more customer listening groups than ever before all trading meetings now begin with insight into our customers and as we celebrate ten years of leading the social and environmental agenda we have repurposed Plan A to make it more customerfocused.
Our customerfocused changes are most keenly felt in our stores.
We invested in customer service by recruiting additional colleagues into the areas we know are most important to our customers.
We also rolled out our Making Every Moment Special instore service initiative.
Read more about Making Every Moment Special below Our new Spend It Well marketing campaign like our Mrs Claus Christmas campaign before it  focuses squarely on our customers lifestyles.
It taps into peoples emotional connection with MandS and is aimed at driving a reappraisal of our brand.
Life is short so we should Spend It Well.
The campaign encourages customers to make the most of whats relevant for them today.
CLOTHING and HOME We asked how we could recover and grow our Clothing and Home business.
The answer lay in making a series of common sense customerfocused changes to the way we do things.
In a tough market I am pleased with the progress we are making.
By listening to our customers and simplifying how we do things I believe we have the right strategy in place to make MandS a relevant pro table and truly sustainable retailer.
STEVE ROWE CHIEF EXECUTIVE CHIEF EXECUTIVES STRATEGIC UPDATE OUR BUSINESS MAKING EVERY MOMENT SPECIAL Our Making Every Moment Special employee engagement programme has been transformational for our customers and our people alike.
Through it we believe weve taken customer service to new levels.
Last summer we gave over 70000 store colleagues interactive training with the objective of putting customers at the heart of what we do.
We encouraged them to make realtime decisions based on individual customers needs and we removed non customerfacing tasks from their daily routines giving them more time to spend with customers.
The response from colleagues has been phenomenal and as positive as anything Ive known in my 28 years at MandS.
Our Customer at the Heart site on Yammer our internal social media network contains thousands of examples of great service by our colleagues.
Throughout our 1 33year history we have learnt that better service leads to better sales.
Making Every Moment Special shows this principle in action.
It has become our mantra across the business.
By empowering our people to make customerfocused decisions our sales  oors are buzzing with a renewed sense of purpose.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS We made shopping simpler for customers by reducing the number of times we launch new lines from 1 4 to nine times a year.
We cut the number of garment options by 10%.
We are phasing out the Indigo Collezione and North Coast subbrands.
These measures enabled us to improve availability across our ranges.
Previously we acted too much like a fast fashion company prioritising frequency over quality and taking too many cues from catwalk fashions.
So we improved our  ts fabrics and  nishes we increased availability and we refocused on delivering contemporary wearable style and wardrobe essentials.
Our ranges are now more relevant to what customers want from MandS.
We started off ering better value than ever before by reducing prices on 2400 Clothing and Home lines.
We simultaneously reduced our promotional activity.
This put an end to confusing pricing which meant our products were either too expensive or too heavily discounted.
Not only have these changes given clarity to customers but they made our sales more pro table and boosted our fullprice market share.
We also made our stores far easier to shop in by merchandising more of our clothes by product category rather than by brand.
This change in emphasis re ected the changes we made last year to the way our teams design and buy products.
Our shops are now simpler and more intuitive.
They are based around customers needs.
We are still in the recovery phase of our plan and getting it right is absolutely crucial to our success.
In May this year we announced a new role to lead this work.
Jill McDonald will join as Managing Director Clothing Home and Beauty and will have overall pro t and loss accountability for all aspects of our Clothing and Home business from design and sourcing through to supply chain and logistics.
The scope of this role highlights the importance we are placing on continuing to recover and starting to grow Clothing and Home.
We are making encouraging progress and I believe we are on the right path to growth.
OUR STRATEGY RECOVER AND GROW CLOTHING and HOME CONTINUE TO GROW
QUALITY QUALITY PUTTING THE CUSTOMER AT THE HEART OF EVERYTHING WE DO CUSTOMERS AND BRAND Focus on product Style wardrobe essentials and  t Drive execution Price availability and service STYLE AUTHORITY Focus on product Innovation health and capability Drive execution Price availability and convenience NEWNESS CONVENIENCE UK STORE ESTATE Grow Food space c.60 fewer more inspirational Clothing and Home stores Rebalance c.50 stores to growth areas
Focus on partnership model and online Drive execution price availability and service ORGANISATION and COSTS Create a lean eff ective Head Offi ce Continue to develop cost culture 10 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT CHIEF EXECUTIVES STRATEGIC UPDATE CONTINUED
Convenient.
Special.
Diff erent.
These are the reasons why customers love our food.
These are also the reasons why our Food business is on a clear path to sustainable growth.
We know that selling quality food from convenient locations is a winning formula sales from the 30 owned Simply Food stores we opened this year are ahead of plan.
Well continue to grow our Food business by opening 250 further Food stores by 2020.
Were succeeding in our aim of making every food moment special.
Customers love our high levels of innovation  we renew around a quarter of our range every year  and they love the high quality of our products.
We wont accept secondrate ingredients.
In a world where you get what you pay for it shows.
This year we extended Collection our top tier range for customers who want something extra special.
And customers know they can trust us on health.
It is their number one concern when it comes to buying food so we launched 200 new products aimed at helping our customers to eat well and extended our Made Without Balanced for You and Eat Well ranges.
The grocery market continues to be very competitive but we will continue to set ourselves apart with superior quality innovation and convenient food in convenient locations.
As we grow our Food store presence our food will be even more accessible to more customers.
OUR PEOPLE By thinking working and behaving with a truly customercentric mindset I believe our people are integral to our success.
Last year I asked what our right cost base shape and structure was and how this would aff ect our people.
In April 201 7  we nalised the pay and pensions changes that I outlined last year and we now reward our people in a fairer more consistent way.
I am immensely proud that we now have pay and bene t parity across the business.
Following detailed consultation with our National Business Involvement Group of elected employee representatives we now off er one of the best reward packages in UK retail.
In November we outlined further plans to simplify the business and lower our costs.
This resulted in a reduction of roles at our Head Offi ce and the decision to reduce our central London offi ce space as we move to more effi cient ways of working.
Some of these decisions had a direct impact on a number of our employees.
But I believe our people recognise that we made them for the right reasons and that they were necessary for our sustainable growth.
I would like to thank all our people for their dedication and professionalism in a year of signi cant but necessary change.
STORE ESTATE AND INTERNATIONAL Our customers shopping habits are changing so I asked whether our UK and International store estate is the right shape for the future.
It is not.
Customers behaviour is evolving and the pace of change is accelerating.
Rather than doing one big food shop a week there is a growing trend of customers picking up food for now or for tonight.
Look at how people use technology.
Theyll browse or buy online and collect in store.
Or theyll buy on their smartphone for home delivery. account for 1 7% of Clothing and Home sales.
At the same time customers want to shop in modern stores that off er a great experience.
Our store portfolio needs to re ect how people live their lives today.
So we announced plans to rebalance our UK space to meet changing customer needs.
The transformation will enable us to grow Clothing and Home sales through fewer better stores.
Over  ve years we will change the use of around 25% of our space with more of it being deployed to Food and other growth areas.
Clothing and Home space will reduce by around 10%.
Approximately
30 fullline stores will close and 45 will be converted to Simply Food.
To be clear this is neither a withdrawal nor a retrenchment.
Due to our ambitious Food expansion we will have more stores in the future not fewer.
But our estate will be the shape which meets how our customers want to shop at MandS.
Our International operations have also changed.
While our franchise business with our knowledgeable partners is pro table our owned estate is not.
This is unsustainable so we are focusing on our joint venture and franchise partnerships and our growing online business and exiting ten of our loss making owned markets.
The programme is on track.
We have now closed all ten of our stores in China and completed employee consultations in the remaining markets.
We remain a signi cant player on the global stage with a store or online presence in 55 markets.
I believe in an international business for MandS and remain committed to it.
These changes show that were willing to adapt to ensure were in the best shape for our customers.
OUR OPERATING MODEL Simplicity and accountability are key to running an agile and successful business.
We are therefore changing our operating model to give us two clear pro t and loss accountabilities  one for our Clothing and Home business unit and one for our Food business unit.
Both sides of the business are now responsible for their own endtoend pro t and loss.
As part of the changesite has moved from being a separate business unit to being a sales channel along with Stores and
All three channels now feed into our two business units with our customers at the centre.
Underpinning these changes is the ongoing drive for simplicity in the way we do things.
CUSTOMERS
LOGISTICS
IT
PLAN A PROPERTY COMMUNICATIONS
HR
CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE
CLOTHING and HOME
INTERNATIONAL
MandS.
OM
STORES
MARKETING
MARKETING 11 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Cost control remains a top priority.
Our operating costs were up 3.8% this year as we put more colleagues into stores and absorbed the costs of our Food store opening programme.
We funded some of this through our Crunch Costs initiative which challenged all of our people to tackle unnecessary costs and from simplifying our Head Offi ce structure.
Better buying initiatives such as direct design and food packaging optimisation mitigated the currency headwinds we saw on both sides of the business.
The steps weve taken to transform MandS led to charges of 437 .4m this year.
These were largely driven by charges for International store closures and for the changes to pay and pensions.
While pro ts were signi cantly down I continue to believe in good cash management a robust balance sheet and a progressive dividend policy.
We know how important our dividend is to shareholders big and small.
Read more in the Financial Review on p2629 OUR CHAIRMAN Our Chairman Robert Swannell has announced that he will step down in
On behalf of all of us at MandS I wish Robert well.
He has overseen signi cant change at MandS.
Our infrastructure now provides a strong platform for growth and Robert has been instrumental in driving shareholder engagement good governance and succession planning.
He has also been a tremendous support to me personally over the last year.
On behalf of the whole business I would like to welcome Roberts successor Archie Norman.
LOOKING AHEAD My priorities for the year ahead are to continue to recover and grow Clothing and Home and to grow our Food business.
I will also establish the foundations for new paths to growth.
In the UK these will focus on areas of market share opportunity in Kidswear Footwear Home and Beauty.
Internationally we will explore new territories with our franchise partners.
And I will continue to develop talent within the organisation.
It continues to be a privilege to lead this fantastic company.
Our job as a retailer is quite simple we must off er customers great products at the right price in physical or digital environments that they enjoy with great service.
If we do this they will come back to us for more.
But to do this yearin yearout we must constantly adapt.
We must adapt both to stay in tune with our customers needs and in the way we sell our products.
Shopping habits wont stop changing so neither must we.
As Chief Executive I want to make MandS agile and  exible enough to change with our customers.
I want to see the end of big transformation programmes followed by years of standing still followed by yet more transformation.
Remaining relevant should be a continuous process.
By simplifying how we do things and really listening to our customers weve already become more agile this year.
By rationalising our Clothing ranges and reshaping our store portfolio weve started to put this agility into practice.
In doing this weve built a solid foundation for growth.
We must never stop adapting our business for our customers.
Nothing makes me prouder of the work our teams do than hearing from our customers and what they love about MandS.
Those customers are the reason were here.
They will remain at the heart of everything we do.
STEVE ROWE CHIEF EXECUTIVE Steve Rowe Chief Executive Paul Friston International Director Andy Adcock Food Director Jo Jenkins Womenswear Lingerie and Beauty Director Sacha Berendji Retail Director Helen Weir Chief Finance Offi cer Patrick BousquetChavanne Executive Director Customersite Dominic Fry Communications and Investor Relations Director Amanda Mellor Group Secretary and Head of Corporate Governance David Guise Human Resources Director OPERATING COMMITTEE 12 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT OUR RESOURCES and RELATIONSHIPS We create longterm value through the eff ective use of our resources and relationships.
We manage these in line with our core values of Inspiration Innovation Integrity and In Touch.
These values in uence how we behave and they run through everything we do  they make the MandS diff erence making every moment special through the products and services we off er our customers in the UK and internationally.
OUR PRODUCTS and CHANNELS Maintaining our channels and supply chain infrastructure to meet customer demand OUR INTELLECTUAL CAPITAL Strengthening our brand through creation and protection of our intellectual property
Generating returns for our stakeholders through eff ective management of our  nancial resources THE MandS DIFFERENCE CREATING SUSTAINABLE
OUR BUSINESS 1 LISTEN and RESPOND 2 STRATEGY and PLANNING 3 DEVELOP and DESIGN Activities By fostering talent and encouraging entrepreneurialism among our people we can continue to develop high quality products for our customers.
Our product developers are experts in their elds whether they are food technologists or experienced tailors.
Our food innovation sets us apart and with talent ranging from Michelintrained chefs to Masters of Wine our Food team is among the best in the business.
We now design 68% of our clothing ranges inhouse and buy our clothes by product category rather than subbrand.
Outcome The talent in our Food team underpins the innovation that our customers love.
By developing and designing clothing inhouse we have reduced product proliferation designed ranges characterised by a more consistent colour palette and re ned our quality through improved  t upgraded fabric and better  nishes.
Activities Effi cient implementation of our strategy is key.
This year changes to our organisational structure saw us streamline our senior management team and bring each channels merchandising operations together increasing effi ciency.
We also revised our operating model which will give our two business units  Clothing and Home and Food  clear pro t and loss accountability.
Through our Smarter Working programme we created a new technology hub which will rollout signi cant technology improvements to increase our digital savviness across the business.
Outcome Successfully implementing our strategy allows us to improve our  nancial performance through increased pro ts and strengthened cash  ow.
Activities Our customers are at the heart of everything we do and our strategy today is more customerfocused than ever before.
By understanding what drives their behaviour both within MandS and externally we can ensure we work to deliver the products and experiences that customers want.
This year we strengthened the data and analytics team within our Customer Insight Unit CIU which gathers and interprets customer data as well as a wealth of external sources.
The CIU then ensures that its insights are used across our business units.
Through the CIU we can understand each customers needs and relationship with MandS  wherever and however they shop.
Outcome By listening to customers and responding to what they tell us we can create products and shopping experiences that are relevant to them.
OUR BUSINESS MODEL 13 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NATURAL RESOURCES Sourcing responsibly and using natural resources effi ciently OUR STAKEHOLDERS Building and nurturing relationships with our customers and suppliers and in the communities in which we operate OUR PEOPLE Developing our employees and their knowledge
Aim to excite and inspire our customers
Strive to do the right thing Core purpose
EVERY MOMENT
PLAN A PLAN A
Aim to improve things for the better IN TOUCH Listen actively and act thoughtfully BRAND and SELL SOURCE and BUY DEVELOP and DESIGN SERVE and ENGAGE LISTEN and RESPOND STRATEGY and PLANNING FIND OUT MORE Read about how our business model creates value on p1415 Read about how our business model works on p1617 OUR RESOURCES and RELATIONSHIPS 4 SOURCE and BUY 5 BRAND and SELL 6 SERVE and ENGAGE Activities We constantly evolve how we sell our products to suit customers changing lifestyles.
Customers today are increasingly looking for deeper engagement with brands they want richer and more meaningful experiences.
They want moments that matter .
W e therefore work across departments and channels to create great customer experiences.
For example our stores are now laid out in product areassitesite is evolving from a purely transactional experience to a place of inspiration and personalisation.
Our Spend It Well campaign re ects the unique feeling that our customers have about MandS and our high quality ownbrand products.
Were also making doing the right thing synonymous with the MandS brand by committing to all our products having a Plan A story to tell by 2020.
Outcome Our own brand creates value by distinguishing us from our competitors and our Plan A ambitions make sustainability accessible to all.
Activities A strong ethical supply chain is crucial in creating sustainable value.
We work with our suppliers to ensure continuous social and environmental improvement whether it relates to sourcing cotton or shing more sustainably.
We are committed to being more transparent about our supply chains and our interactive Supplier Map details all the clothing home beauty and food factories that supply MandS.
All 3000 of our suppliers must adhere to our Global Sourcing Principles which cover working conditions and workers rights.
We comply with the Groceries Supply Code of Practice GSCOP and help build global approaches to ethical sourcing through organisations such as the Consumer Goods Forum.
Outcome An eff ective sourcing strategy creates sustainable value by driving effi ciencies and margin improvement while using our scale to deliver great quality at every price point.
Activities We build on our privileged position of trust among customers with high levels of service.
This year our Making Every Moment Special employee engagement initiative saw 70000 store colleagues receive training in giving better customer service and making the shopping experience eff ortless for customers.
In understanding our customers better we can become more relevant more often.
We also serve and engage with our customers via our Sparks loyalty scheme.
Through Sparks they share their passions and preferences with us so we can introduce new services products and channels that we know will interest them.
We also serve and engage with the communities in which we operate.
Outcome Good service and engaging with our customers in a way that is relevant to them drives higher sales and customer loyalty.
This creates longterm sustainable value across the business.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT Our resources and relationships Across our business we depend upon key resources and relationships to create  nancial non nancial and strategic value.
OUR PRODUCTS and CHANNELS OUR INTELLECTUAL
FINANCIAL
NATURAL
RESOURCES
OUR PEOPLE
STAKEHOLDERS
How our activities deliver strategic value Listen and Respond By analysing what our customers want we ensure our growth plans are right for the future of MandS.
Strategy and Planning Our UK store estate programme will drive sales growth by ensuring that we have an estate that re ects how our customers want to shop.
Develop and Design By constantly improving product quality and choice we drive growth by making MandS more relevant to our customers more often.
Source and Buy Our progress towards a more exible and direct sourcing operation is bene ting our Clothing and Home margins.
Brand and Sell We sell our products through our own branded channels empowering us with the ability to grow and develop them in the way that is right for our customers.
Serve and Engage The rationale behind every strategic decision starts with our customer we want a winning culture built around giving them great products and service.
How our activities deliver  nancial value Listen and Respond We use comprehensive data to understand what customers want to buy and how they want to shop.
Strategy and Planning Robust  nancial management ensures we are able to continue to invest in our business and deliver pro table growth for our shareholders.
Develop and Design New ideas fuel future performance which is why attracting and developing talent is central to the future of our business.
Source and Buy We capitalise on the strong longterm relationships we have with our suppliers to deliver effi ciencies improve margins and drive pro tability without compromising on the quality of our products.
Brand and Sell Our brand is at the heart of the MandS diff erence and we create unique products that drive  nancial value.
Serve and Engage We build and maintain customer loyalty by prioritising customer service and linking it to our employee bene ts.
Strategic objectives Drive growth Reach customers Improve pro tability See KPIs p2021 Group  nancial objectives Grow Group revenue Increase earnings and returns Strong cash generation See KPIs p18 Non nancial objectives Engage serve and retain customers Foster a skilled motivated and engaged team Source products with integrity
See KPIs p19 How our activities deliver non nancial value Listen and Respond Our customers trust in the MandS brand is a key point of diff erence.
We retain this competitive advantage by doing things in the most responsible way  we do the work so our customers dont have to.
Strategy and Planning We improve effi ciency and reduce waste across the business through the eff ective use of our resource and sourcing systems.
Develop and Design By cultivating talent and encouraging diversity we have an engaged and autonomous workforce empowered to put our customers  rst.
Source and Buy We are leading the way on sourcing products with integrity to exceed customers expectations on quality safety and sustainable sourcing.
Brand and Sell We have built our brand on robust standards of responsibly sourced products and services.
Serve and Engage We bring our brand to life by driving engagement and participation in store online and through community support and volunteering.
How our activities deliver non nancial value l How our activities deliver strategic value c CONNECTED VALUE OUR BUSINESS CORE OBJECTIVES BUSINESS MODEL THE MandS DIFFERENCE INPUTS 15 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS We are committed to delivering sustainable value for stakeholders.
Here we summarise how our business model drives value creation how the process is managed and how we measure the value created.
There are a number of risks related to how we deliver  nancial value Clothing and Home recovery
Pro table growth Third party management See Risk p3233 There are a number of risks related to how we deliver non nancial value Clothing and Home recovery Food safety and integrity Corporate responsibility Information security including cyber Customer proposition and experience Talent and succession
See Risk p3233 There are a number of risks related to how we deliver strategic value Clothing and Home recovery
Margin
UK store estate Pro table growth See Risk p3233 Group revenue Group pro t before tax and adjusted items Adjusted earnings per share Dividend per share Return on capital employed Free cash  ow preshareholder returns See KPIs p18 Total Food customers and average number of shops per customer Total Clothing and Home customers and average number of shops per customer Employee engagement score Percentage of products with a Plan A quality Greenhouse gas emissions tonnes Greenhouse gas emissions per sq ft See KPIs p19 Food UK revenue Food gross margin Food likeforlike revenue growth UK space growth  Food Clothing and Home UK revenue Clothing and Home gross margin Clothing and Home UK likeforlike revenue growth International revenue International operating prositesite weekly site visits See KPIs p2021 Strategic value created Strategic performance risks Key strategic measures Growth in sales product range and presence Supply chain effi ciency Increased customer base with broadening appeal A more dynamic exible and agile business Strong pro ts build strong cash position Returns to shareholders Taxes to government Increased investment opportunities Employee rewards Financial value created Financial performance risks Financial accountability Key  nancial measures Non nancial value created Non nancial performance risks Key non nancial measures KEY OUTCOMES Strategic accountability See Governance p3484 See Remuneration p6678 See Governance on p3484 See Remuneration p6678 Non nancial accountability
OPERATING COMMITTEE OPERATIONAL PLAN A COMMITTEE ADVISORY PLAN A COMMITTEE See Plan A Report
BOARD
OPERATING COMMITTEE OPERATING COMMITTEE Non nancial value created Non nancial performance risks Key non nancial measures Non nancial accountability Strategic value created Strategic performance risks Key strategic measures Strategic accountability OUTPUTS ACCOUNTABILITY RELATED RISK FACTORS Maintained and improved reputation with consumers Better trained and fully committed employees Stronger relationships with suppliers and communities Culture where innovation and agility thrive 16 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC 6 SERVE and ENGAGE The January edition of our Adventures in Food customer newspaper was all about the new ranges with information on some of the more unusual ingredients tips for ways to eat more healthily and recipe ideas for creating healthy meals at home.
Communications went to all stores to educate colleagues on the new ranges and we hosted tasting events in 50 stores giving customers the chance to try the Nourish Bowls and the new wraps and sandwiches.
We have seen a big change in how our customers shop for healthy food.
As interests have shifted away from dieting consumers are looking for ways to live healthier lifestyles every day and 8 1 % of our customers tell us that health is their number one concern when buying food.
We have also seen an increase in interest in wheat free and plant based eating with vegan products being one of the biggest product requests we receive from our customers.
This isnt just vegetarians and vegans  industry data suggests there is a growing number of people in the UK who identify as  exitarian in that they eat a largely plant based diet with the occasional addition of meat and  sh.
With a 4.5% market share in the onthe go lunchtime food market we saw an opportunity for us to add to our Food on the Move range by bringing these trends to our customers.
We also noticed there was a gap in the market for veganfriendly lunchtime options.
Our product development team went on a research trip to California the home of healthy eating to get ideas and inspiration.
The big trend in San Francisco was for nourish bowls  colourful wholesome salad bowls composed of vegetables healthy grains and protein.
Taking the customer insight market trend data and inspiration from their trip the team developed a new range of Nourish Bowls featuring hearty wholesome and fresh ingredients including edamame black rice avocado and sweet potato.
They also developed our  rst ever vegan sandwiches and a range of vegetable wraps made with beetroot pumpkin or spinach which all contain a portion of vegetables.
1 LISTEN and RESPOND 2 STRATEGY and PLANNING 3 DEVELOP and DESIGN
SAN FRANCISCO
We launched the new range in January when consumers are typically looking for new ways to eat healthily.
Our TV and print campaign Adventures in Wonderfood showcased products from the new ranges in a vibrant and exciting waysite With its range of new  avours we introduced the Nourish Bowls to customers as part of our lunch meal deal and ran a special promotion for Sparks members with 10% off all Eat Well products which included the new Food on the Move products.
5 BRAND and SELL Our buying teams worked with our suppliers to source unusual grains and ontrend ingredients such as buckwheat and cauli ower couscous to bring something new and diff erent to our customers.
The Avocado and Egg Nourish Bowl is the  rst product on the UK high street to use sorghum a protein and  bre rich wholegrain similar to pearl barley while the Edamame and Black Rice and the Sweet Potato Nourish Bowls are our  rst vegan Food on the Move salads.
4 SOURCE and BUY
VALUE CREATION IN ACTION ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS We know coats are one of the most important product categories for our customers when it comes to determining their view of MandS.
Coats are quick to try on during a shopping trip and customers want to be able to easily compare the look and feel of each item.
For AutumnWinter 1 6 we made our coats easier to shop with a Coats destination area at the front of our stores.
The area featured an event zone which showcased the key coats of the season with unstructured coats in early autumn switching to the warmer pea coats as the weather got colder.
The pea coat is a consistently popular style and it has joined garments such as the trench and the camel coat as a timeless classic.
Its also a style that is consistently popular with our customers our Winter 1 5 collection featured a classic pea coat in two colours that was an instant hit and sold out early in the season.
As the market leader in coats we know this is a style we need to get right.
We have set out a clear strategy to focus on style over fashion trends and we know our customers want a consistent  t that atters with good quality fabrics.
We also know we are at our best when we focus on what we are famous for.
In order to maximise the opportunity our Womenswear team set out to create a collection of pea coats that used quality fabrics and styling to deliver a range suitable for our broad customer base.
Following the changes to the structure of our Womenswear team our products are now designed and bought by category rather than by brand.
Our Outerwear design team created a collection which took that classic shape and updated it with diff erent colours and interesting fabrics.
Using our subbrands the team created distinct products for our customers.
This gave the range a clear point of diff erence across MandS Collection and the subbrands from the coats length fabric and colour to styling details such as pockets trims or collar shape.
At 55 our MandS Collection opening price point pea coat gave customers a wardrobe classic at a great price while the per una pea coat featured gold military buttons and a faux fur collar as we know per una customers like a touch of elegance.
1 LISTEN and RESPOND 2 STRATEGY and PLANNING 3 DEVELOP and DESIGN CLOTHING and HOME VALUE CREATION IN ACTION 6 SERVE and ENGAGE 5 BRAND and SELL With con dence in the style we bought our classic 55 pea coat in greater depth and more colours.
For the more trendled 99 version we bought it in the two key colours of the season  navy and khaki.
Leveraging our direct sourcing capabilities we have consolidated some of our supply base which has enabled us to work more closely with our key suppliers to source better quality fabrics and focus on styling and  t.
4 SOURCE and BUY ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 The 99 MandS Collection woolmix pea coat was the star of our AutumnWinter marketing campaign and was available to customers in all our stores.
In line with our pricing strategy to off er consistently good prices from our 55 opening price point pea coat to the 1 99 1 00% lambswool version we off ered great value and quality at every price point.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT GROUP REVENUE Total Group revenue including retail sales for owned businesses and wholesale sales to franchise partners.
Group revenues were up this year mainly driven by the growth in our Food business as we opened new stores and an improvement in International revenues.
Group PBT before adjusted items was down on last year largely due to the reduction in Clothing and Home gross pro t and the increase in operating costs in the year.
GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX PBT AND ADJUSTED ITEMS Adjusted pro t provides additional information on performance adjusting for items considered to be signi cant in nature andor value.
RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED ROCE Return on capital employed is a relative pro t measure of the returns from net operating assets.
The decrease in ROCE primarily re ects the decrease in earnings before interest tax and adjusted items.
ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE EPS Adjusted earnings per share EPS is the pro t before the impact of adjusted items divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue.
Basic adjusted EPS decreased primarily due to the lower pro t generated in the year.
The weighted average number of shares in issue during the period was 1623.1m last year 1635.9m.
DIVIDEND PER SHARE Dividend per share declared in respect of the year.
The Board is recommending a  nal dividend of 1 1.9p per share resulting in a total dividend of 1 8.7p.
FREE CASH FLOW PRE SHAREHOLDER
Free cash  ow is the net cash generated by the business in the period before returns to shareholders excluding the impact of exchange rates on translation of foreign currency denominated cash balances.
We delivered free cash  ow up 8.5% on last year mainly due to the impact of reduced capital expenditure which was partially off set by weaker business performance.
OBJECTIVE KPI 201617 PERFORMANCE 52 weeks to 1 April 201 7 Grow Group revenue
Increase
GROUP REVENUE bn 1 0.6bn 2.2% RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED % 7% ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE p 12.6% DIVIDEND PER SHARE p
FREE CASH FLOW PRE SHAREHOLDER RETURNS m 8.5% GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX AND ADJUSTED ITEMS m 1 0.3% KEY PERFORMANCE
OUR PERFORMANCE GROUP FINANCIAL OBJECTIVES To provide a meaningful comparison with last year the revenue and pro t KPIs are relative to the 52 week period to 26 March 2016.
GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE
Total number of UK Food customers per year and average number of shops per customer resulting in a purchase across all UK shopping channels.
We achieved a 7% reduction mainly through lower carbon UK grid electricity.
We also maintained our position of carbon neutrality zero net emissions by sourcing renewable energy and carbon off sets.
We achieved a 10% per sq ft improvement mainly through lower carbon UK grid electricity.
This has contributed towards the 7% reduction in total gross emissions.
This represents an improvement of 6%.
Our target is to have at least one Plan A quality in all MandS products by 2020.
OBJECTIVE KPI 201617 PERFORMANCE
Effi cient and responsible operations PRODUCTS WITH A PLAN A QUALITY This is a quality or feature regarded as a characteristic or inherent part of a product which has a demonstrable positive or signi cantly lower environmental andor social impact during its sourcing production supply use andor disposal.
GROSS GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS Total gross CO e emissions resulting from MandS operated activities worldwide.
GROSS GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS PER 1000 SQ FT Total gross CO e emissions per 1000 sq ft resulting from MandS operated activities worldwide.
Linked to remuneration KEY TO RESOURCES and RELATIONSHIPS AFFECTED Financial Our Products and Channels Our Intellectual
Our People Our
Natural
Resources
Our convenient special and diff erent food and our continued Simply Food store opening programme continue to draw customers in.
We are still in the recovery phase of our plan for Clothing and Home. in customers in our stores.
The annual survey was completed by 80% of employees.
Employee engagement results were positive and up on last year.
Foster a skilled motivated and engaged team Engage serve and retain our customers EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT Engagement is a key driver of performance.
Our Your Say survey looks at the key drivers of employee engagement such as pride in MandS and our products feelings about MandS as an employer and the role of line managers.
TOTAL
CUSTOMERS
AVERAGE
NUMBER OF SHOPS PER YEAR
TOTAL
CUSTOMERS
AVERAGE
NUMBER OF SHOPS PER YEAR 5.3% CLOTHING and HOME Total number of UK Clothing and Home customers per year and average number of shops per customer resulting in a purchase across all UK shopping channels.
81 % 3% 526000 CO 2e 7% 26 tCO 2 e 1 000 sq ft 1 0% 79% 6% 79% MandS products 201516 73% 2020 target 100% NONFINANCIAL OBJECTIVES Read more in the glossary of alternative performance measures on p133134 20 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT UK LFL REVENUE GROWTH 0.8% De nition Sales growth from stores open at least 52 weeks and with no signi cant change in footage.
Performance Sales were down slightly in a competitive market.
UK FOOD SPACE GROWTH 1 % De nition Increase in absolute Food selling space.
Performance We increased the reach and convenience of our off er by opening 68 new Food stores of which 38 were franchise.
Franchise accounted for c.
10% of new space growth.
UK LFL REVENUE GROWTH 3.4% De nition Sales growth from stores open at least 52 weeks and with no signi cant change in footage.
Performance As expected Clothing and Home revenues declined 3.4% as a result of our strategy to reduce promotions and markdown activity.
UK REVENUE 5.6bn 4.2% 201516 5.4bn De nition UK Food sales including sales from our owned business and sales to our UK franchisees.
Performance Growth was driven by new space.
Our strategic objectives in Food remain consistent superior quality innovation and convenient food in convenient locations.
REVENUE
GROSS MARGIN OPERATING PROFIT REVENUE GROWTH SPACE GROWTH ONLINE VISITS UK REVENUE 3.8bn 2.8% 201516 3.9bn De nition UK Clothing and Home sales from our owned business.
Performance As expected Clothing and Home revenues declined as a result of our strategy to reduce promotions and markdown activity.
However we are encouraged by some early evidence that our strategy is working with fullprice sales up.
UK GROSS MARGIN 32.5% 25bps De nition Gross margin is the percentage of revenue retained after costs for producing and transporting goods.
Performance Gross margin was below expectations owing to input cost in ation and higher than anticipated waste in the second half of the year.
UK GROSS MARGIN 1 % 1 05bps De nition Gross margin is the percentage of revenue retained after costs for producing and transporting goods.
Performance Gross margin was ahead of expectations.
This was driven by the improvement in the buying margin which off set currency headwinds as we continued to deliver bene ts from leveraging our direct sourcing capabilities.
Gross margin also bene ted from reduced discounting.
OBJECTIVE KPI
Reach customers
CLOTHING and HOME FOOD KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS CONTINUED STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE TOTAL ONLINE REVENUE 5.6% 201516 791.5m De nition Total revenue from the Groups online platforms including International online sales.
Performance We grew sales although these were adversely aff ected by the reduction in promotional activity.
Fullprice sales performance improved over the course of the year as we improved operational eff ectiveness as well as reduced discounting.
WEEKLY SITE VISITS 1 1 % De nition Weekly visits to our UK desktop tablet mobile sites and app.
SPACE GROWTH 3.3% De nition Yearonyear change in absolute selling space.
Performance We are reestablishing our International business as a more sustainable and pro table operation with our focus on a partnership model.
While we remain committed to our joint ventures in India and Greece and our owned businesses in some key markets we are exiting owned stores in ten loss making markets.
We have closed all our stores in China and we are on track for the further planned closures to be largely completed by the end of the  rst half of the year.
REVENUE
1 .2bn 7% 201516 1.1bn De nition Sales from the International business including sales from owned business and sales to franchisees.
Performance International revenues rose driven by currency translation bene ts.
On a constant currency basis revenues declined by 0.1%.
OPERATING PROFIT BEFORE ADJUSTED ITEMS 15.4% De nition Adjusted operating pro t provides additional information on performance adjusting for items that are considered to be signi cant in nature andor value.
Performance The improvement was due to a reduction in losses in owned markets.
This followed our decision to exit ten markets and the adjusted charges we took at the point of that decision.
Pro ts from our franchise markets were down due to lower shipments to our partners in the Middle East.
MandS.
OM INTERNATIONAL In Clothing and Home we expect a space decline of 12% weighted towards the end of the year.
We anticipate gross margin to be 25 to 25 basis points as we seek to mitigate currency headwinds with better buying and a further reduction in discounting.
In Food we expect space growth of c.7% weighted towards the end of the year as we open c.90 new Simply Food stores.
We anticipate input cost in ation will slightly outweigh operational effi ciencies with a resulting decrease in gross margin of between 0 and 50 basis points largely weighted towards the  rst half.
We expect UK cost growth of c.2.5 to 3.5% as a result of new space cost in ation and the annualisation of investment in customer service partly off set by Head Offi ce restructuring effi ciencies.
Cost growth will be weighted towards the  rst half of the year.
The 201 718 eff ective tax rate on adjusted pro t before tax is expected to be around 21% as a result of the Scottish Limited Partnership structure.
Capital expenditure is expected to be c.
400m as we increase the rate of Simply Food store openings.
Read about our Strategy on p0811 Read more on Remuneration on p54 Read about our Resources and relationships on p1215 Based on restated FY16  gure of 7.4m due to improvements in data capture and analytics.
LOOKING AHEAD 22 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT We took action this year to simplify and modernise our business in line with our strat egy to put our customers at the heart of everything we do keep things simple and work as one team.
We reduced the number of roles in our UK Head Offi ce by 590 alongside moving 400 IT and Logistics roles out of central London.
We also put in place a fairer simpler and more consistent approach to pay.
The changes which took eff ect in April this year saw us increase basic pay for our Customer Assistants to a level well above the National Living Wage and move to a single approach for premium payments.
We also moved to a more consistent and sustainable approach to pensions for all MandS employees and closed the UK de ned bene t pension scheme to future accrual.
These changes were made following an extensive consultation process with all employees through our National Business Involvement Group BIG MandSs network of elected employee representatives and through town hall meetings and listening groups in our stores.
The feedback gathered in these sessions directly in uenced the outcome which demonstrates the importance of BIG.
We now have a pay and bene ts package that is among the best in UK retail which means we can both reward our store OUR PEOPLE OUR PERFORMANCE OUR PEOPLE apprentices this year.
They will gain experience in diff erent parts of the business including digital and will  nish the programme with a recognised quali cation.
The programme will provide the  rst steps to a career in retail.
At MandS we want to instil an anything is possible culture and we have great role models in a number of our senior team who started their careers in our stores.
Our Marks and Start programme for people who face barriers getting into work went from strength to strength helping over 2900 people around half of whom were under 25 take their  rst steps into work.
No business can stand still we are focused on continuous improvement and being an agile and  exible organisation that is constantly evolving.
Our longterm growth will rely on us having talented dedicated people at our core. customers.
While no change is easy these were necessary actions to build a robust platform for future growth.
We are a more relevant and agile company as a result.
We implemented customerfacing changes too.
By increasing the number of employees in our stores we can better serve our customers.
Having more people on the shop  oor has had a discernible impact on customer satisfaction levels and our peoples engagement levels creating a virtuous circle of improvement.
Our
Your Say survey showed that employee engagement increased again to 8 1 %.
It also highlighted areas where employees want to see an improvement  we learnt we need to do more to demonstrate the opportunities for development and this will be a focus in the year ahead.
In November we outlined a reshaping of our UK store estate.
Although this programme is in its early stages over the next  ve years it will lead to change for some of our people.
Our aim is to redeploy as many aff ected colleagues as possible and to create more jobs as we continue with our Food store opening programme.
Through constant dialogue we will keep our people informed every step of the way  they will be the  rst to know of any changes that are planned.
Our 85000 colleagues are the heart and soul of MandS and we have put in place a clear strategy for our People that underpins our business strategy.
We want to develop and attract great talent at all levels of our business.
We want a winning culture a diverse and inclusive workforce and we want a  t and exible organisation that allows our people to  ourish.
By fostering talent in a structured way at every level of MandS  be that on the shop  oor in our school leaver or graduate programmes or at more senior levels our people can realise their full potential.
Our new Retail Apprenticeship programme is a prime example of fostering talent.
Launched in May we will take on 400 retail MAKING EVERY MOMENT SPECIAL IN OUR COMMUNITIES Our people believe in doing the right thing not just saying it.
Spark Something Good is MandSs way of helping customers and colleagues make a real diff erence.
This year we took Spark Something Good to another seven cities with over 4000 customers and employees volunteering on more than 240 projects.
Were also sparking something good by working to beat cancer  our colleagues and customers raised 3.2m for Macmillan Cancer Support through a series of activities such as our involvement in the Worlds Biggest Coff ee Morning in stores across the country and 2.8m for Breast Cancer Now.
BE YOURSELF MandS has always taken employee wellbeing seriously.
We have an established wellbeing programme which includes a dedicated online Mental Wellbeing area on our employee online portal with tools and materials from mental health experts designed to support MandS employees and line managers alike in both prevention and support.
We also had a series of activities bringing inclusion and wellbeing together under Dare to Be Yourself with a series of events led by our expert diversity partners representing gender ethnicity LGBT  and wellbeing looking at research insight and views on the important link between wellbeing and inclusion.
EMPLOYEE DIVERSITY AS AT 1 APRIL 2017 Female 67 Male 90 Total senior managers 42.7% 57.3% Female 3 Male 7 Total Board 30% 70% Female 61340 Male 23869 Total employees 72% 28% 23 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE PERFORMANCE REVIEW OUR PERFORMANCE
HEALTHY CHOICE We want to lead the market on health by off ering customers healthy ways to feel great and great ways to feel healthy.
We extended our Eat Well range and added 4 1 lines to our Made Without range which has trebled in size since 201 5 sales rose 4% and 38% respectively.
We introduced a wholesome store cupboard range with 37 new products across areas including dried grains and grain pots.
Our
With specially selected Japanese rice authentic nori seaweed fresh wasabi and soy sauce brewed in Japan it is our most authentic sushi range ever and customers love it we have already sold 7 40000 packs.
TRANSPARENCY
Our sustainability credentials are a key part of the MandS diff erence and we need to ensure our strong ethical standards remain at the forefront of everything we do.
We published our inaugural Human Rights Report which outlines the steps we are taking to support and respect human rights and our plans for the future.
We were one of  rst organisations to report against the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights Reporting Framework and the highest ranked retailer in the Corporate Human Rights
We also extended the reach of our interactive supply chain map to include Food Beauty and Home suppliers.
We have had a good year in a diffi cult environment.
Sales were up 4.2% and our growth outpaced the market.
Over the year our market share rose 20bps to 4.5%.
Our focus this year was on building on our strengths of innovation quality and convenience.
We made our food more accessible by opening 68 new Foodonly stores taking the total to 636 including 383 franchise stores.
Between our three formats Foodhall Simply Food and Food To Go we deliver convenient food in convenient locations with ranges tailored to each stores location and size and off ering the most relevant choice for our customers.
We continue to focus on making the shopping experience as special as our food.
Constantly curious our development team is always trying to push the boundaries of innovation.
Independent tests prove that we are maintaining our lead on quality and innovation.
We introduced 1600 new lines this year and from festive Secret Centre Cheeses to our Texaninspired Smokehouse BBQ collection newness accounted for a quarter of our entire range.
We extended our premium Collections range to more products for customers looking for something extra special.
We introduced shoppers to exciting new fruits and vegetables including the biggest avocado on the UK high street and biancoli a cauli ower similar in appearance and texture to Tenderstem broccoli.
We added 1 4 dishes from Vietnam Thailand Singapore and Korea to our everpopular Taste Asia range and off ered customers a delicious fresh meal in 25 minutes with our relaunched Cook range.
Our product developers are constantly working to translate the theatre of restaurant desserts into something our customers can enjoy at home  hits this year included our Chocolate Melting Dome and Chocolate and Passionfruit Star.
We know our customers want great value every time they shop with us.
So we reduced the number of promotions we ran and focused on delivering competitive prices every day alongside simpli ed promotions.
We upgraded our popular Dine In off er and our Indian Takeaway meal deals and saw sales increases of 7% and 10% respectively.
A basket of our opening price point Simply products excluding milk for which we pay a premium to our farmers is competitor pricematched to ensure we are off ering customers great value on everyday essentials.
At Christmas we improved service for our customers with a new Christmas Food to Order site and a better instore collection experience  customer satisfaction increased by 20%.
We hosted Taste of Christmas events in 600 stores off ering our customers inspiration and the chance to try special and new products to help them plan their Christmas dining.
Customers are increasingly concerned about the origin of their food so maintaining the integrity of our food supply chain is essential to our success.
At MandS we pride ourselves on our strong relationships with suppliers from those with large factories to smaller craft producers.
Our Farm Animal Health and Welfare Policy sets out the high standards we expect of our suppliers and we have a dedicated team of agriculture and  sheries specialists responsible for implementing our agriculture policies across our supply base.
Our business is founded on a longstanding mutual trust between us our suppliers and our customers.
So if a trusted supplier makes a mistake we believe it is right to stick with them help them to rectify the issues and in turn make them a more robust business.
We know our strategy in Food is the right one.
We will continue to make every food moment special with our diff erentiation newness and quality.
CLOTHING and HOME Our priority in Clothing and Home is to recover and grow sales.
We have focused on improving quality lowering prices and streamlining our ranges.
Our performance is on an improving trajectory as a result.
Sales over the year fell by 2.8% to 3.8bn as we reduced our reliance on discounting.
We grew market share in Lingerie and Kidswear and stabilised our share in
We removed a greater proportion of promotions from Womenswear which aff ected market share.
As we continue our journey of improvement one overarching aim underpins everything we do to get it right.
Right product.
Right price.
Right  t.
Right availability.
Delivered with great service.
We believe we are on a solid path to sustainable growth.
Read more about our Clothing and Home strategy on p0809 We reduced the number of promotions and lowered prices to focus on fullprice clothing sales.
As result fullprice sales were up 2.7%.
We have lowered over 2400 prices since January 201 6 particularly on opening MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT OUR PERFORMANCE CONTINUED price points so we are now off ering our customers better value every day.
We ran 89 fewer promotions and reduced the number of sales in the year from nine to six.
In 201 7  we will reduce this further to four.
At the same time we increased the number of tailored promotions for Sparks members so that we continue to reward our loyal customers.
By removing the noise of constant promotional activity and by cutting prices we delivered more consistent value and restored our price integrity and customers noticed the diff erence.
For example when we lowered the price of jeggings from 1 9.50 to 1 5 sales rose by 35% yearonyear.
This resulted in an improvement in fullprice sales.
We are working hard to improve the style and design of our products.
In Womenswear this means creating beautiful high quality wardrobe essentials the area for which MandS is famous in one master colour palette.
We know  t is one of the most important measures of quality for our customers so we reviewed and updated our block patterns to ensure that everything from exactly where we put darts to the measurements on a neckline means we are off ering a consistent good  t.
In Mens formalwear we reduced the number of  ts from six to four while increasing the range of styles colours and sizes.
This gave clarity to shoppers and customer feedback measures on quality  t and style were all up on the previous year.
Some of our customers told us that MandS had become too diffi cult to shop in with too much product duplication leading to confusion about the subbrands.
So we are streamlining our ranges by cutting the number of subbrands we sell Indigo in Womenswear and Collezione and North Coast in Menswear are being phased out.
We also trimmed the number of clothing lines we off er by 1 2%.
At the same time we have increased the depth of our buys and improved availability across all Clothing and Home departments.
The result was more consistent ranges with better size and colour availability.
It is now a year since we changed the structure of our Womenswear team to focus on product categories rather than brands.
We have also simpli ed how we work in Menswear with an even greater focus on product categories that re ects how our male customers shop.
Some 68% of our products are now designed inhouse and our simpli ed structure means our buying teams across Clothing and Home can work in a more collaborative way.
Not only does this remove duplication and allow greater coordination in our pricing architecture but it leads to effi ciencies in our supply base.
We can focus on working with our best suppliers and buy bigger volumes and better quality fabrics through fewer factories.
Our improved margin performance is a result of better sourcing and less reliance on promotions.
Whilst there is a risk that rising sourcing costs will impact margin OVERSEAS GROWTH In April we opened our new  agship store in Doha with our largest franchise partner
The 46000 sq ft store in the Doha Festival City Mall sells fresh food for the  rst time in Qatar.
It also features our largest international Lingerie department an instore bakery and a tablewaited MandS Caf which serves British classics like  sh and chips and afternoon tea.
The store is the 28th MandS store in the Gulf and the third in the city. strong focus on costs will help mitigate this.
We increased our focus on product categories for which we are best known such as Lingerie Schoolwear Bedding and Bath which resulted in market share growth in all these categories.
We know where our strengths lie and these categories provide opportunities for growth.
From our credibility in Food we will grow our Cooking and Dining departments.
We will capitalise on our number one market share position in Schoolwear to grow our school shoes market share.
We also have a great opportunity in Beauty  we sold 21 0000 of our innovative Beauty Advent Calendar in just two weeks highlighting the success of off ering something diff erent to our customers.
Customers are responding positively to these changes.
As we move through recovery to growth we will continue to listen to our customers and to focus on contemporary style and wardrobe essentials with better products prices and availability.
INTERNATIONAL
This year we announced changes to our International operations that will build a more sustainable pro table and customer focused International business for MandS.
International revenues were broadly  at at 1 % at constant currency up 10.7% on a reported basis while adjusted pro ts grew 1 5.4% to 64.4m.
However performance varied across diff erent parts of the business.
While our franchise business made a pro t of 8 1.9m our owned business was loss making in a number of markets.
In our franchise business revenues from shipments to our partners declined by 3% due to lower shipments to the Middle East as a result of the weak retail market in the region although there was better momentum in the second half of the year.
Shipments to our European partners increased driven by new Food store openings in France while shipments to Asia also bene tted from the expansion of our Food business and new store openings.
As we announced in November our new strategy will put our International business on a more sustainable footing by focusing on our partnership models.
International
The action we are taking will make us more customer and partner focused driving sustainable pro t growth overseas in a capitallight way.
Our decision to exit owned stores in ten markets will result in the closure of 53 stores the last of which is expected to shut this autumn.
The aff ected businesses were loss making and in markets where there is limited opportunity for growth.
These closures resulted in charges of 1 30.5m which signi cantly impacted pro ts this year.
We also simpli ed our overseas multichannel strategysite platform and ecommerce distribution centre to ful l international orders.
Weve simpli ed our International business and remain committed to our international ambitions.
We still sell our products from Dublin to Dubai and from Sydney to San
After the reorganisation we will trade in 50 markets with over 400 stores and an online presence in 25 markets.
We are just as focused on our customers internationally as we are in the UK  international customer satisfaction levels have risen signi cantly yearonyear.
The changes will allow us to play to our strengths in markets where we have strong brand awareness an established store estate and a loyal customer base.
Going forward we will continue to expand with our trusted franchise partners enabling us to leverage their scale infrastructure and local expertise.
We will focus on our successful joint ventures in India where likeforlike clothing sales grew 9% and Greece where sales were up 3% on a constant currency basis.
We also remain committed to our established owned business in the Republic of Ireland which this year was aff ected by our strategy to reduce promotions and discounting.
We will expand our popular franchised Food business in France.
In addition we will continue to reach customers through fully localised owned and operated websites via established marketplaces such as Myntra in India and Zalando in Europe and with our franchise partners.
REACHING OUR CUSTOMERS In November we outlined plans to reshape our UK store estate to ensure it remains relevant and convenient for our customers.
The changing shape of retail and the growth in online has inevitably had an impact on our space requirements.
This year alone online sales rose by 5.6% on a reported basis to 836.3m up 4.9% at constant currency.
We will reduce our Clothing and Home space by around 1 0% over the next  ve years while ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE LISTENING TO OUR CUSTOMERS Our Easy Dressing School Uniform created with customer insight and help from the National Autistic Society makes dressing for school easier quicker and more comfortable for both parents and children.
Popular items include the Boys trousers which are a pull up style so no ddly zips or buttons with the care label inside the side pocket for comfort.
After a customer contacted us about off ering clothing for children like her grandson who have specialist needs we worked closely with her her grandson and other families on adapting and extending some of our bodysuits and sleepwear up to age 78.
The range was very well received and we have since introduced more products and extended it up to age 1 6. stores in better locations and through MandS. com.
We are also improving the customer experience in store.
As part of the transformation we will improve around 25% of our Clothing and Home space.
More space will be deployed to Food and to growth areas such as Kidswear and Home.
Approximately
30 fullline stores will close.
At the same time we will open 250 new Simply Food stores to take our Food business to even more customers.
This will result in us having more stores in more convenient locations with an estate that re ects how our customers want to shop with us.
Our commitment to putting our customers at the heart of everything we do has been brought to life this year through our Making Every Moment Special initiative.
Its about knowing our customers and listening to what they want.
The results have seen customer service satisfaction ratings improve and our people are energised Making Every Moment Special has evolved into a movement within MandS.
We also made changes in store that further enabled our colleagues to spend more time with our customers.
We put over 3000 extra employees in key areas we removed certain tasks that were taking colleagues off the shop  oor we introduced hosts in some of our bigger stores to greet customers and we introduced handheld devices to improve the shopping experience.
This technology gives our store colleagues access to a wealth of information that enables them to spend more time helping customers from uptodate stock information to letting them assist with activating Sparks off ers.
We also made our stores easier to shop in.
Following customer feedback we reduced coordinated displays and the space given to subbrands.
Meanwhile we increased space for destination areas such as Coats and Knitwear and put these to the front of the store.
We reviewed our ranging to ensure better availability and more choice. over the year.
This omnichannel approach means we can be responsive to how and where our customers are shopping and make best use of stock to ensure customers get what they want.
We have improved the shopping experience across all devices over the year as we made them easier to use through a series of small upgrades and page developments. alltime high.
Online shopping often starts with a speci c item rather than a speci c retailer so we made changes to our pages to make them easier for search engines to read and list. engines was up 29%.
We are aligning our channels to give customers consistent and complementary experiences online and in store.
For examplesite now mirrors what happens in our stores.
Our online tool for booking a store bra  tting is used by over 1500 customers a day.
Shop Your Way remains a crucial nexus between our physical and online stores.
Twothirds of our online transactions also touch a store at some point  whether ordering in store or picking up there.
Over
Looking ahead we will focus on improving the speed of our site particularly on mobile and off ering a broader range of delivery options.
ENGAGING OUR CUSTOMERS Amid  erce competition it is vital that our brand remains relevant to our customers.
Through our marketing activity this year we have taken a diff erent approach to engaging with customers.
It is an approach built on what they have told us rather than what we want to tell them.
Its designed to show that we understand their lifestyles and what matters to them.
Its aimed at reinforcing an emotional connection and at sparking conversations about MandS and fresh new thinking about our brand.
Our new marketing approach focuses on the feeling and emotion people get when they shop at MandS.
We  rst used it in our awardwinning Mrs Claus Christmas campaign which had over 22.5m online views and resulted in high customer engagement.
Where previous ads have centred on the things we sell Mrs Claus the tale of Santas wife as a skilled behind thescenes operative  was our  rst ever nonproductled campaign.
It aimed to tap into peoples emotional connection with
Through our lovemrsclaus social media hashtag and tieins with our Make Every Moment Special activity in store Mrs Claus was a key ingredient that lifted our Christmas performance.
On the back of the campaigns success in May this year we introduced our new brand proposition.
More than a tagline Spend It Well is a call to action designed to inspire and enable our customers to make every moment special by focusing on the experiences people and things that really matter.
The campaign represents a commitment to putting customers at the heart of everything we do and it is the  rst we have created based on deep customer insight.
With its signi cant focus on customer experience on and offl ine it aims to position MandS as an enabler of a life well lived.
This is also the  rst time we have united both Food and Clothing and Home under a single brand philosophy.
Spend It Well will sit across all digital channels stores marketing communications and Sparks giving our customers a clear and consistent view of MandS.
Our Sparks membership club is pivotal when it comes to giving customers what they want and rewarding their loyalty.
Nearly
1.6m members joined this year taking total membership to 5.6m.
Sparks analytics have given us access to a wealth of insights that enable us to be more relevant to our customers.
We aim to create a personal relationship with them allowing us to tailor our off ers and experiences.
By doing this we have shown that we can encourage people to shop more frequently in diff erent categories and via diff erent channels and devices thereby creating shareholder value.
We are working on making Sparks even better.
Over the next year we will increase levels of personalisation make the scheme easier to use at diff erent customer touchpoints and continue to drive shopper behaviour in ways that are relevant to them.
Since we launched Plan A in 2007  it has sparked some fantastic innovations.
It has made us challenge the way we do things and to think diff erently.
It has also helped us to have a positive impact on communities.
The new iteration of Plan A comes with a new ambition to increase levels of engagement with our customers by addressing the issues we know they really care about.
We have identi ed three new priorities around which all our Plan A activity will be based Wellbeing Community and Planet.
The launch dovetailed with our Spend It Well campaign after all looking after the planet and living life to the full are part of the same philosophy.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW
OUR PERFORMANCE This year we are reporting on the 52 weeks to 1 April 201 7 compared with last years 53week year.
To provide a more meaningful comparison with last year all  nancial movements in this section are reported relative to the 52 weeks to 26 March 201 6 unless otherwise noted.
During the year we set out our new strategy to put MandS on a more sustainable footing and establish the basis for future growth.
Although we are con dent that these actions are the right ones to recover and grow MandS they have not come without signi cant cost.
As a result on a 53week reported basis Group pro t before tax was down 63.9% to 1 76.4m last year 488.8m and pro t before tax and adjusted items was 6 1 3.8m down 1 1.0% last year 689.6m.
OUR OPERATING PERFORMANCE In Food we continued to outperform a challenging grocery market with revenue up 4.2% to 5.6bn last year 5.4bn.
Driving growth through our store opening programme we opened 30 new owned and 38 new franchise Food stores and increased market share by 20bps to 4.5%.
Food gross margin was down 25bps yearonyear due to input price pressure as a result of the fall in sterling and higher than anticipated waste.
Clothing and Home revenue was down 2.8% at 3.8bn last year 4.0bn as sales were aff ected by our strategy to reduce our reliance on promotions and sale activity.
However we are encouraged by the increase in fullprice sales which were up 2.7% and market share stabilisation and we are con dent that we are taking the right action for the longterm success of our clothing business.
Clothing and Home gross margin increased by 105bps to 56.1 % as a result of lower discounting and buying margin gains as we continue to leverage our direct sourcing capabilities and scale.
These factors more than off set the signi cant headwind as a result of the decline in value of sterling which had a signi cant impact on our cost of goods.
UK operating costs were 3390m last year 3266m up 3.8% with the primary drivers being the costs associated with investment in new space and IT as we continue to upgrade our systems and infrastructure to support future growth.
International operating pro t before adjusted items was 64.4m up 1 5.4% last year 55.8m.
This improvement was due to a signi cant reduction in losses in owned markets of this 7m is a result of the provision for certain onerous leases taken as an adjusted item following our decision to exit owned stores in ten countries.
Pro ts from our franchise markets were slightly down due to lower shipments to our franchise partners in the Middle East in the  rst half of the year.
Group pro t before tax was down to 1 76.4m last year 488.8m on a 53week basis as a result of the signi cant charges associated with the implementation of our revised strategy.
This included 1 32.5m for International store closures and impairments and 1 56.0m relating to the closure of our UK de ned bene t pension scheme and changes to pay and premiums.
We also continued to incur charges in relation to a provision by MandS Bank for insurance mis selling which this year were 44.1 m last year 50.3m.
Of the 437 .4m of adjusting items 80.9m were cash in the year.
Further details are on p28 and in note 5 on p103104.
Cash generation in the business remains strong with free cash  ow before shareholder returns of 585.4m last year 539.3m on a 53week basis.
During the year we further strengthened our capital management disciplines.
Capital investment was signi cantly down as we have completed some of our larger infrastructure projects and opened fewer fullline stores than last year.
Net debt reduced by 203.6m during the year to 1.9bn.
We issued a new 300m bond in December in advance of a 500m bond expiry in December 201 7 .
We remain committed to a strong balance sheet and maintaining an investment grade credit rating.
Our credit rating is BBB minus.
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT AND IMPROVING SHAREHOLDER RETURNS Following several years of investment we now have the infrastructure needed for sustainable growth.
However some of these investments have not generated the returns we had hoped for and some have cost more than they should.
We are also operating in a marketplace undergoing signi cant changes.
While we remain committed to investing in the growth of MandS we need to do this within a tighter investment framework.
Under this approach we are already placing a greater emphasis on cash payback when assessing investments to help improve the reliability of returns.
We also plan to reduce the average length of our leases giving us greater  exibility and to ensure we have a better mix between growth and business as usual investments.
We believe this approach will enable us to prioritise key investments while improving returns to our shareholders.
We recognise the importance of regular dividends and we are committed to delivering sustainable shareholder returns.
During the year we returned 377 .5m to shareholders which included 7 4.5m in the form of a special dividend.
Notwithstanding the decline in pro ts but after considering the strong cash generation characteristics of the Group the Board decided to maintain the full year dividend at 1 8.7p last year 1 8.7p.
We believe our strategy to recover and grow MandS alongside our strengthened approach to capital management will deliver pro table sustainable growth for our shareholders.
HELEN WEIR CHIEF FINANCE OFFICER FIND OUT MORE See our KPIs on p1821 See our Strategic Update on p0811 Read about our operating performance on p2325 See how performance links to Remuneration on p56 27 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE During the  rst half we declared a special dividend of 4.6p per share.
However given the potential cash costs associated with our strategic changes and uncertain market conditions the Board took the prudent decision not to make an additional return of cash to shareholders under our enhanced shareholder returns programme in the second half.
Despite the fall in pro t we believe we have the right strategy in place to recover and grow MandS and this alongside our strengthened approach to capital management will deliver pro table sustainable growth for our shareholders.
FULL YEAR REVIEW 52 weeks ended
Group revenue 10622.0 10391.0 2.2 UK revenue 944 1.7 9324.8 1.3 International revenue 11 80.3 1066.2 10.7 Adjusted Group operating Adjusted UK operating pro t 626.2 721.8 13.2 Adjusted International operating pro t 64.4 55.8 15.4 Adjusted pro t before tax 613.8 684.1 10.3 Adjusted items 437 .4 200.8 na Pro t before tax 176.4 483.3 63.5 GROUP REVENUE Group revenues were up 2.2% up 1 .
1 % on a constant currency basis .
UK revenues were up 1 .3% in total with a likefor like decrease.
International revenues were up 1 0.7% 0.
1 % on a constant currency basis .
GROSS MARGIN UK gross margin was 42.0%.
Clothing and Home gross margin was ahead of expectations up c.105bps yearonyear.
Buying margin increased by 100bps despite currency headwinds as we continued to deliver bene ts from leveraging our direct sourcing capabilities through retendering orders and by moving business to lowerduty locations.
Reduced discounting bene ted margin by c.5bps on the year with an 1 10bps improvement in the second half as a result of lower stock into sale and better sell through rates.
Food gross margin declined 25bps yearonyear which was more than expected.
We generated gains from our ongoing value optimisation programme of 70bps.
However these were more than off set by an increase in input costs of 80bps following the depreciation of sterling and higher than expected waste.
UK OPERATING COSTS 52 weeks ended
Store staffi ng 1010.3 97 4.4 3.7 Other store costs 1000.7 97 4.4 2.7 Distribution and warehousing 519.6 475.4 9.3 Marketing 162.7 186.1 1 2.6 Central costs 697.1 655.8 6.3 UK Operating Costs 3390.4 3266.1 3.8 Certain prior year costs have been reclassi ed to re ect changes in UK organisation structure UK operating costs were up by 1 24m 3.8% with higher depreciation accounting for 26m.
Store staff costs increased by 36m primarily driven by new space with the cost of the annual pay review and investments in improved store service largely off set by business effi ciencies.
Within other store costs new space drove the increase with occupancy cost in ation largely off set by effi ciencies and lower depreciation.
Distribution and warehousing costs increased by 44m.
A signi cant proportion of this increase was driven by increased capacity to support growth in our business with a new Food depot in En eld and Clothing and Home warehouse in Bradford.
The balance was largely attributable to increased food volumes and in ation.
Marketing costs declined by 23m.
This was mostly a result of a reduction in activity and the more eff ective use of our marketing budget such as our Christmas campaign where we increased customer views while reducing costs as well as the annualisation of the launch of Sparks last year.
Central costs increased by 4 1 m.
This was largely driven by an increase in IT related operating costs including higher depreciation from new merchandising systems.
A greater proportion of costs are now being expensed as we transition to increased use of cloud based software services.
As expected around half of the anticipated c.
30m cost savings from our Head Offi ce restructuring were delivered during the year.
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE PROFITABLE INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 52 weeks ended
Franchise 314.0 324.4 3.2 Retained 686.9 580.9 18.2 Revenue 1180.3 1066.2 10.7 Franchise 81.9 87 .3 6.2 Retained 17.2 15.3 1 2.4 Operating Pro t 64.4 55.8 15.4 During the year International revenues rose by 1 0.7% driven by currency translation with constant currency sales down 0.
1 %.
Pro t before adjusted items increased by 1 5.4% to 64.4m.
In our franchise business shipments to Asia bene ted from new store openings and expansion of our Food business.
We saw a good performance from Europe where shipments increased driven by new Food store openings in France.
Revenues from the Middle East were aff ected by destocking and weak retail markets although the trend improved in the second half of the year with a similar trend in pro ts.
In our retained owned business constant currency revenues increased by 2%.
Our joint venture business in India performed well with seven new store openings during the year .
Sales in the Republic of Ireland and in Hong Kong were aff ected by our strategy to reduce discounting.
Pro t in retained owned markets improved.
Lower operating pro ts in Hong Kong were off set by an improved performance in the Czech Republic and India.
International restructuring costs include 7m of lease costs relating to stores either closed or in the process of closing.
This contributed to the reduction of losses in exit markets.
The remaining store closures will be largely complete by the end of the  rst half and we now expect to reduce the losses in exit markets by between 20 and 25m in the current year .
T otal closure costs related to the International strategy are expected to be at the lower end of the previously indicated range at c.
The cash costs associated are expected to be c. with the vast majority incurred in 20 1 7 1 8.
ADJUSTED OPERATING PROFIT Group adjusted operating pro t was 6 1 3.8m last year 684.
1 m.
UK operating pro t was 626.2m.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
NET FINANCE COSTS 52 weeks ended
Interest payable 100.2 99.1  1.1 Interest income 6.6 5.8 0.8 Net interest payable 93.6 93.3 0.3 Pension net  nance income 29.3 15.3 14.0 Unwind of discount on partnership liability 12.6 1 4.7 2.1 Unwind of discounts on  nancial instruments and provisions 0.1 0.8 0.9 Net  nance cost 76.8 93.5 16.7 Net  nance cost reduced by 1 6.7m largely due to increased pension net  nance income as a result of a higher UK de ned bene t scheme surplus at the start of the year.
Net interest payable increased marginally to 93.6m.
The interest payable on the new 300m bond issued in December as we pre nanced an existing bond expiring in December 201 7 was almost fully off set by the reduction in interest rates yearonyear.
GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX AND ADJUSTED ITEMS Group pro t before tax and adjusted items was 6 1 3.8m down 1 0.3% on last year down 1 1 .0% on a 53week basis .
The decrease was primarily due to the reduction in Clothing and Home gross pro t and the increase in operating costs in the year .
MandS Bank pro ts were down 9.7m as a result of the reduction in interchange fees and lower interest bearing balances.
ADJUSTMENTS TO PROFIT BEFORE TAX The Group makes certain adjustments to statutory pro t measures in order to derive alternative performance measures that provide stakeholders with additional helpful information on the performance of the business.
Adjusted items 52 weeks ended Strategic programmes changes to pay and pensions 156.0 UK organisation 24.0 UK store estate 51.6 37.0 International store closures and impairments 132.5 31.6 UK store impairments and onerous lease charges 48.8 MandS Bank charges incurred in relation to the insurance misselling provision 44.1 50.3 UK Logistics 9.8 9.2 Legal settlements 9.8 Other impairments  94.5 IAS 39 fair value movement of embedded derivative  2.0 Net gain on acquisition of joint venture holding Bradford warehouse  5.4 Adjustments to operating pro t and pro t before tax 437.4 200.8 During the period the Group announced changes to our pay and pensions arrangements within the UK business.
We closed our UK de ned bene t pension scheme to future accrual eff ective from 1 April 20 1 7 resulting in a oneoff charge of  1 27 .0m.
In respect of pay we announced an increase in our base level of pay to 8.50 per hour as well as the removal of a number of premium payments.
The Group has recognised a charge of 23.6m in the year in relation to this.
The Group anticipates making transition payments to employees in relation to the closure of the de ned bene t scheme of c. in aggregate over the next three years.
These amounts will be recognised within adjusted items as they are incurred.
During the period following completion of a detailed review of the UK organisation the Group announced proposed changes to its UK Head Offi ce structure.
The changes have resulted in a net reduction of c.590 Head Offi ce roles with restructuring costs in the year of 1 5.4m inclusive of fees.
The Group also announced an 1 8month programme to centralise its London Head Offi ce functions into one building.
The Group has recognised a net charge of 8.6m associated with this rationalisation.
In November the Group announced a strategic programme in relation to the UK store estate.
As part of this programme during the year ten UK stores were approved for closure resulting in closure costs of 47 .3m relating to dilapidations sublet shortfalls accelerated depreciation of  xtures and  ttings and impairment of assets.
The balance of the charges of 4.3m in the period related to the ongoing review of assumptions associated with previously closed stores.
We continue to expect total adjusted items related to this programme of c.
The Group has announced its intention to close its owned stores in ten international markets resulting in the recognition of a cost of 1 30.5m in the period.
The expected closure costs primarily relate to redundancy lease exit and property dilapidations.
The closure programmes are ongoing in all markets with the exception of China where the  nal store was closed on 1 April 201 7 .
International
Off setting these store impairments are credits of 7 .0m relating to the reversal of historic impairments against  ve stores in Ireland and the release of unutilised provisions on completion of the exit from the Balkans.
UK store impairment testing during the year has identi ed a number of stores where the current and anticipated future performance does not support the carrying value of the stores.
As a result a charge of 39.4m has been incurred in respect of the impairment of assets associated with these stores.
A further charge of 9.4m has been incurred in respect of onerous lease provisions associated with some of these stores.
The Group continues to incur charges in relation to MandS Bank insurance misselling provision.
The Groups income from MandS Bank has been reduced as a result of a further 44.1 m of charges in the year.
A net credit of 9.8m has been recognised in the year in relation to an updated view of the estimated closure costs of legacy logistics sites associated with the strategic transition to a single tier distribution network.
During the year the Group has reached various legal settlements resulting in a net credit of 9.8m.
The cash  ow impact of adjusted items was 80.9m in the year.
GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX Group pro t before tax was 1 76.4m down from 483.3m last year 488.8m on a 53 week basis.
The decrease was largely due to the impact of the strategic programmes in the year including the curtailment costs associated with the closure to future accrual of the UK de ned bene t pension scheme costs associated with the closure of our owned stores in ten International markets and the UK store estate.
TAXATION
The eff ective tax rate on pro t before tax and adjusted items was 1 9.9% last year 1 7 .2%.
The eff ective tax rate was 34.4% last year 1 7 .3% due to the impact of disallowable adjusted items. around 2 1 % as a result of the Scottish Limited Partnership structure.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE Corporation tax 10% Customs duties 7% Employers NI 9% Employees NI 7% Other taxes 1% Business rates 21% Excise duties 15% VAT 17% PAYE 13% TOTAL TAX CONTRIBUTION In 201 7  our total cash tax contribution to the UK Exchequer was 88 1 m 201 6 857m split between taxes ultimately borne by the Company of 423m 201 6 4 1 9m i. i.
PA YE employees NIC value added tax excise duties and sundry taxes.
EARNINGS PER SHARE Basic earnings per share decreased by 70.7% to 7 .2p decreased by 71.1 % on a 53week basis largely as a result of the impact of the adjusted items in the current year.
The weighted average number of shares in issue during the period was 1623.1 m last year 1635.9m.
Basic earnings per share before adjusted items decreased by 1 2.6% to 30.4p decreased by 1 3.1 % on a 53week basis due to the lower adjusted pro t generated in the year.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 52 weeks ended 53 weeks ended
UK store environment 22.6 36.9 14.3 New UK stores 75.0 106.4 3 1.4 International 13.4 26.4 1 3.0site 46.1 89.1 43.0 Property maintenance 90.3 79.6 10.7 Proceeds from property disposals 27.0 30.6 3.6 Total capital expenditure excluding acquisition 331.2 468.9 137.7 Joint venture owning Bradford warehouse  56.2 56.2 Total capital expenditure 331.2 525.1 193.9 UK store environment spend included investment in increasing the exibility of our instore layout in Womenswear new store fascias and rebranding our Food halls.
Spend was down yearonyear due to completion of a number of instore schemes last year primarily in Lingerie and Kidswear.
New UK store spend was down as a result of fewer new fullline stores opening.
During the year we opened 30 owned Simply Food three fullline stores and two relocations compared to 25 owned Simply Food  ve fullline stores and two relocations in the previous year.
Clothing and Home space increased by 0.9%.
International spend was signi cantly lower as a result of the decision to exit stores in 10 markets.
Spend in the year was largely focused on new stores in India and refurbishment projects in Hong Kong.
We continue to invest in improving our supply chain and IT infrastructure although the total spend has reduced as we have completed some of our larger infrastructure projects.
During the year we opened a new Food depot in En eld as well as investing in our warehouse in Bradford. infrastructure projects.
Investment in IT comprised of upgrading our instore wi networks and investing in additional handheld devices which improve effi ciency and customer service instore.
In addition as we move towards more cloud based software solutions a larger proportion of costs are now being expensed.
Maintenance spend has increased primarily due to investment in more energy effi cient instore equipment such as lighting.
The proceeds from property disposals mainly relate to the  nal instalment of deferred consideration from the sale of the White City warehouse.
CASH FLOW AND NET DEBT 52 weeks ended 53 weeks ended
Adjusted operating pro t690.6 784.9 94.3 Depreciation and amortisation before adjusted items 589.5 576.8 1 2.7 Non cash pension and share charges 110.9 1 1 8.0 7.
Adjusted items cash out ow 80.9 63.2 1 7 .7 Working capital 9.1 13.2 22.3 Pension funding 135.3 1 18.4 16.9 Capex and disposals 383.2 519.5 136.3 Acquisition of joint venture  56.2 56.2 Interest and taxation 202.6 206.0 3.4 Share transactions 5.5 9.7 4.2 Free cash  ow pre shareholder returns 585.4 539.3 46.1 Dividends paid 377.5 301.7 75.8 Share buy back  150.7 150.7 Free cash  ow 207.9 86.9 121.0 Opening net debt 2138.3 2223.2 84.9 Exchange and other noncash movements 4.3 2.0 2.3 Closing net debt 1934.7 2138.3 203.6 The reduction in capital and acquisition expenditure was partially off set by weaker business performance with adjusted operating pro t down 94.3m.
Working capital was broadly  at on the year with a reduction in Clothing and Home inventory off set by a reduction in creditors.
Pension funding was up 1 6.9m due to an increase to the UK de ned bene t contributions rate following the 201 5 triennial valuation.
Additionally cash payments associated with adjusted items were 1 7 .7m higher in the year driven by the International strategy.
The business delivered free cash  ow preshareholder returns of 585.4m an increase of 46.1 m on the prior year.
The Strategic Report including pages 30 to 33 was approved by a duly authorised Committee of the Board of Directors on 23 May 201 7  and signed on its behalf by HELEN WEIR CHIEF FINANCE OFFICER 23 May 201 7 30 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT
APPROACH TO RISK MANAGEMENT
The Board is accountable for carrying out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those threatening its customers people values reputation business model operations safety future performance solvency or liquidity.
On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee reviews the eff ectiveness of the risk management process.
Each business area is responsible for formally identifying and assessing its risks halfyearly measuring them against a de ned set of criteria and considering the likelihood of occurrence and potential impact to the Group.
The Group Risk function facilitates a similar exercise with members of the Operating Committee before combining these perspectives to create a consolidated view.
In compiling this complete risk pro le consideration is given to risks that are external to our business core to our daytoday operations related to business change and any other that may impact achievement of our future strategy.
The principal risks identi ed by this process form our Group Risk Pro le which is agreed by the Operating Committee ahead of nal review and approval by the Board.
In addition to this periodic review key areas of risk are subject to regular oversight and challenge by the Operating Committee and where appropriate by the Board and Audit Committee during the course of the year.
The directors assessment of the longterm viability of the Company is also reviewed annually mindful of the principal risks faced.
Further detail on our approach to assessing longterm viability can be found on page 3 1.
KEY AREAS OF FOCUS We continue to challenge and improve the quality of risk information generated across the business while maintaining a simple and practical approach.
Our ways of working with the Operating Committee have evolved during the year.
More detailed discussion regarding the nature and extent of our principal risks has enhanced our understanding in the context of the businesss risk appetite as well as informing our consideration of emerging risk areas.
By completing periodic deep dives on targeted connected risks we can also better assess the eff ectiveness of the mitigating activities in place and strengthen our approach to risk management.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES The details of our principal risks and uncertainties and the key mitigating activities in place to address them can be found on pages 32 and 33.
We disclose those we believe are likely to have the greatest impact on our business at this moment in time and which have consequently been the subject of debate at recent Board or Audit Committee meetings.
The year 201 61 7 has been one of change and this is re ected in the yearonyear evolution of the principal risks and uncertainties.
The Company is exposed to a wide range of risks in addition to those listed.
These are monitored for any increase in likelihood or impact and to ensure that appropriate mitigations are in place.
While our capacity to in uence external risks is often limited we recognise the importance of operating a business model that has the potential to  ex and adapt to a changing environment.
For example the consequences of the UKs decision to leave the European Union will directly impact our business in a variety of ways.
While we have already been aff ected by the depreciation of sterling other risks are not yet fully quanti able.
Potential risks could include trade tariff s higher taxation and limits to the free movement of people all will demand a proactive response as the implications are better understood.
We have created a working group to monitor the changing risk pro le.
Economic uncertainty and sociopolitical unrest also fall under this umbrella of external risk.
As with any business we face risks and uncertainties on a daily basis.
Eff ective risk management is essential to support the achievement of our strategic and operational objectives.
RISK MANAGEMENT
OUR PERFORMANCE RISK APPETITE The UK Corporate Governance Code requires companies to determine their risk appetite in terms of the nature and extent of the principal risks faced and those they are willing to take in achieving strategic objectives.
In addition to assessing whether residual risk is at an acceptable level in the context of overall risk appetite the Board has established a set of risk appetite statements that address key risk areas and speci c operations.
The statements articulate risk parameters within which the Group operates supported by our policies and procedures.
In addition to ensuring that our risk appetite statements remain relevant and evolve with the business we recognise the importance of fostering an environment where innovation can thrive.
Consequently there are times when there may be merit in operating outside agreed risk parameters if appropriate approvals and mitigating controls are in place.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE The UK Corporate Governance Code requires us to issue a viability statement declaring whether we believe the Company is able to continue to operate and meet its liabilities taking into account its current position and principal risks.
The overriding aim is to encourage directors to focus on the longer term and be more actively involved in risk management and internal controls.
The Board is required to assess the Companys viability over a period greater than 1 2 months.
The increased levels of uncertainty within the global economic and political environment and the macro economic challenges being experienced within the retail sector mean the Board continues to believe a threeyear period is appropriate for business planning measuring performance and remunerating at a senior level.
Our assessment of viability therefore continues to align with this threeyear outlook.
The process adopted to assess the viability of the Company involves collaborative input from a number of functions across the business to model severe but plausible scenarios in which a number of the Groups principal risks and uncertainties materialise within the period of the threeyear plan.
We have modelled scenarios which group together principal risks where we believe interdependencies exist between the risks in addition to scenarios where unconnected risks occur simultaneously.
The scenario with the most signi cant adverse impact was reviewed against the current and projected liquidity position to conclude on the Companys viability.
The assessment also took account of additional potential mitigations available in the event of further downside factors including a reduction in capital expenditure and reduced returns to shareholders.
The Audit Committee reviews the output of the viability assessment in advance of  nal evaluation by the Board.
In assessing viability the Board considered a number of key factors including our business model see pages 1 2 and 1 3 our strategy see page 9 risk appetite see page 30 and our principal risks and uncertainties see pages 32 and 33.
These have been reviewed in the context of our nancial plans speci cally the annual budget and threeyear plan.
The directors also satis ed themselves that they have the evidence necessary to support the statement in terms of the eff ectiveness of the internal control environment in place to mitigate risk.
In making the statement the directors have applied the following assumptions in preparing the scenarios Bonds maturing during the assessment period will be repaid through our existing bank facilities.
The actions included in our plan to grow sales are not fully realised or are off set by lower than expected market growth.
The actions included in our plans to mitigate input cost increases that we expect are not delivered in full or the input cost increases are greater than expected.
The UK governments noti cation of its intention to exit the European Union will have adverse  nancial impacts including input cost in ation from increased tariff s and a further weakening in sterling as well as reduced UK consumer spending.
The Boards assessment is that MandS is a viable business.
The viability statement can be found on page 83.
OUR APPROACH TO ASSESSING LONGTERM VIABILITY RISK INTERDEPENDENCY We recognise that there is signi cant interdependency between our key risks.
This diagram based on an extract from our current Group Risk Pro le highlights how changes to one risk might impact those connected to it.
By understanding the relationship between our key risks we are better placed to ensure we are managing them appropriately and to understand our broader risk exposure.
This is especially important when assessing the Companys longterm viability.
The following is an illustrative example of a potential scenario In order to drive longterm Pro table Growth we need to ensure that we proactively manage a number of our principal risks and uncertainties.
We must off er and deliver a Customer Proposition and Experience that is competitive and reliable across all channels keeping pace with changing consumer behaviours and enabling us to leverage growth opportunities as they arise.
In addition our Brand needs to evolve with consumer lifestyles and attitudes ensuring that it resonates with customers and remains relevant as they move from one life stage to the next.
To be able to realise growth opportunities we need to identify keep pace with and embrace developments in
This will enable us to both meet and exceed customer expectations while ensuring that our business remains innovative resilient and  exible.
All of these aims are ultimately underpinned by the strength of our people.
Through eff ective management of Talent and Succession we can ensure our people are best set up for success to deliver business objectives as they evolve.
Pro table
Customer
Proposition and
Talent and
Brand Technology 32 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC STRATEGIC REPORT Risk key Nr New risk Evolved from prior year No material change to risk Our Group Risk Pro le evolves as changes in circumstances elevate risk mitigating activities reduce net risk over time or as new risks emerge.
As a result of our new strategy our business has undergone considerable change during the year  aff ecting our people and operations.
This has signi cantly in uenced the risks re ected in the Group Risk Pro le which forms the basis of the principal risks and uncertainties disclosed below.
RISK DESCRIPTION CURRENT CONTEXT MITIGATING ACTIVITIES CLOTHING and HOME RECOVERY Our future performance will be impacted if we fail to meet customer expectations.
As we continue to reassert our Clothing and Home credentials we are focused on ensuring that product relevance pricing and quality meet customer expectations.
Meeting our customers needs in all respects is key to driving improved performance in an increasingly competitive market.
Early signs of improved performance are being seen in Clothing and Home following ongoing eff orts to strengthen product style and quality.
Irrespective of this there is no room for complacency and achieving recovery and further growth of our Clothing and Home business remains a key priority.
Clothing and Home strategy and supporting workstreams in place to drive sales target market share control costs and drive pro tability.
Monthly monitoring and challenge of delivery against strategy and performance indicators.
Continued focus on product quality and style including adherence to our Clothing Quality Charter.
Ongoing engagement through customer panels and our Customer Insight Unit.
FOOD SAFETY AND INTEGRITY A food safety or integrity related incident occurs or is not eff ectively managed.
Our brand is based on trust and our customers have high expectations of both the quality and integrity of our food.
It is of paramount importance that we eff ectively manage safety and integrity especially as we continue to grow our global food business.
While we set our own exacting standards the external pressures facing the food industry are continually evolving.
Fraudulent supply chain behaviour supplier cost pressures innovation demands and stringent regulatory requirements are just some of the contributors to this risk.
Dedicated Food Technology team responsible for ensuring products are safe for consumption through rigorous controls and processes.
Longestablished store supplier and depot auditing programme in place.
Visible response to emerging customer concerns.
Proactive horizon scanning for future issues including focus on fraud and adulteration.
Crisis management plan in place.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Our reputation as a sustainable retailer relies on our ability to meet our social responsibility agenda and stakeholder expectations.
Our
As our peers place greater focus on this and the regulatory environment continues to develop it is essential that we continue to evolve our aims maintain strong ethical standards and meet stakeholder expectations.
Our business values and practices are being in uenced by a broader range of factors than ever before including modern slavery and human rights.
It is essential that our commitment to our ethical standards remains at the forefront of our behaviours especially during a period of signi cant change.
Continued commitment to and development of Plan A objectives to allow risks to be identi ed mitigated and monitored.
Overarching governance of processes through Plan A leadership.
Mature supplier ethical auditing programme including independent third party auditors across our Clothing and Home and Food businesses.
Policy on supplier selection processes.
Businesswide human rights policy and ownership.
Updated Global Sourcing Principles to incorporate requirements of Modern Slavery Act.
Signatory to United Nations Global Compact principles covering human rights the environment and ethical behaviour.
Membership of the Ethical Trading Initiative.
INFORMATION SECURITY INCLUDING CYBER We experience a major information security breach.
Our business and society continues to be subject to external threats to security including external hackers and viruses physical security attacks or sensitive data being lost or accessed without authorisation.
Experiences across the corporate landscape have continued to highlight the real threat of cyber and physical attacks.
The external threat pro le is ever changing becoming more sophisticated and more unpredictable.
In addition regulatory responsibilities in relation to data protection are becoming increasingly stringent including the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation from 2018.
Established security controls including policies procedures and use of security technologies.
Dedicated Head of Data Governance.
Data Governance Group in place.
Dedicated Corporate Security team with ongoing focus on improving physical security environment.
Dedicated Head of Cyber Security leading a team of cyber security experts and analysts with 247 monitoring and defence tools.
Third party cyber maturity assessment performed.
Ongoing monitoring of developments in cyber security threats engaging with third party specialists as appropriate.
Control of sensitive data through limited and monitored access and the rollout of systems with enhanced security.
Specisite
TECHNOLOGY
To support future pro table growth we need to keep pace and develop our technology capability.
Our business needs to identify keep pace with and embrace developments in technology.
This will encompass a range of technology demands driven by the needs of our customers deployment of tools that promote eff ective and  exible working and maintaining an overarching IT infrastructure that enables resilient business delivery.
The everincreasing importance of technology in meeting customer needs successfully growing our business and supporting our people means this remains an area of change and focus.
Digital lab in place developing new technology enabled solutions.
Proactive simpli cation of IT infrastructure through clearly de ned technology roadmaps for all business areas.
Structured deployment of Smarter Working principles and enabling technologies.
Overall review of future IT strategy under way.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED 33
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE RISK DESCRIPTION CURRENT CONTEXT MITIGATING ACTIVITIES CUSTOMER PROPOSITION and EXPERIENCE Our performance and reputation will be impacted if we fail to deliver a competitive and reliable customer proposition and experience across all channels. choose to shop or have their order delivered.
Our business recognises the need to deliver a reliable and competitive customer proposition across all channels to keep pace with changing consumer behaviours drive performance and leverage growth opportunities.
Appointed dedicated Head of Customer Experience.
Omnichannel approach adopted to drive consistent experiences online and in store.
Proactive monitoring of social media to observe and respond to trends in customer experience. teams to drive consistency across all channels.
Robust business continuity plans incident reporting and management procedures in place across all channels.
Ongoing review of future strategic opportunities to meet customer needs.
TALENT and SUCCESSION We need to attract develop motivate and retain the right individuals to achieve our operational and strategic objectives.
Eff ective talent management is essential to deliver current and future business requirements.
We recognise the importance of both developing internal talent and successfully integrating external hires.
Our people continue to be a key pillar of our business and ensuring that the right people are in the right roles is a signi cant enabler to leveraging performance and growth.
Completion of top tier talent review.
Review of crossGroup talent management processes under way.
Third party review completed to help support and develop skill set of senior leadership group.
Targeted development programmes in place.
Clear line manager responsibility for succession planning supported by appropriate people forums.
Ongoing focus on enhancing recruitment processes across the business.
MARGIN
Sourcing or cost pressures impact our margin performance.
While our business continues to face challenging foreign currency headwinds other factors place signi cant pressure on margin performance.
These include the availability of raw materials and pricing strategies in the context of the overall retail market.
Ongoing sourcing and cost pressures are placing increasing focus on our margin performance and the need to further evolve our sourcing strategies and ways of working in response to this.
Clearly de ned margin targets across the business with performance monitored and reported to management.
Comprehensive sourcing plans in place for key productssuppliers.
Currency strategy to actively manage foreign exchange rate  uctuations.
Ongoing monitoring of pricing strategy in the context of the wider retail market.
Strong engagement with buying teams to communicate uctuations in raw material prices and foreign exchange rates.
Enhanced Clothing and Home product development system in place improving effi ciency to leverage margin growth.
BRAND
Our brand needs to evolve with consumer lifestyles and attitudes for us to successfully attract and retain customers.
We need to ensure that we recruit engage and retain customers through the ongoing relevance of the MandS brand.
To drive future performance and leverage opportunities our brand needs to stay relevant and appeal to customers as they move from one stage of life to the next.
We recognise the importance of ensuring that the MandS brand resonates with customers of diff ering lifestyles and outlooks.
Focus on clearly de ned brand purpose to Make Every Moment Special connecting with customers through our Spend It Well campaigns with greater focus on lifestyle and outlook.
Engagement with customers through our Customer Insight Unit and focus groups providing rich insights and quanti able data.
Strengthened Customer Insight Unit leadership.
Continued investment in the development of Sparks.
UK STORE ESTATE We fail to maintain and develop a UK store estate that is relevant to future customer preferences and supports business performance.
As consumer behaviours continue to evolve our physical store estate planning must align to our business strategy providing better range authority in more convenient locations while generating higher space productivity.
Stores are and will remain a critical part of our customer focus alongside a fully integrated online off er.
We recognise the importance of proactively managing our UK store estate to ensure that our space is relevant to the customer while supporting strong business performance and pro table growth.
Full review of our UK store portfolio during 20161 7.
Multiyear programme under way to improve our estate to better meet customers needs.
Strengthened property capabilities including appointment of senior external hires.
Crossbusiness Steering Group and working groups set up to manage and monitor the store estate change programme.
Property Board approval process and governance framework in place.
Continued expansion of our Simply Food business alongside improvements to the UK store estate.
PROFITABLE GROWTH To drive pro table growth our business needs to innovate as well as successfully deliver additional space and strong likeforlike performance.
To generate longterm shareholder value we need to identify alternative revenue streams and opportunities to leverage growth while also ensuring that we drive the performance of our existing products and services.
We must successfully drive innovation and diversi cation to secure future pro table growth for our business.
Customer Insight Unit provides horizon scanning of changes in consumer behaviour.
Review of innovation processes underway.
New operating model implemented to drive effi ciency and eff ective decisionmaking.
Business restructure completed to help drive our business objectives and strategic aims.
Ongoing focus on establishing foundations for new paths to growth.
THIRD PARTY MANAGEMENT To drive value for our business we need to successfully manage and leverage our third party relationships and partnerships.
Our
To ensure that we continue to drive value for the business it is essential that we work collaboratively clearly de ne requirements and proactively manage our third parties.
A signi cant level of expertise and eff ort is required to eff ectively manage third parties.
As our business model evolves we need to maintain focus on this area to continue to drive commercial and cost bene ts.
Ongoing Boardlevel review of key relationships and partnerships.
Dedicated personnel managing key contracts.
De ned service level agreements and key performance indicator standards in place for key contracts.
De ned contract governance and oversight standards.
Strong engagement with inhouse Legal and Procurement teams.
Periodic independent review of performance.
The risks listed do not comprise all those associated with Marks and Spencer and the numerical referencing does not denote an order of priority.
Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to management or currently deemed to be less material may also have an adverse eff ect on the business.
These less material risks are kept in view in case their likelihood or impact should show signs of increasing.
Further information on the  nancial risks we face and how they are managed is provided on pages 1 18 to 1 23.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED
Nr
Nr 34 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT As I highlighted earlier in this report this has been a year of considerable change for the
With the appointment of Steve Rowe as CEO the Board undertook a comprehensive review of all aspects of the business to ensure clarity around our customers and our brand positioning our strategy and business model our people our store portfolio our offi ces and our assets.
This review and the Board debate throughout the year resulted in a number of signi cant decisions for the business.
The
Board was acutely aware that these would aff ect a broad range of our stakeholders.
While we sought to ensure that our decisions were taken in a way that was fair and consistent with our values we recognised the importance of balancing these with the need to support the longterm future of the business.
The Board recognised that the consequences of its decisions would lead to signi cant adjustments to the business and to our  nancial position this year but we believe that these were essential to reestablish the foundations of the business to deliver sustainable performance and build an organisation that is  t and relevant for the longer term.
The Board and Audit Committees debate and associated judgements are covered on pages 404 1 and 485 1 of this report.
BOARD ACTIVITIES AND CONSIDERATION OF ALL
The tenets of Lord Sieff s words about the importance of considering a companys responsibilities to a broad stakeholder group which I quoted earlier in the report and which predate by decades the s.1 72 directors duties of the Companies Act 2006 have long been core to the MandS culture values and decisionmaking.
These were particularly evident in our deliberations around the introduction of an MandS living wage and the ambition to deliver fairer pay for our store colleagues in a way that was true and relevant to MandS.
This led us to go beyond the National Living Wage and establish ourselves as one of the best employers in the market.
We had signi cant debate around the closure of the long standing de ned bene t pension scheme but recognised that this was critical to ensure a fairer reward framework for all our colleagues.
We spent a lot of time considering the consequences of the closures within our international businesses to ensure we could establish a structure and format which would be stronger and more relevant for our customers and markets and a more pro table business with foundations for growth.
We also reviewed the con guration of our UK store estate to ensure we could establish a footprint to meet future customer needs.
We debated the necessary changes and restructuring within our offi ces to support our future plans.
In each such discussion the Board carefully considered the impact of its decision on our teams our customers the communities in which we trade our shareholders our supply base and our Plan A aspirations.
EMPLOYEE AND RETAIL SHAREHOLDER VOICE We are pleased to have established regular Board sessions for employee insight.
The feedback provided during our dedicated Board sessions by the chairs of both the Business Involvement Group BIG which represents the interests of all our 85000 colleagues across the business and of our De ned Bene t Pension Scheme was invaluable in ensuring the Board was able to fully consider the views of these vital stakeholders through the period of change.
We were grateful for their candid and open feedback which enabled the Board to appreciate fully the potential impact on those aff ected.
We also trialled our  rst Private Shareholder
The objective was to give our private shareholders additional access and information as is provided to our major institutional shareholders.
The candour and insights provided by these panel discussions were helpful in ensuring we were listening to this important stakeholder group.
The success of these trial panels led to the formal launch of our Private Shareholder Panel which will form an active part of our stakeholder engagement programme.
Details on this and our broader stakeholder engagement are provided on pages 44 to 45.
This illustrates how we have considered listened and engaged with all these stakeholders.
RISK AND CONTROLS The progress made on our risk debate and understanding of risk appetite in previous years helped ensure the Boards decision making was supported by the right discussions and considerations.
The enhanced level of risk debate and greater involvement of the Operating Committee was also critical in ensuring that appropriate monitoring and mitigations were embedded to support the proposals under discussion.
The Board spent time debating the market environment and the potential impact of the vote to leave the European Union.
It continues to assess the implications of Brexit for our customers communities and the business and the impact of currency movements on the business and our supply base.
We also undertook a thorough review of our cyber environment to ensure that we have appropriate data and information governance processes and controls ecommerce defences proactive security and strong incident management processes across the business.
While the Audit Committee will continue to monitor business processes and provide assurance over controls the Board considers data governance and cyber to be so signi cant that it will review this at least twice a year.
TALENT DEVELOPMENT AND SUCCESSION In addition to the strategic debate the Board and Nomination Committee also focused on ensuring we had the right talent in our business to support our plans.
Senior succession discussions have long featured on the Board agenda but we took this substantially further this year to include a comprehensive review of our people
GOVERNANCE OVERVIEW
The importance of considering a companys responsibilities to a broad stakeholder group has long been core to the MandS culture values and decision making processes.
ROBERT SWANNELL CHAIRMAN 35 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS capabilities and speci c development needs against the future requirements of our business.
The Board reviewed assessments for over 100 of our senior leaders in the business and discussed their leadership qualities strengths areas for development and medium and longterm succession plans to ensure that we have the right skills career paths and understanding of our talent to support our future business growth.
As highlighted earlier following the appointment of Steve Rowe as CEO and the announcement of our plans to build a simpler and more relevant MandS I considered it was the right time to deal with my own succession and for the business to appoint a new Chairman.
So in December 201 6 I informed the Board that I intended to retire as Chairman during 201 7 after six years in the post.
I am grateful to Vindi Banga our Senior Independent Director for leading such a rigorous process for the Nomination Committee to appoint my successor.
We are delighted that Archie Norman will succeed me in September 201 7 .
Overviews of the recruitment process undertaken by the Nomination Committee and the induction programme being undertaken by Archie are provided on page 39.
This programme is extremely comprehensive and will ensure that he has an extensive insight into our business our colleagues and stakeholders prior to taking up his appointment as Chairman.
When I joined MandS as Chairman I made it clear that I regarded eff ective succession planning as a vital responsibility for both me and the Board.
I am delighted that with Steve and Archies appointments this aspect has been successfully achieved in a rigorous way.
I know that succession planning and the development of talent at MandS will remain very high priorities of the Board.
BOARD OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING The Audit Committee played a key role in ensuring that there was appropriate challenge and governance around the accounting treatment of the decisions taken in the year and ensuring robust risk management controls and assurance processes were in place.
The Committee continues to closely monitor the management of our cyber and data governance processes health and safety and business continuity plans for our UK and international operations.
The
Committees activities considerations and judgements are set out on pages 48 to 50.
Fairness and pay has featured strongly in the Boards debate this year.
To support leadership and talent within our business the Remuneration Committee has reviewed our remuneration framework measures and targets.
This review was particularly topical given the Business Energy and Industrial Strategy BEIS Green Paper on corporate governance reform earlier in the year.
The
Committee held a number of discussions with shareholders on framework design during the year.
It also reviewed and updated the Remuneration Policy to ensure it remains both in line with best practice and relevant to our business.
It will be put forward for formal shareholder approval at the AGM in July 201 7 .
The Committees activities and its considerations on remuneration along with our Remuneration Policy are outlined in detail on pages 54 to 78.
In line with the requirements of the Corporate Governance Code the Board was independently evaluated during the year.
We were pleased that overall the Board has made signi cant progress since the last external review in 201 5 especially in relation to the quality of Board debate and decisionmaking Board papers and process.
The  ndings of the review and the action plans for the year ahead are set out on page 42 of this report.
We have had to take some bold and tough decisions to ensure MandS is set up for the future.
The Board made these changes as they are the right and relevant thing to do.
From a strong core set of wellestablished timeless values we have sought to ensure fairness integrity and rigour with each decision for all our stakeholders.
We recognise that the business has had to deliver a signi cant scale of change this year but the feedback from our stakeholders and the early progress we are seeing encourages us to continue to be bold con dent remain on the front foot and embrace the challenges ahead.
ROBERT SWANNELL CHAIRMAN Over the next few pages we look at the Board its role performance and oversight.
As in previous years we provide detail on the Board activities and discussions during the year pages 4 1 and 42 the actions arising from these and the progress made against them.
We also provide insight on director independence eff ectiveness and our Board evaluation succession planning and induction and ongoing development.
Governance at MandS is an important element of our Board environment.
To support how we do business and how we serve our stakeholders it needs to be relevant authentic and meaningful.
In line with previous years we have used the key themes of the Code to articulate the Boards activities during the year Leadership and eff ectiveness  pages 36 to 43 and 46 to 47 .
Accountability  pages 30 to 33 within the Strategic Report and pages 48 to 52 in the Directors Report.
Our stakeholders how we listen and engage pages 44 to 45.
Remuneration  pages 54 to 78.
Information on the governance of our Pension Scheme is provided on page 53.
The required governance and regulatory assurances are provided throughout this report re ecting their relevance to the business.
We provide insight into how governance supports and protects the MandS business and our stakeholders in a practical way.
Where information would previously have been located within the Directors Report and has now been incorporated into the Strategic Report a list of page references is available within the Other Disclosures section on page 79.
Every year we review and benchmark our Governance Framework against best practice.
The framework sets out the roles accountabilities and expectations for our directors and our structures. itethecompany.
UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE The UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Code is the standard against which we measured ourselves in 20161 7 .
A copy of the Code is available from the Financial Reporting Councils website.
We are pleased to con rm that we complied with all of the provisions set out in the Code for the period under review.
To keep this report interesting and engaging we continue to focus on the key insights from the business however further detail on how we comply with the Code can be found in our Corporate Governance Statementsitethecompany.
GOVERNANCE SUMMARY Our compliance with key areas of the Code is summarised as follows Independence Over half of our Board comprises independent nonexecutive directors and the composition of all Board Committees complies with the Code.
Senior Independent Director Our Senior Independent Director is Vindi Banga.
Accountability and election Clear separation of duties between Chairman and CEO roles all the directors are to stand for annual reelection.
Evaluation An externally facilitated performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees was undertaken during the year.
Attendance The directors have all attended an acceptable level of Board and Committee meetings.
Experience The Audit Committee chairman met the speci c requirements with regard to recent and relevant  nancial experience throughout 20161 7 .
Auditor tenure We changed our auditor in 201 41 5 following a thorough tender process.
Nonaudit policy This is disclosed on our website along with the limited nonaudit work undertaken during 20161 7 .
Auditor appointment We disclose our external auditor appointment policy on our website.
Internal Audit Details on the Internal Audit function are provided within this report.
Performancerelated pay A signi cant part of performancerelated pay is delivered through shares.
Our reward framework is simple transparent and designed to support and drive our business strategy.
THIS REPORTS KEY FEATURES 36 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE Steve Rowe Chief Executive
Chief Executive in April 2016 Skills competence and experience Steve joined MandS in 1 989 and progressed through a variety of roles within store management before moving to Head Offi ce in 1 993.
He has worked in senior roles across various areas of the business including Director of Home Director of Retail and Director of Retail and
He was appointed to the Board as Executive Director Food in 201 2 moving to the role of Executive Director General Merchandise in July 201 5.
He was appointed as CEO on 2 April 2016.
During his  rst year in the role he has laid solid foundations for a more relevant customercentric MandS including the repositioning of Clothing and Home and the continued growth of Food.
More information about Steves work during the year can be found in the Chief Executives Strategic Update starting on page 8.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Patrick BousquetChavanne Executive Director Customersite
July 201 3 Skills competence and experience Patrick brings over 25 years of extensive experience in the consumer goods industry.
His valuable strategic insight is supported by his experience in developing and marketing brands globally and broad knowledge of enhancing business performance and customer experience in a multichannel environment.
Patrick played a key role in creating the new Masterbrand marketing strategy across Food and Clothing and
Patrick assumed overall responsibility for Customer Experiencesite and Plan A in May 2016.
Other roles NonExecutive Director of BrownForman Inc.
Helen Weir Chief Finance Offi cer
April 201 5 Skills competence and experience Helen is a quali ed accountant with over 25 years experience in the  nance and retail sectors.
She brings substantial strategic  nancial experience and a wealth of signi cant retail and consumer experience to the Board.
Helen has strong listed company experience having been Group Finance Director Executive Director and NonExecutive Director on the Board of a number of major companies.
Helen is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and was awarded a CBE for services to Finance in 2008.
Other roles Trustee of Marie Curie NonExecutive Director of the Rugby Football Union.
Robert Swannell
Appointed
Chairman in January 201 1 NonExecutive Director in October 2010 Skills competence and experience Robert is a chartered accountant and a Barrister.
He has extensive government and regulatory experience and possesses a wealth of knowledge of many diff erent business areas banking and the City acquired over a 33year career in investment banking.
He has signi cant experience as a director and chairman across various sectors and his leadership in the area of governance promotes robust debate and drives a culture of openness in the boardroom.
Robert will retire from the Board on 1 September 201 7 .
Other roles Chairman of UK Government Investments Director of the Investor Forum Trustee of Teach First Advisory Board Member of Sutton Trust and Spencer Stuart.
CHAIRMAN
N R OUR BOARD See p43 for Governance and Board structures See p4041 for Board activities in 201617 See p43 for Board roles and responsibilities FIND OUT MORE The Board is responsible for the stewardship of the Company overseeing its conduct and aff airs to create sustainable value for the bene t of its shareholders.
KEY TO COMMITTEES Archie Norman Chairman Designate Proposed appointment date 1 September 2017 Archie brings a breadth of experience with an extensive track record in retail and brands.
He was instrumental in transforming a number of major British businesses including King sher Asda and Energis.
Archie is an experienced chairman and board director having served as Chairman of ITV Lazard and Hobbycraft and Deputy Chairman of Coles Limited.
In 20 1 6 he was appointed by the Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy as its Lead Non Executive Board member.
Further information about Archies skills experience and suitability for the role of Chairman can be found under Succession and Induction on page 39.
Other roles Adviser to the Board of Wesfarmers Limited Director of Target Pty Limited Chairman of Lazard and Hobbycraft Deputy Chairman of Coles Limited Lead Non Executive Board Member of BEIS.
INCOMING CHAIRMAN LEADERSHIP AND EFFECTIVENESS 37 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Amanda Mellor Group Secretary and Head of Corporate Governance
July 2009 GROUP SECRETARY Vindi Banga Senior Independent Director
Senior Independent Director in March 201 5 NonExecutive Director in September 201 1 Skills competence and experience Vindi has extensive consumer brand knowledge and global business experience acquired over 33 years in senior roles within the consumer goods industry.
His indepth knowledge of UK and international trade and industry provides valuable insight into business and enterprise across the globe.
He has strong experience as a board member of other listed companies and is the recipient of the Padma Bhushan one of Indias highest civilian honours.
Other roles Partner at Clayton Dubilier and Rice Director of Kedaara Capital Investment Managers Ltd Kedaara Capital I Ltd and Kedaara Holdings Ltd NonExecutive Director of Thomson Reuters and GSK Chairman of the Mauser Group and the CBIs Economic Growth Board member of the Governing Board of the Indian School of Business.
Miranda Curtis NonExecutive Director
February 201 2 Skills competence and experience Mirandas substantial experience of the international consumer and technology sectors and extensive knowledge of global industry provides a valuable contribution to the Board.
During her 20year career with Liberty Miranda led the companys investments in digital distribution and content operations across continental Europe and AsiaPaci c most notably in Japan.
Miranda will retire from the Board on 1 February 201 8.
Other roles NonExecutive Director of Liberty Global plc Lead Non Executive Director of the Foreign and Commonwealth Offi ce Trustee of the Institute for Government Deputy Chair of the Royal Shakespeare Company Deputy Chair of Garsington Opera Chair of African girls education charity Camfed.
Andy Halford NonExecutive Director
January 201 3 Skills competence and experience A chartered accountant Andy has a strong  nance background and signi cant recent and relevant nancial experience gained from CFO positions in global listed companies.
His extensive knowledge of the UK and international consumer market provides the Board with valuable strategic insight.
Andy is a member of the Business Forum on Tax and Competitiveness and a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
Other roles Chief Financial Offi cer of Standard Chartered plc.
INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Richard Solomons NonExecutive Director
April 201 5 Skills competence and experience Richard brings strong commercial nancial consumer branding and global experience to the Board.
His extensive international retail and consumer experience plus his role as CEO of a global business provide valuable insight.
Richard has held a number of senior roles at IHG and is currently Chief Executive Offi cer a role from which he will retire on 1 July 201 7 .
Richard was integral in shaping and implementing IHGs assetlight strategy which has helped the business grow signi cantly since it was formed in 2003 as well as supporting the return of 1 2.8bn to shareholders.
Other roles Chief Executive Offi cer of IHG retiring 1 July 201 7 Governor of the Aviation Travel and Tourism Industry Community of the World Economic Forum Member of the Industry Real Estate Financing Advisory Council.
Alison Brittain NonExecutive Director
January 201 4 Skills competence and experience Alison brings extensive  nancial and commercial experience to the Board combined with considerable knowledge of running largescale consumer businesses.
She is Chief Executive of hospitality group Whitbread and was Group Director of Lloyds Banking Groups Retail Division until July 201 5.
She has held a number of senior positions in the nancial sector particularly in retail and has valuable regulatory insight.
Alison has an MBA from Cambridge Universitys Judge Institute.
Other roles Chief Executive of Whitbread plc Trustee of the Princes Trust Council.
Andrew Fisher NonExecutive Director
December 201 5 Skills competence and experience Andrew has substantial experience of the international consumer and technology sectors and has led the successful growth of a number of technologyfocused enterprises over the past 1 9 years.
He is Executive Chairman of Shazam Entertainment Limited having previously served as Chief Executive Offi cer since 2005.
Prior to that Andrew was European Managing Director of Infospace Inc now Blucorasite He was a member of the Advisory Board to the Secretary of State for the Review of the BBC Charter and was awarded an OBE for services to the Digital Economy in 2016.
Other roles Executive Chairman of Shazam Entertainment Limitedsite Group plc.
Laura WadeGery Executive Director Multichannel
12 September 2016 Laura stepped down from the Board after  ve years of service during which she was instrumental in the improvement and modernisation of our ecommerce and multichannel capabilities.
RETIREMENTS IN 201617 R A R A N N N A N A N R N 38 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE BOARD COMPOSITION ROLES AND ATTENDANCE AS AT YEAR END CHAIRMAN ATTENDED
POSSIBLE INDEPENDENT RESPONSIBILITY IN 201617 LINKED TO
Robert Swannell 99 Board governance and performance shareholder engagement EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Chief Executive Steve Rowe 99 Strategy and Group performance Chief Finance Offi cer Helen Weir 99 Group Financial Performance Property IT and Clothing and Home distribution Executive Director Patrick BousquetChavanne 99
Executive Director Laura WadeGery NA NA Laura was on maternity leave from September 201 5 and was therefore not expected to attend Board meetings during this time.
She retired from the business in September 2016.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Vindi Banga 99 Independent nonexecutive directors assess challenge and monitor the executive directors delivery of strategy within the risk and governance structure agreed by the Board.
As Board Committee members they also review the integrity of the Companys  nancial information recommend appropriate succession plans and monitor Board diversity.
Alison Brittain 99 Miranda Curtis 99 Andrew Fisher 99 Andy Halford 99 Richard Solomons This table provides details of scheduled meetings held in the 20161 7  nancial year.
Richard Solomons was unable to attend the meeting on 20 May due to personal commitments which had been booked prior to the meeting being rescheduled for this date.
See Board Activities on p4041 BOARD MEETINGS The Board held nine scheduled meetings during the year and individual attendance is set out above.
Suffi cient time is provided at the start and end of each meeting for the Chairman to meet privately with the Senior Independent Director and the nonexecutive directors to discuss any matters arising.
OUR BOARD CONTINUED GENDER DIVERSITY 1 April 201 7 as at year end SECTOR EXPERIENCE
90% 90% 0 100%
100% 60%
60 0% 40%
40 0% NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR TENURE 12 YEARS 28.57% 34 YEARS 28.57% 56 YEARS 42.86% INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE BOARD DIVERSITY
Male
70% 30% GROUP BOARD
Male
67% 33%
Female
Male
71% 29%
INDEPENDENCE OF DIRECTORS The Board reviews the independence of its nonexecutive directors as part of its annual Board Eff ectiveness Review.
The Chairman is committed to ensuring the Board comprises a majority of independent nonexecutive directors who objectively challenge management balanced against the need to ensure continuity on the Board.
None of the nonexecutive directors has served more than six full years on the Board.
The Board considers that all of the nonexecutive directors bring strong independent oversight and continue to demonstrate independence.
The Board recognises the recommended term within the UK Corporate Governance Code.
It is mindful of the need for suitable succession and therefore maintains a clear record of the time each non executive has served the Company and the skill set that each provides.
See details and experience of each director on p3637 39 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stage 1.
Company structure and strategy including Group structure history strategy vision key people succession plans Board procedures including governance framework and Code of Ethics and Behaviours Board Committees calendar minutes Board eff ectiveness reviews and action plans  nances and performance operating plans current KPIs and targets operational overview of all business areas key relationships including suppliers and major contracts Group Risk Pro le and our approach to risk.
Stage 2.
Industry and competitive environment including customer trends consumer and regulatory environment including governance and all relevant consumer and industry bodies CSR environment and sustainability.
Sentiment and reputation including brand positioning and media pro le marketing campaigns brand values analyst and investor opinion review of investor surveys share register and voting history key stakeholder relations including employees customers suppliers service providers opinion leaders an overview of our remuneration policy and pensions.
Stage 3.
Archies programme will be supported by oneonone meetings with management from Clothing and Home Foodsite International Retail Finance Property Plan A Marketing Customer Insight Unit Human Resources Communications and Investor Relations Internal Audit and Risk Pensions the Company Archive and the Governance Group.
Stage 4.
He will visit a number of our stores with the Retail team as well as our distribution centre with the Logistics team.
He will also meet with key investors and suppliers.
CHAIRMAN RECRUITMENT CHAIRMAN INDUCTION PROCESS SUCCESSION and
LEADERSHIP AND EFFECTIVENESS In December 201 6 we announced that after six years in the role Robert Swannell intended to retire from the business in 201 7 .
Robert committed to continue in his role until his replacement had been identi ed and had joined the business.
Following this announcement we commenced the process to recruit and appoint a new Chairman.
The search was undertaken by the Nomination Committee the Committee and led by myself as the Senior Independent Director.
Steve Rowe was fully involved in the entire process.
The Committee had a number of discussions to scope out the key skills experience characteristics and requirements for the role.
We then invited a selection of recruitment  rms to participate in a selection process focusing on a series of key questions in order to identify the appropriate executive recruitment consultants to support our search.
We received very thorough and comprehensive responses from each  rm and following further discussions selected JCA.
Aside from assisting with recruitment JCA has no other connection to the Company.
Given the public pro le of MandS the Committee did not consider it necessary to use open advertising for this role.
The announcement of Roberts retirement had been made to the market in December and interested parties were able to contact either myself or other Committee members.
A structured timetable was adopted for the process and regular Committee discussions and updates held throughout.
From a detailed understanding of our requirements and speci cation of the role JCA put together an extensive range of potential candidates for the Committees consideration.
After much debate this was narrowed down to a strong short list for interview.
Shortlisted candidates met with the same members of the Committee to ensure consistency.
Steve Rowe also spent signi cant time with the  nal candidates.
The Committee members and Steve were unanimous in their  nal selection of the new Chairman.
On 5 May 201 7 we were pleased to announce the appointment of Archie Norman as NonExecutive Chairman with eff ect from 1 September 201 7 .
Archie was an ideal match to our requirements for a strong retail background and signi cant board experience.
He is one of the UKs most respected business leaders with a proven track record in retail and business.
He has been on the board of public companies on and off since 1 986 when he became  nance director of King sher at the age of 32.
He went on to gain experience as both a CEO and chairman of a number of well known listed companies including Asda and more recently ITV.
The
Committee believes he is well placed to support Steve and the team as they deliver the plan that is already underway.
VINDI BANGA SENIOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR SENIOR SUCCESSION The Operating Committee recently undertook a full talent and succession review of the top 1 20 senior roles within the business plus the succession planning in place for these roles.
As part of this a benchmarking review was undertaken by Korn Ferry for all relevant individuals.
This supported our talent agenda by providing A thorough benchmarking exercise of our talent versus the external market.
Additional feedback and insights for all senior individuals which combined with our perspectives are leading to robust development plans for all our leaders.
A catalyst for the broader MandS talent agenda enabling us to adapt and simplify our talent processes for the wider organisation.
This extensive review was discussed by the Board as part of an ongoing drive to provide greater clarity and achieve a common understanding of talent within the business and to baseline our talent data at a senior level.
While it was recognised that there is still some room for improvement before our talent information is a true re ection of our overall talent health themes are emerging that enable us to strengthen our capabilities in the near term.
Ongoing and eff ective talent management is key to achieving our strategic and operational objectives and this is clearly recognised by the Board as re ected in the Risk Management section on page 33.
There is work outstanding to embed some of the identi ed core talent processes deeply in all parts of the organisation as the principles of our new way of reviewing talent represent a cultural shift for MandS.
These changes although not always easy to make are important if we are to create a sustainable winning organisation.
Korn Ferry is a market leading company that assists organisations in attracting engaging developing and retaining their people.
STAGE 1 Understand the MandS business STAGE 2 Understand the MandS environment STAGE 3 Meet the MandS teams STAGE 4 Visit the MandS operations 40 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE TOPIC ACTIVITIESDISCUSSION ACTIONS ARISING PROGRESS
Discussed strategic priorities across Food and Clothing and Home.
Agree a new threeyear plan focused on recovery and growth in Clothing and Home and growth in Food.
Focus on simplifying organisational structure and processes.
Deliver signi cantly greater focus on customers and drive improvements in our brand position.
Threeyear strategic plan agreed.
Detailed implementation plans established and robust processes in place to manage and monitor their delivery.
Key risks and opportunities identi ed.
Agreed the strategic plan for the UK store estate.
Assess the optimisation of the Clothing and Home network based on practical and deliverable actions.
Deliver improved sales and pro tability through enhancing the quality of our UK estate.
Continue to drive Food store rollout programme.
Agreed expedited plan for recon guration of Clothing and Home space to be achieved over the next  ve years.
Agreed necessary actions and costs associated with delivery of the proposed strategy.
Rollout of c.250 new Simply Food stores by 201 920.
Reviewed the
International
Review performance and ownership structure of all International operations.
Retain our position as an international retailer and reaffi rm our clear commitment to continued growth in international markets.
Develop strategy to deliver a sustainable International business built on a portfolio of pro table markets.
Decision taken to exit lossmaking whollyowned retail businesses in speci c regions following completion of a thorough consultation process with colleagues in the aff ected markets.
Agreed the sale of three stores and head offi ce in Romania to an existing franchise partner.
Agreed restructure of current franchise model to increase competitiveness in our chosen markets.
Discussed the Groups capital structure and  nancial strategy including capital investments shareholder returns and the dividend policy.
Assess the mediumterm capital and funding structure in light of the threeyear plan.
Review the Companys cash  ow position dividend cover and enhanced shareholder returns policy in the context of the wider market and our agreed capital allocation priorities.
Continue investing in the business for growth underpinned by strong investment disciplines.
Discussed the balance sheet strategy capital effi ciency and leverage position of the Group.
Continued strong cash generation and diligent management of costs.
Maintained a strong balance sheet investment grade credit rating and a progressive dividend policy broadly twice covered by earnings.
Full year ordinary dividend of 1 8.7p plus an additional special dividend of 4.6p paid in July 2016.
Shareholder returns programme put on hold during the year.
Reviewed our technological capabilities and debated future requirements and areas for development.
Challenge and develop our current technological capabilities to enable further business growth.
Deliver solutions that build on the strategic investments in technology already made with greater focus on user experience simpli cation and use of more costeff ective technologies.
Conducted a full review of the skills capabilities systems and supplier landscapes needed to deliver the strategy over the next few years.
Substantial progress made through initiatives focusing on simpli cation cost reduction and the future operating model.
Discussed potential risks and mitigating actions.
Discussed the logistics strategy in Clothing and Home.
Consider the broader future of and anticipated longterm changes to logistics and distribution and how these might  t with the MandS business model of the future.
Agree plan for the development of the logistics network and infrastructure over the next three years.
Identify opportunities to maximise the potential of the Companys distribution centres improving service and productivity.
All major building projects now complete.
Proportion of product handled through single tier logistics network increased.
Discussed the key initiatives included in the threeyear plan including operating model systems upgrades and asset utilisation.
Robust challenge and discussion around the logistics network review including planning processes and the key risks and assumptions made.
Values
Discussed continued progress and evolution of Plan A.
107 total Plan A 2020 commitments.
Review progress made in 20161 7 and set priorities 64 achieved 6 not achieved.
25 on plan 1 1 behind plan.
1 commitment cancelled.
Strategic priorities for 201 7 1 8 identi ed.
Identi ed opportunities to improve our organisational culture and ways of working.
Ensure the Company has the optimal organisational structure in place to support our business strategy and drive growth.
Undertook a review of processes activities structures and costs.
Progress made in implementation of Smarter Working workstream to optimise use of offi ce space.
Shareholder engagement Encouraged strong engagement with investors and other stakeholders.
Actively support engagement opportunities.
Strengthened links between the business and its retail investors through the launch of our Shareholder Panel.
Largest shareholders invited to annual Governance Event hosted by the Chairman.
Reviewed independent report from Makinson Cowell covering major investors views on our management and performance.
Ensured shareholder feedback was reviewed and considered in advance of the AGM.
Speci c issues raised by shareholders to be addressed in the Chairmans AGM statement.
Key topics raised by shareholders to be communicated together with an update on the Companys progress in these areas.
BOARD ACTIVITIES LEADERSHIP AND EFFECTIVENESS 41 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TOPIC ACTIVITIESDISCUSSION ACTIONS ARISING PROGRESS
Discussed the evolving regulatory environment and the internal governance processes underpinning programmes and initiatives.
Review the Companys internal policies procedures and controls in respect of market abuse market manipulation and insider dealing prior to implementation of the Market Abuse Regulation.
Assess controls over internal  nancial reporting processes to improve information  ows.
Review key projects on completion and evaluate the endtoend delivery process.
Internal systems and processes updated in line with new requirements.
Training on the new Market Abuse Regulation conducted at Board level and for employees across the relevant business units.
Identi ed and implemented enhancements to controls and processes relating to internal  nancial reporting.
Undertook comprehensive postimplementation reviews of key projects.
Reviewed progress against the 201617 Board Action Plan.
Conduct an externally facilitated Board evaluation.
Obtain and evaluate director feedback on the processes eff ectiveness and working of the Board and its committees.
Discussed the outcome of the Board evaluation conducted by an external facilitator F on Hague of Independent Board Evaluation.
Agreed 201 7 1 8 Action Plan with clear process for ongoing monitoring over the course of the year.
Half yearly review of Group Risk Pro le covering core internal and external risks risks driven by business change and areas of emerging risk.
Assess the eff ectiveness of the Group risk process.
Review completeness and ordering of the Group Risk Pro le including key risk movements and consider appropriate mitigating activities.
Ongoing robust debate around risk tolerance and risk appetite.
Agreed a robust set of Grouplevel risks and mitigating activities which are regularly monitored.
Debated key changes in risk severity and the relevant contributing factors rede ning as appropriate.
Discussed the potential business impact of Brexit and the possible actions to mitigate the associated risks.
Reviewed the Companys progress on data governance and cyber security.
Review and assess the strength of the Companys cyber security capabilities and potential risks in light of the perpetually changing nature of potential threats.
Undertook a comprehensive externally facilitated assessment of the Companys cyber security risks.
Key areas of risk identi ed and future priorities agreed.
Updated programme for driving responsible use of data throughout the business.
Customer
Reviewed progress of Sparks programme and discussed future development.
Review customer perceptions of Sparks against loyalty schemes off ered by peers.
Assess overall performance of the scheme and the extent to which it drives customer behaviour.
Determine the overall vision for the future of the programme including growth prospects and potential future applications.
Work underway to ensure the customer insights gathered through Sparks are used to inform future business decisions that generate growth.
Plans in place to further develop and improve the programme.
Discussed brand and customer proposition.
Evaluate insights from customer research and assess recommendations in respect of our brand positioning.
Continue to re ne our customer understanding.
Key themes emerging from customer and employee research discussed.
Agreed actions to improve customer experience with emphasis on our brand purpose of Making Every Moment Special.
Leadership and employees Discussed succession talent development and diversity across management.
Review the Boards composition diversity and succession plans.
Facilitate the smooth succession of the Chairman.
Deliver eff ective and sustainable management of talent pipelines to ensure the right talent is in the right place at the right time.
Continue to support and encourage the professional development of Board members and senior management to provide them with the skills they need both today and for the future.
Women comprised 30% of our Board as at close of the 20161 7  nancial year.
Robust succession process for the Chairman completed.
Undertook a comprehensive review of talent and succession among senior management during the year with clear development plans produced.
Progress made in adapting and simplifying processes for managing our talent pipelines.
Ongoing development initiatives include the Korn Ferry Leadership Development Review and Development Centres for high potential talent.
Discussed employee engagement.
Promote stronger engagement between the Board and colleagues across the business.
Evaluate the results of the annual Your Say survey from colleagues across the business and identify areas for improvement.
Received a detailed update from the National Business Involvement Group BIG the Companys employee representative body on its activities during the year and discussed its role in providing an independent colleague voice.
Discussed colleague sentiment across the business including key areas of concern and the employee perspective of MandSs future opportunities and risks.
Regular engagement with our people across the business.
Discussed employee reward and pensions.
Implement the agreed arrangements for pay and pensions across the business following the full review initiated during the previous  nancial year and conclusion of the consultation period.
Decision taken to cease future accrual in the Companys de ned bene t pension scheme following a period of consultation with National BIG on behalf of employees.
Determined the Companys future approach to pay with emphasis on fairness consistency and sustainability following a period of consultation with National BIG.
See Board Eff ectiveness on p42 42 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE This is a period of crucial and profound change for the business and it is heartening to see how committed the Board is to eff ecting change.
ROBERT SWANNELL CHAIRMAN BOARD EVALUATION The assessment of the Board was conducted according to the guidance in the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and was facilitated by F on Hague of Independent Board Evaluation.
Neither F on Hague or Independent Board Evaluation has any other connection with the Company .
STAGE 1 A comprehensive brief was given to Independent Board Evaluation by the Chairman and Group Secretary in December The assessment team observed the main Board and committee meetings in December January and February.
Access to Board papers was provided electronically prior to the meetings via a secure portal.
In January and February detailed interviews were conducted with each Board member .
All participants were interviewed according to a clear agenda tailored for MandS.
The team also met with the Group Secretary HR Director Director of Group Finance Head of Internal Audit and Risk Director of Retail audit partners from Deloitte PwC remuneration consultant and Makinson Cowell independent investor relations consultants.
STAGE 2 The report was compiled by the assessment team based on information and views supplied by those interviewed.
All recommendations were based on best practice as described in the Code and other corporate governance guidelines.
STAGE 3 Draft conclusions were discussed with the Chairman and subsequently with the whole Board at its meeting in March with F on Hague present.
The conclusion of that discussion was recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
Following the Board meeting F on Hague gave feedback on the Chairman to the Senior Independent Director Vindi Banga and to the committee chairmen on the performance of each committee.
In addition the Chairman received a separate report with feedback on individual directors.
BOARD REVIEW INSIGHTS 201617 The broad message from the directors was that Board dynamics and the  ow of information to the Board has improved signi cantly.
The Board rated itself as satisfactory in its performance on issues of Board focus risk management Board culture the relationship with senior management meeting schedules and the Board support function.
Areas for further progress included consistency of papers and management information succession planning and people development.
As a result these areas feature in the Board Action Plan for the year ahead.
When the review was undertaken Steve Rowe had been the CEO for a period of nine months.
The business had been through signi cant change in that period and it was clear from the review that the openness in communication was a very positive development.
The directors felt that the Board agenda covered the most important topics.
However they felt a review of the management information provided to the Board would improve the pace of the decisionmaking process.
The culture of the Board is seen as positive and supportive.
Board members described it as wellbalanced respectful open challenging and committed.
However it agreed that a greater diversity of culture gender and experience might enhance the Boards composition.
COMMITTEES
Board committees were also reviewed and were considered highly regarded in terms of eff ectiveness and decision making.
Senior managers felt signi cantly challenged by the Audit Committee and commented that the Audit Committee Chairman is very engaged on the key issues.
The Remuneration Committee was seen as eff ective and considered.
Greater visibility around remuneration is welcomed.
CHAIRMAN
The Chairman is much appreciated by staff who feel he truly embodies the Companys brand through his employee recognition work and his many store visits.
ACTION
PLAN
AGREED
Note The above activities were undertaken by F on Hague of Independent Board Evaluation.
F on Hague also attended the Board discussion.
STAGE 1 STAGE 2 STAGE 3 BRIEFING and
OBSERVATION
DISCUSSION
WITH
COMMITTEE
CHAIRS
BOARD
DISCUSSION
ONETOONE
INTERVIEWS
WITH BOARD
COLLATED
REPORTED and
BOARD
EFFECTIVENESS
LEADERSHIP AND EFFECTIVENESS THE BOARD ACTION PLAN FOR 201718 WILL ALSO INCLUDE Continue tracking of KPIs and management information and their alignment with longterm strategy.
Continue tracking of postdecision reviews of major capital investment and strategic changes.
Continue to drive the people agenda by creating speci c KPIs for people and diversity.
Increase the level of informal contact between the Board and senior individuals and the Board and the broader business beyond Head Offi ce.
Review the Board education programme to ensure the induction of new Board members is tailored to their individual skills and experience.
BOARD ACTION PLAN STAGES OF THE BOARD EVALUATION 43 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Board is responsible for the stewardship of the Company overseeing its conduct and aff airs to create sustainable value for the bene t of its stakeholders.
In performing this task the Board recognises that to promote success over the long term it must ful l its wider duty to care for the interests of employees customers and the communities in which the Company operates and whose support is required to create sustainable value.
The Board discharges some of its responsibilities directly and others through its Board committees and through management.
The terms of reference of the Board and its committees are included in our Governance Framework.
The Board agrees and has collective responsibility for the strategy of the
For MandS strategy means the development of speci c actions aimed at promoting the longterm sustainable growth of the Company by meeting the needs of our target customer groups across all our product categories and channels.
The articulation of our strategy will include agreement on how our physical and intellectual property and the skills of our people should be used developed and enhanced to create competitive advantage for the Company.
The Board delegates the execution of the Companys strategy and the daytoday management and operation of the Companys business to the Operating
The Board is responsible for overseeing guiding and holding to account management in carrying out these responsibilities.
The Board is responsible for ensuring that appropriate values ethics and behaviours for the conduct of the Company are agreed and that appropriate procedures and training are in place to ensure that these are observed throughout the Company.
The Board has discussed and agreed the key values of Inspiration Innovation Integrity and In Touch and these underpin the required values ethics and behaviours.
Clear terms of reference outline the full schedule of matters reserved for the Boards decision and that of its key committees.
The Board is responsible for Ensuring leadership through eff ective oversight and review.
Supported by its principal committees  Audit Remuneration and Nomination  the Board sets the strategic direction and aims to deliver sustainable shareholder value over the longer term.
Overseeing the implementation of appropriate risk assessment systems and processes to identify manage and mitigate the principal risks of the Companys business.
Much of this work is delegated to the Audit Committee.
Eff ective succession planning at Board level and for assessing the processes in place to ensure that there is appropriate succession planning among senior management.
Much of this work is delegated to the Nomination Committee.
In addition to the other matters referred to in its Governance Framework the Board is responsible for speci c matters relating to strategy  nance risk management internal control and audit legal reputation and public company management.
These along with the individual roles of the Board members are covered by the Schedule of Matters Reserved to the Board in the Marks and Spencer Group plc governance frameworksitethecompany.
ROLE OF THE BOARD AND ITS COMMITTEES RESPONSIBILITIES OVERSIGHT and INDEPENDENCE LEADERSHIP AND EFFECTIVENESS MONITORING AND OVERSIGHT Protecting the business from operational nancial and reputational risk is an essential part of the Boards role.
Both the directors and senior management focus on not just the short but also the longer term and continue to be more actively involved in risk management and internal controls an important part of stewardship and key to ensuring the longterm viability of the business.
The Group Risk Pro le and risk appetite are owned by the Board.
Their compilation is facilitated by Group Risk using business area risk registers and oneonone interviews with Board members and business unit directors.
Oversight and independence are provided in the process through the Audit Committee which ensures that the risks the Board include in the Group Risk Pro le continue to re ect the businesss strategic objectives.
An Internal Audit plan is then mapped to the Group Risk Pro le demonstrating where assurance is provided over mitigating activities.
BOARD COLLABORATION The Group Board and committee structure is provided below and the reports from the chairs of the principal committees can be found on the pages 46 48 and 54.
Following the appointment of Steve Rowe as CEO the businesss operational processes were reviewed and a new framework implemented with the Operating Committee responsible for monitoring managing and providing executive input to support strategic and operational decisions to create strong executive alignment on business priorities and actions.
Membership of this committee can be found on page 1 1 or on our corporate website.
Although the executive directors sit as part of the Operating Committee to debate and understand opinion from key leaders from the business areas they are ultimately responsible for all for decisions on strategy and all nonproperty investments through the Investment Committee and capital expenditure for the Groups UK and International property portfolio in line with the Groups strategic goals and business priorities through the Property Committee.
The supporting committees provide oversight and regular updates to the Operating Committee and annual assurance updates to either the Audit Committee or Group Board.
All committees have clear terms of reference and approval thresholds set and approved by the Group Board.
SUPPORTING COMMITTEES Fire Health and Safety Business Continuity Plan A
COMMITTEE
OPERATING
COMMITTEE
PROPERTY
COMMITTEE
PRINCIPAL COMMITTEES
Remuneration
Nomination
GROUP BOARD 44 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE Our rich network of stakeholder relationships upholds the values on which MandS was founded.
These remain vital to building a sustainable business.
Annual General Meeting AGM Our 2016 AGM was well attended and all our proposed resolutions were passed with votes in favour ranging from 90.53% to 99.99%.
Shareholder Panel Regular discussions between the directors and groups of private shareholders.
Performance Overview Our annual business overview designed and written speci cally for the private shareholder.
Monthly CEO updates We have introduced a monthly CEO update to c.50000 employees via social media.
Your Say survey Our March 201 7 employee survey showed that engagement was up by 3%.
Listening groups In early 201 7 our colleagues shared their views on a range of customer focused questions.
Director breakfasts Discussions between directors and groups of employees from all levels within the business.
Business Involvement Group BIG Engagement with our employees is facilitated through BIG our network of elected employee representatives from each store and business area.
Quarterly Skype updates Our quarterly CEOCFO trading updates are broadcast via Skype to our store management teams.
Ongoing engagement Members of our senior management and Investor Relations teams held 406 meetings with 245 diff erent institutions during 2016.
Annual Governance Event The Chairman hosts this annual day of dialogue and debate between directors and the Companys largest investors.
Annual perception study Each year the Board receives an independent report from Makinson Cowell into our major investors views on our management and performance.
Annual Report and Accounts We go beyond our obligations to provide a holistic and engaging view of the business.
Webcasts We have been providing live webcasts of our AGMs and preliminary and interim announcements for over ten years.
EMPLOYEES
Private shareholders SHAREHOLDERS EMPLOYEES We are always looking for ways to develop our engagement with shareholders.
This year we introduced our regular Shareholder Panel where a small group of private shareholders is invited to participate in facetoface discussions with members of the Board and senior management.
For our large institutional investors and investor advisory  rms we continue to hold our Annual Governance Event.
Our 201 6 event was hosted by the Chairman and attended by the Senior Independent Director  the committee chairmen Group Secretary and a senior representative from our Plan A team.
The Boards engagement with the Companys 85000 employees is facilitated through our Business Involvement Group BIG a network of 3500 elected employee representatives from across all parts of the business.
Local BIG teams regularly feed back to National BIG whose chairman in turn represents the collective employee voice through regular meetings with the Chairman and CEO plus attendance at our Board.
However employee engagement extends far beyond BIG one example from the year was a collaborative exercise where we asked our store colleagues what we all needed to do
Institutional
OUR STAKEHOLDERS HOW WE LISTEN and ENGAGE
The main purpose of building up a great business should not be merely to make money.
A company has its responsibilities not only to shareholders but also to the staff  the customers and the whole community in which it trades.
Unless it gives satisfaction and even happiness to all concerned it will fail in its aims in the long term.
LORD SIEFF DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF MandS 1964 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Customer Insight Unit CIU Our CIU gathers feedback through surveys reviews and focus groups to learn what customers want from MandS.
Customer Research Panel Our dedicated panel of c.23 1000 customers gives us valuable input on products in development.
Consumer Barometer Each month we listen to c.70000 customers to create a snapshot of consumer sentiment.
Sparks Card 5.6m customers now receive tailored off ers plus the chance to engage with a Plan A charity partner.
Over 2m has been raised to date.
Marketing We created our 2016 Christmas With Love campaign in direct response to feedback from thousands of customers.
Marks and Start Training work placements and employment have been provided to thousands of disadvantaged people.
Spark Something Good Over the last two years 4000 employee and customer volunteers have helped over 240 community projects across 1 2 cities.
Global Community Programme We continue to improve the lives of over 40000 people across our global supply chain.
Business community engagement We help shape our business environment by responding to government and industry consultations and contributing to industry discussions and events.
Exhibitions and events Our Marks in Time exhibition and programme of events brought MandSs heritage to life for 38000 people during 20161 7 .
Schools programme Our awardwinning programme has reached 12000 pupils since 2012 having recently broadened its reach through videoconferencing.
Partnership with University of Leeds Now in its  fth year our strategic partnership delivers collaborative research projects and unique student work opportunities.
Reminiscence work We provide support to people with dementia and their carers through dropin sessions and the newly launched Memory Caf.
Making Every Moment Special We held an extensive programme of instore events to  nd out from our employees how we could make every moment special for our customers.
Crunch Costs In 2016 we asked all our employees how we could drive down costs and ineffi ciencies.
We used the 20m saved to add over 3000 colleagues to our stores.
CUSTOMERS
MandS
Company
Archive
Plan A CUSTOMERS COMMUNITY Our Customer Insight Unit constantly gathers feedback from our customers to understand what they want from MandS.
Key insights are shared with the directors and are critical to informing strategy.
During the year customer feedback resulted in a number of store improvements including additional staff on shop  oors.
We also engage with our customers to create marketing campaigns that are relevant to them such as Christmas With Love in 201 6 and the creation of Spend It Well.
For more on customer insight and engagement see Market and Customer Insights on pages 67 and Engaging Our Customers on page 25.
201 7 marks the tenth anniversary of Plan A our social and environmental sustainability programme.
Central to Plan A is our goal of creating a positive impact in society and improving peoples lives be they employees customers workers in our supply chain charity partners or local communities around the world.
Find out more at marksandspencer. complana.
This year also marks the  fth anniversary of the MandS Company Archive whose educational and social activities have enriched the lives of thousands of local people.
Visit the Archives website at marksintime. for our customers.
Through 75 regional leadership events and 1500 events involving all our store employees we found new ways to help empower our people to put customers at the heart of the business more about this on page 8.
Engagement can also start in the community Through Marks and Start we off ered work placements to over 2900 disadvantaged people in Over 6 5 % of those who c omplet ed the programme went on to  nd work either with MandS or other employers.
For further details about how we engage with our employees see Employee Involvement on pages 8 182.
PLAN A Our pioneering social and environmental sustainability programme continues to underpin the way we do business at MandS.
MandS COMPANY
Our archive safeguards MandSs heritage and shares it with the public through exhibitions and events as well as online.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 46 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE Committee review The Committees performance was externally evaluated during the year by F on Hague.
The Committee was considered to be eff ective and remains independent.
Areas of focus identi ed for the year ahead are provided below.
Nomination Committee activity During the year the Committee held a signi cant number of unscheduled meetings to support the search and appointment of the new Chairman.
In addition it continued to support the development of the executive directors and participated in several employee focused initiatives giving increased access to the organisation.
Looking ahead An area of focus for the Committee over the coming year will be the link between diversity strategy and developing the business.
More consideration will be given to the nature variety and frequency of interaction between the Board and aspiring candidates at all levels.
The Committee will play an active part in the induction process for our new Chairman Archie Norman who joins the business in September 201 7 .
MEMBER ATTENDANCE
SINCE
NUMBER OF
ATTENDED
MAXIMUM
POSSIBLE
MEETINGS % OF MEETINGS
Robert Swannell 4 Oct 2010 5 5 100% Vindi Banga 3 Sept % Alison Brittain 1 Jan % Miranda Curtis 3 Feb % Andrew Fisher 1 Dec % Andy Halford 1 Jan % Richard Solomons 13 Apr % Miranda Curtis was unable to attend the meeting on 1 4 March 201 7 due to external business commitments.
ACTION PLAN 201718 Continue to review succession plans for the Board and key roles across the business.
Continue to review future talent pipeline.
Review development initiatives for directors.
Greater input when tailoring the induction of new Board members to their individual skills and experience.
Continue to identify opportunities for broader business engagement beyond Head Offi ce.
INTRODUCTION
During the year the focus of the Nomination Committee the Committee was on the search for a new Chairman to succeed me and the succession of nonexecutives and senior individuals within the business.
As outlined on page 39 the Chairman search was led by Vindi Banga and I did not participate in the process.
In September following her maternity leave Laura WadeGery Executive Director Multi channel left the business.
Her responsibilities were allocated to the other executive directors and the business now operates with a smaller executive Board.
Laura was instrumental in modernising our ecommerce and multichannel capabilities and we wish her the very best for the future.
The Committee maintains a wellde ned speci cation for each appointment with a clear understanding of the attributes and values required to help the eff ective functioning of the whole Board.
It considers the combination of skills and experience required to ful l the Boards purpose.
As
Chairman of the Committee I take an active role in overseeing the progress made towards improving diversity and womens representation on both the Operating Committee and among its direct reports.
The business has a framework with clearly identi ed individuals capable of covering key management roles on an interim or permanent basis.
These individuals receive the necessary coaching to ensure they have the required skills to provide any critical support when needed.
Development for directors and high performing individuals below Board level is an essential area of focus.
Coaching and mentoring is provided to develop and enhance speci c skill sets and the Committee believes the bene ts of this approach are critical for developing our own talent for the future.
The Committee continues to take a more active interest in talent management in particular ensuring that initiatives are in place to develop the talent pipeline and to promote diversity in Board and executive appointments.
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE We are introducing new initiatives to broaden and develop the strong talent that exists within the business.
ROBERT SWANNELL CHAIRMAN
COMMITTEE REPORT LEADERSHIP AND EFFECTIVENESS 47 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BOARD DIVERSITY POLICY Since the launch of the Board Diversity Policy in 201 2 the Board has made progress in broadening the diversity of the Board and senior management.
The policy continues to drive the bene ts of a diverse Board and workforce across the business.
The ambitions and objectives set out in the policy remain relevant targets against which to measure our progress.
For further information on employee diversity including gender ethnicity and agesiteplana2017.
BOARD DIVERSITY PROGRESS UPDATE Maintain a level of at least 30% female directors on the Board over the short to medium term.
As highlighted earlier in the report one change to the Board was made during the year to 1 April 201 7  with the resignation of Laura WadeGery.
Despite the reduced size of the Board the percentage of women on the Board remains on target at 30% at the time of publication.
The charts on page 38 provide a clearer picture of our Board diversity.
The Board remains committed to maintaining at least a 30% female representation on the Board while ensuring that diversity in its broadest sense remains a central feature.
However the Nomination Committee will continue to recommend appointments to the Board based on merit measured against objective criteria and the skills and experience the individual off ers.
The Board is also committed to strengthening the pipeline of senior female executives within the business and has taken steps to ensure that there are no barriers to women succeeding at the highest levels within MandS.
Assist the development of a pipeline of highcalibre candidates by encouraging a broad range of senior individuals within the business to take on additional roles to gain valuable board experience.
During the year  the Board continued to focus on strengthening the pipeline of executive talent in the Company .
It remains committed to building on existing programmes while introducing new initiatives to broaden and develop the strong talent which exists across the business.
Key initiatives include A comprehensive talent review presented to the Board annually  mapping successional candidates and opportunities across all senior roles within the business.
A thorough approach to talent development through initiatives including the Korn Ferry Leadership Development Review and Development Centres for high potential talent.
The Leadership Development Service has been in place for four years and continues to identify and partner key senior talent across the business broadening their skill sets and experience to prepare them for future opportunities.
This has been supported through greater boardroom exposure nonexecutive and Trustee roles outside of MandS involvement in senior pipeline programmes and participation in mentoring schemes.
Access to international business school training.
Senior management mentoring and coaching schemes and nonexecutive director sponsored lunches and breakfasts.
Consider candidates for appointment as nonexecutive directors from a wider pool including those with experience outside traditional listed boards.
Although no new appointments were made during the year the Nomination Committee continued to discuss the successional needs of the Board in respect of its nonexecutive directors.
Lists of potential candidates are compiled with assistance from executive search agencies and comprise candidates from a range of diff erent industries and backgrounds.
Those subsequently identi ed for interview are measured against criteria set at the start of the search process.
The
Chairman also meets informally with a range of people introduced by third parties or through direct approaches.
Although we do not currently openly advertise our non executive director positions we appreciate the bene t of this approach and will keep this under review.
Ensure long lists of potential nonexecutive directors include 50% female candidates.
The Board remains committed to ensuring that highperforming women from within the business and from a variety of backgrounds who have the requisite skills are given greater exposure to the nomination committees of FTSE 1 00 companies.
All long lists for potential future nonexecutive director appointments will include at least 50% female candidates.
Only engage executive search  rms who have signed up to the Voluntary Code of Conduct for Executive Search Firms on gender diversity and best practice.
The Board continues to support the ten principles of the Voluntary Code of Conduct for Executive Search Firms on gender diversity and best practice and is committed to only engaging executive search  rms who are signatories to this code.
During the year we worked closely with Egon Zehnder and JCA and maintained our focus on the targets and ambitions around female representation on the
The Board con rms that neither Egon Zehnder nor JCA has any other connection with the Company.
Report annually against these objectives and other initiatives taking place within the Company which promote gender and other forms of diversity.
The Board has made strong progress against the key policy objectives during the year as reported above.
In addition the business has continued to promote diversity through a range of key initiatives The annual Board evaluation process includes an assessment of the Boards diversity including gender helping to objectively consider its composition and eff ectiveness.
Five employeeled diversity networks that focus on making MandS an inclusive place to work for women and men Gender Equality Network minority ethnic groups BAME at MandS lesbian gay bisexual and transgender people LGBT  at MandS parents Parents Net and people with disabilities and health conditions The Buddy Network.
These deliver largescale awarenessraising events promoting inclusion and equality as well as mentoring coaching roundtable discussions with senior leaders and regular communication across the business.
Continued involvement in the government backed 30% Club an organisation committed to increasing female representation on UK boards.
Continued involvement running Business in the Community BITC mentoring circles which help us to promote and develop BAME Black Asian and minority ethnic talent pipelines.
Active involvement in key campaigns including LGBT  Pride celebrations International Womens Day Black History Month National Inclusion Week and World Disability Day raising awareness and our pro le as an inclusive employer.
A number of programmes to help people in our communities including Marks and Start and Marks and Start Logistics are successfully helping young people the homeless lone parents and those with disabilities to  nd work in our stores and distribution centres.
Report annually on the outcome of the Board evaluation the composition and structure of the Board as well as any issues and challenges the Board is facing when considering the diverse makeup of the Company.
We continue to regard the Board evaluation process as an important means of monitoring our progress.
Full details of the 201 61 7 Board evaluation and the Action Plan are on page 42.
We remain committed to getting the right balance of internal versus external hires and work towards understanding and managing the challenges we face such as International management experience re ective of the customers and communities we serve.
Any challenges women face in reaching regional management positions and above within the business.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE
ACCOUNTABILITY
The Committee has played a key role in ensuring appropriate challenge and governance around accounting treatment risk management and control and assurance process.
ANDY HALFORD CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
As Chairman of the Audit Committee the Committee I am pleased to present the Committees report for the year ended 1 April 201 7 .
Through this report I aim to share some of the Committees discussions from the boardroom off ering insight into its essential role in protecting the interests of our shareholders through ensuring the integrity of the Companys published  nancial information and the eff ectiveness of the Internal Audit process.
Our report will provide an overview of the signi cant issues the Committee has assessed during the year and will off er the Committees view of the Annual Report as a whole including the methodology behind its assessment of the narrative reporting as an accurate re ection of the  nancial statements.
The report also shares some of the executive updates that were presented to the Committee by diff erent areas of the business during the year.
These updates are essential in telling us how diff erent risks are managed and mitigated throughout the business and assists the Committee in understanding the progress being made towards the strategic plan.
They also provide the Committee members with an opportunity to share their own extensive experience with the presenters utilising their independent perspective to add value through robust challenge discussion and debate.
The report will also update you on our assessment of the eff ectiveness of our statutory auditor Deloitte and explain our policy relating to any nonaudit work it was engaged to complete and the fees it received for doing so.
The expertise of the Committee members is considered as part of the annual review of the Committees eff ectiveness.
The Board is satis ed that the Committee possesses relevant sectoral competence and appropriate levels of independence and that its members off er a depth of  nancial and commercial experience across various industries.
It is further satis ed that Andy Halford possesses recent and relevant nancial experience and the requisite competence in accounting.
Audit Committee activities during 201 61 7 Maintained focus on the audit assurance and risk processes within the business as well as oversight of  nancial and other regulatory requirements.
Reviewed the Groups systems of internal control and risk management and any changes in accounting policies and impact on its  nancial statements.
Provided oversight of particular business risks including those relating to ethical sourcing and animal welfare.
Provided increased oversight of the risks and controls pertaining to cyber security.
Monitored the  nancial reporting process the statutory audit of the Groups  nancial statements and the independence of the statutory auditor.
Discussed and reviewed adjusted items that may impact business performance.
Reviewed the mitigating controls over the Groups principal risks and assessed the level of assurance provided.
Continued to support assurance mapping across the Group with particular focus on strategic priorities.
Continued to monitor and respond to the changing regulatory environment particularly in respect of implementation of the EU Audit Regulation and Directive.
Members of senior management are invited to attend Committee meetings as and when their specialist technical knowledge is required.
The Committee also meets privately without management present before each meeting.
Additionally separate private sessions attended by the lead audit partner from Deloitte and the Head of Internal Audit and Risk are held after each meeting.
As Committee Chair I also regularly meet on a onetoone basis with the Chief Finance Offi cer Director of Group Finance Head of Internal Audit and Risk and other members of senior management.
I also meet with the lead audit partner in advance of Committee meetings.
Scheduling meetings in this way enables me to better understand any key issues and areas of concern and allows suffi cient time to facilitate meaningful discussion during the subsequent meeting.
MEMBER ATTENDANCE
SINCE
NUMBER OF
ATTENDED
MAXIMUM
POSSIBLE
MEETINGS % OF MEETINGS
Andy Halford 1 Jan % Alison Brittain 11 Mar % Miranda Curtis 4 Mar % Andrew Fisher 3 Feb 2016 5 5 100% Miranda Curtis was unable to attend the meeting on 23 January 201 7 due to illness.
Note Detailed information on the experience skills and quali cations of all directors is available on pages 36 and 37 .
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE 49 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Committee receives detailed updates from one or more business areas at each meeting.
These updates are planned on a rolling 1 2month basis.
Additional matters identi ed by Internal Audit as requiring the Committees attention are included in the agendas of subsequent meetings.
An overview of some of the updates presented during 201 61 7 is provided below MANAGEMENT OF INTERNAL CONTROL FAILURES The Audit Committee receives updates on internal control matters at each meeting.
This regular monitoring of the internal control framework allows timely identi cation of issues and formal tracking of remediation plans.
Instances where the eff ectiveness of internal controls was considered insuffi cient were discussed during the year either by the Audit Committee or the full Board.
These have included controls over market updates third party oversight and IT asset management.
As part of the annual review of internal control the Audit Committee again considered these matters ensuring that the agreed actions were being implemented to support a programme of maintaining and improving internal control.
Following its review the Committee recommended to the Board that although the matters identi ed were important they had been addressed at the time of its review with suitable controls now in place.
FIRE HEALTH AND SAFETY FHS Updated on performance across all aspects of trading safely and legally and the progress made in driving compliance standards.
Discussed the safety of sales  oor equipment  ttings and installations including progress made and the key actions put in place.
Updated on continuing improvements to International governance and compliance processes in respect of FHS including the reports of the third party facilitated store inspection plan.
Noted the reductions in reported accidents in UKowned stores as a result of work undertaken with our Primary Authority Partner Birmingham City Council.
ETHICAL SOURCING AND MODERN SLAVERY Updated on the controls in place to ensure an uncompromising approach to maintaining MandSs ethical standards in an increasingly competitive international sourcing environment.
Discussed how risks are mitigated through supplier selection appraisal criteria and regional improvement programmes supported by a strict Internal Audit and monitoring approach.
Updated on the approach to supplier inspections and the diff erent processes adopted in Food and Clothing and Home noting the regular ethical audits undertaken by an accredited third party on all factories used by MandS.
Updated on the ways in which the business proactively supports the human rights of colleagues across all business operations including compliance with the Modern Slavery Act and the steps taken to prevent modern slavery throughout the business and its supply chain.
GOVERNANCE AND COMPLIANCE Updated on the revisions to the auditor engagement policy implemented following the introduction of the EU Audit Regulation and Directive.
Discussed and reviewed the Boards approach in undertaking its assessment of the longterm viability of the business.
Updated on the annual circulation of the MandS Code of Ethics and Behaviours including ongoing monitoring of compliance and noting plans for a full review of the Code during 201 7 1 8.
BUSINESS CONTINUITY Updated on the continued strengthening of crisis management and business recovery capability across all retail and distribution operations.
Discussed national preparedness in the context of the UKs current threat level crisis simulation exercises undertaken in collaboration with industry peers and the development of new training tools for Duty Managers aimed at raising levels of preparedness.
Updated on preparedness and the crisis management processes in place internationally regionspeci c threat assessments and crisis simulations and procedures relating to business travel to areas deemed to be high risk.
Updated on the disaster recovery plans for the distribution centre at Castle Donington improvements in resilience capability and key milestones achieved.
Discussed the priorities for 201 7 1 8 including supply chain resilience in international logistics International retail and sourcing as well as global terrorism and cyber security.
FOOD SAFETY AND INTEGRITY Updated on the governance and control processes in respect of food safety the assessment of operational risks in key areas and the regular reviews of the risk model conducted in response to internal and external issues.
Discussed food safety and the processes in place for resolution of complaints.
Updated on the internal and external in uences on risk mitigation strategy covering supply base raw material sourcing product targeting and regulatory developments.
Discussed the food safety and integrity risk pro le and the greater focus placed on supply base within the audit programme.
AUDIT COMMITTEE UPDATES INDEPENDENT REVIEW AND COMMITTEE ACTION PLAN The Committees performance was reviewed externally this year by F on Hague.
Feedback was positive particularly relating to the open debate encouraged during meetings.
It is regarded as thorough and eff ective and provides the Board with a high level of assurance that audit matters are dealt with appropriately.
Areas in which it was felt improvements could be achieved were discussed by the Committee for inclusion in its 201 7 1 8 action plan.
The Committee made good progress on the 201 61 7 action plan by reviewing controls over and assessing the levels of assurance provided in respect of the Groups principal risks supporting risk assurance mapping across the Group increasing its oversight of cyber security risks and monitoring regulatory change.
The action plan for 201 7 1 8 Review the eff ectiveness of Internal Audit in line with the Chartered Institute of Internal Audit requirements and monitor any key  ndings.
Continue to oversee the Companywide risk and assurance mapping.
Continue to monitor oversight of data governance and information security risk ahead of the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation in May 201 8.
Oversee the re nement of the internal control environment.
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE CONTINUED 50 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED The Audit Committee has assessed whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and whether management has made appropriate judgements and estimates.
Throughout the year the Finance team has worked closely with Deloitte to ensure that the business is transparent and provides the required level of disclosure regarding signi cant issues considered by the Committee in relation to the  nancial statements as well as how these issues were addressed while being mindful of matters that may be businesssensitive.
This section outlines the main areas of judgement that have been considered by the Committee to ensure that appropriate rigour has been applied.
All accounting policies can be found in note 1 to the nancial statements.
Where further information is provided in the notes to the  nancial statements we have included the note reference.
Each of the areas of judgement to the right has been identi ed as an area of focus and therefore the Committee has also received detailed reporting from Deloitte.
PRESENTATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Committee gave consideration to the presentation of the  nancial statements and in particular the use of alternative performance measures and the presentation of adjusted items in accordance with the Group accounting policy.
This policy states that adjustments are only made to reported pro t before tax where income and charges are signi cant in value andor nature.
The Committee received detailed reports from management outlining the judgements applied in relation to the disclosure of adjusted items.
In the current year management has included in this category the reduction in MandS Bank income for the impact of the MandS Bank provision for  nancial product misselling signi cant charges arising in relation to changes to pay and pensions net costs associated with the implementation of strategic programmes in relation to UK organisation UK logistics UK store estate and the closure of International owned businesses impairments of the carrying value of UK and International stores including associated onerous leases and legal settlements.
This was an area of focus for the Committee in the current year due to the number and value of these items 437 .4m charge and the recent guidelines on the use of alternative performance measures issued by the European Securities and Markets Authority.
In addition the prior year was a 53week statutory reporting period so consideration had been given to the balance of 52week and 53week metrics for the prior year reported throughout the Annual Report.
The 52week measures have been quoted where relevant to ensure meaningful comparison with this years 52week period.
Following detailed review and active discussion with management the Committee has concluded that the presentation of the  nancial statements is appropriate.
See note 5 on p103 IMPAIRMENT OF GOODWILL BRANDS TANGIBLE AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS The Committee has considered the assessments made in relation to the impairment of goodwill brands tangible and intangible  xed assets including land and buildings store assets and software assets.
The Committee received detailed At the request of the Board the Committee has considered whether in its opinion the 20 1 7 Annual Report and Financial Statements are fair balanced and understandable and whether they provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
The structure of the report continues to focus strongly on the key strategic messages in the Strategic Report.
It was therefore important for the Committee to ensure that this emphasis did not dilute the overall transparency in the disclosures made throughout the report which we know our stakeholders  nd useful and that the messages presented by the business are both clear and re ective of the Company as a whole.
A broad outline of the structure of the Annual Report was given to the Committee early in the planning process along with a similarly broad indication of its content.
The Committee received a full draft of the report two weeks prior to the meeting at which it would be requested to provide its  nal opinion.
Feedback was provided by the Committee in advance of that meeting highlighting the areas it was felt would bene t from further clarity.
The draft report was then amended to incorporate this feedback prior to being tabled at the May Audit Committee meeting for  nal comment and approval.
The Committee was provided with a list of the key messages included in the Annual Report highlighting which were positive and which were re ective of the challenges from the year.
A supporting document was also provided speci cally addressing the following listed points highlighting where these could be evidenced within the report.
When forming its opinion the Committee re ected on the information it had received and its discussions throughout the year.
In particular the Committee considered IS THE REPORT FAIR Is the whole story presented and has any sensitive material been omitted that should have been included Is the reporting on the business performance in the narrative reporting consistent with those used for the nancial reporting in the  nancial statements Are the key messages in the narrative re ected in the  nancial reporting Are the KPIs disclosed at an appropriate level based on the  nancial reporting IS THE REPORT BALANCED Is there a good level of consistency between the narrative reporting in the front and the  nancial reporting in the back of the report and does the messaging presented within each remain consistent when one is read independently of the other Is the Annual Report properly a document for shareholders Are the statutory and adjusted measures explained clearly with appropriate prominence Are the key judgements referred to in the narrative reporting and the signi cant issues reported in this Audit Committee Report consistent with the disclosures of key estimation uncertainties and critical judgements set out in the nancial statements How do the signi cant issues identi ed compare with the risks that Deloitte plans to include in its report IS THE REPORT UNDERSTANDABLE Is there a clear and understandable framework to the report Are the important messages highlighted appropriately throughout the document Is the layout clear with good linkage throughout in a manner that re ects the whole story
Following its review the Committee was of the opinion that the 2017 Annual Report and Financial Statements are representative of the year and present a fair balanced and understandable overview providing the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
FAIR BALANCED AND UNDERSTANDABLE SIGNIFICANT ISSUES 51 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS reports from management outlining the treatment of impairments valuation methodology the basis for key assumptions discount rate and longterm growth rate and the key drivers of the cash  ow forecasts.
The Committee has challenged management and is satis ed that these are appropriate.
The Committee has also understood the sensitivity analysis used by management in its review of impairments.
In addition the business plans detailing managements expectations of future performance of the businesses are Board approved.
The
Committee is satis ed that appropriate impairment of tangible and intangible assets has been recognised.
See notes 5 14 and 15 on p103104 and 114116 INVENTORY VALUATION AND
Inventory provisions include obsolete stock net realisable value below cost and stock loss provisions.
The Committee has examined management papers outlining the judgements made regarding provisioning for inventory balances and is satis ed that a suffi ciently robust process was followed to con rm quantities of inventory and that net realisable value of inventory exceeds its cost at year end.
RETIREMENT BENEFITS The Committee has reviewed the actuarial assumptions such as discount rate in ation rate expected return of scheme assets and mortality which determine the pension cost and the UK de ned bene t scheme valuation and has concluded that they are appropriate.
The assumptions have been disclosed in the nancial statements.
See note 11 on p108111 REVENUE RECOGNITION IN RELATION TO REFUNDS GIFT CARDS AND LOYALTY SCHEMES Revenue accruals for sales returns and deferred income in relation to loyalty scheme redemptions and gift card and credit voucher redemptions are estimated based on historical returns and redemptions.
The Committee has considered the basis of these accruals along with analysis of historical returns and redemption rates and has agreed with the judgements reached by management.
SUPPLIER INCOME This continues to be monitored closely by management and robust controls are in place to ensure appropriate recognition in the correct period.
The Committee is satis ed with managements conclusion that there is minimal risk of material misstatement.
Enhanced disclosure has been made again in the current year through publication of the accounting policy and disclosing the eff ects of supplier income on certain balance sheet accounts.
CLOSURE COSTS FOR INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS NEW DISCLOSURE The Committee has considered the assessments made in relation to the estimation of closure costs and associated provisions for the exit from certain International owned markets.
The Committee received detailed reports from management outlining the accounting treatment of the costs the basis for the key assumptions used in the estimation of the costs most notably in relation to property exit costs and redundancy and the assessment of assets to be impaired.
The Committee has challenged management and is satis ed that these are appropriate.
The Committee is satis ed that appropriate costs and associated provisions have been recognised.
See notes 1 5 15 and 22 on p96 103 115 and 124 SIGNIFICANT ISSUES CONTINUED
Deloitte was appointed by shareholders as the Groups statutory auditor in 2014 following a formal tender process.
The lead audit partner Ian Waller has held the position for three years.
The external audit contract will be put out to tender at least every ten years.
The Committee recommends that Deloitte be reappointed as the Companys statutory auditor for the 201 7 1 8  nancial year.
We believe the independence and objectivity of the external auditor and the eff ectiveness of the audit process are safeguarded and remain strong.
The Company has complied with the Statutory Audit Services Order for the  nancial year under review.
EFFECTIVENESS
The eff ectiveness of our external auditor is assessed in accordance with a process agreed by the Audit Committee which is divided into ten structured components setting out the key areas of the audit process for the Committee to consider.
This framework also recognises the contribution of management in being fully engaged with and thereby enhancing the eff ectiveness of the external audit process.
It enables the Audit Committee to form a view of managements role in an eff ective audit process by considering whether it believes in a culture of right  rst time produces high quality papers ensures robust internal systems and controls are maintained respects and values the independent audit process and examines any audit adjustments proposed by the external auditor with appropriate rigour.
This framework provides a robust process for monitoring auditor eff ectiveness and can be measured against the  ndings of future external auditor eff ectiveness surveys.
The approach to the assessment is tailored to enable senior management to answer detailed questions on the Company wide audit process and provide the Audit Committee with suffi cient detail to establish an informed view on the overall effi ciency integrity and eff ectiveness of the external audit.
Questionnaires were tailored to the following target groups Chief Finance Offi cer and Director of Group Finance A full questionnaire was completed covering all areas of the audit process while taking account of the questionnaires completed by the Directors of Finance for Food and Clothing and Home and Head of Finance International.
Directors of Finance Food Clothing and Home and Head of Finance International Shorter questionnaire focusing on the audit team planning challenge and interaction with the business.
Audit Committee A highlevel set of questions with speci c focus on the planning execution value communication and challenge of the audit and audit partner.
The Committee had access to copies of the completed management questionnaires sections 1 and 2 above to assist with its own considerations.
WHAT WAS THE OUTCOME Feedback from each of the target groups was positive overall particularly in respect of the technical insight and challenge provided by the audit team its level of interaction with the business its strong understanding of MandSs culture and values and the valuable guidance provided for the Companys strategic initiatives.
It was felt that areas identi ed during the 201 51 6 review had improved during the year speci cally the communication between the business and Deloitte during the audit process however it was felt that further improvements could still be achieved.
Areas for development identi ed in this years review were encouraging a more joinedup approach during the audit and ensuring the timely provision of accurate information by MandS to the auditor.
Additionally it was felt that further work by both MandS and Deloitte would improve the effi ciency of the overseas audit process.
EXTERNAL AUDITOR 52 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED The Board assumes ultimate responsibility for the eff ective management of risk across the Group determining its risk appetite as well as ensuring that each business area implements appropriate internal controls.
The Groups risk management systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
See p3233 of the Strategic Report for more information on our material risks See p30 for further information on our risk management processes The key features of the Groups internal control and risk management systems that ensure the accuracy and reliability of nancial reporting include clearly de ned lines of accountability and delegation of authority policies and procedures that cover  nancial planning and reporting preparing consolidated accounts capital expenditure project governance and information security and the Groups Code of Ethics and Behaviours.
The Board has delegated responsibility for reviewing the eff ectiveness of the Groups systems of internal control to the Audit
This covers all material controls including  nancial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems.
The Committee is supported by a number of sources of internal assurance from within the Group in order to complete these reviews in particular Internal Audit The Groups primary source of internal assurance remains delivery of the Internal Audit Plan which is structured to align with the Groups strategic priorities and key risks and is developed by Internal Audit with input from management.
Recommendations from Internal Audit are communicated to the relevant business area for implementation of appropriate corrective measures with results reported to the Committee.
Business presentations Focusing primarily on the key risks identi ed in the Group Risk Pro le management continues to provide updates to the Committee on how these are managed in individual business areas.
These are complemented by independent reviews conducted by Internal Audit.
Other control agencies Responsible for maintaining control over critical areas of risk the processes and controls of these agencies are tested by Internal Audit and Risk during relevant audits.
An overview of these agencies and the manner in which they provide assurance to the Committee is indicated in the table below.
The Group was compliant throughout the year with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code relating to internal controls and the FRCs revised Guidance on Audit Committees and Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
No signi cant failings or weaknesses were identi ed during the Committees review in respect of the year ended 1 April 201 7 and up to the date of this Annual Report.
Where the Committee identi ed areas requiring improvement processes are in place to ensure that the necessary action is taken and that progress is monitored. itethecompany.
ANDY HALFORD AUDIT COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN ASSURANCE AND INTERNAL CONTROL ENVIRONMENT EXTERNAL AUDITOR CONTINUED INTERNAL ASSURANCE FRAMEWORK Source of information Frequencynature of reporting Fire Health and Safety Committee Plan A Committee Business Continuity Committee Direct reporting lines to the Committee with annual updates from the relevant executive
COMMITTEE
Papers produced on the following subjects Information Security Whistleblowing and Fraud
Code of Ethics and Behaviours GSCOP Grocery Supplier Code of Practice Formal updates presented to the Committee annually Internal Audit testing as appropriate in relation to Food Safety and Integrity Ethical Audits Trading Safely and Legally Updates provided to the Committee as requested or appropriate Note also reports directly to the Board.
NONAUDIT FEES A robust auditor engagement policy is in place and adhered to.
It is reviewed annually and was updated during the year to account for the tighter restrictions on work permitted to be undertaken by the statutory auditor introduced by the Financial Reporting Councils FRC Revised Ethical Standard 2016. thecompany.
The business is committed to maintaining nonaudit fees at a low level.
The nonaudit fees to audit fees ratio for the  nancial year ended 1 April 201 7 was 0.1 6 1 compared with the previous years ratio of 0.1 7 1.
During the year the Company was noti ed that Deloitte had acquired crisis management specialists Regester Larkin RL which the Company has engaged prior to acquisition to develop crisis management exercises.
The fees for RL were 32k.
Since the bulk of the fees were incurred prior to RL s acquisition by Deloitte it was decided to complete the project as planned and that alternative providers would be reviewed for future engagements.
The majority of the 0.3m in nonaudit fees paid in total to Deloitte during 201 61 7 were incurred for assurance services it provided during the year.
These comprised fees in respect of the Half Year review turnover certi cates the annual Euro Medium Term Note EMTN programme renewal reviews of quarterly trading statements crisis management reviews and overseas engagements.
It is normal practice for such assurance services to be provided by the Companys statutory auditor.
No additional recurring or oneoff nonaudit services were provided during the year.
The Committee is satis ed that the Company was compliant during the year with both the updated UK Corporate Governance Code and the FRCs Ethical and Auditing Standards in respect of the scope and maximum permitted level of fees incurred for nonaudit services provided by Deloitte.
Where nonaudit work is performed by Deloitte both the Company and Deloitte ensure adherence to robust processes to prevent the objectivity and independence of the auditor from being compromised.
All nonaudit work performed by Deloitte was put to the Audit Committee for consideration and approval regardless of size.
Further details on nonaudit services provided by Deloitte can be found in note 4 on page 102.
Committees
Business areas
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
GOVERNANCE
GOVERNANCE
The Group operates a de ned bene t pension scheme the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme the Scheme for employees with an appointment date prior to 1 April 2002.
The Scheme closed to future accrual from 1 April 201 7 .
Employees are now eligible to join and are autoenrolled as required by legislation into a de ned contribution pension scheme Your MandS Pension Saving Plan which is part of a mastertrust arrangement managed by Legal and General.
The results of the triennial actuarial valuation of the Scheme as at 3 1 March 201 5 revealed a surplus of 204m on a technical provisions basis.
This represented a healthy improvement from a de cit of 290m as at 3 1 March 201 2 as a result of agreed recovery plan contributions from the Company and outperformance of returnseeking assets over the period.
The Scheme has also been hedged against interest rate and in ation risks and has thus been insulated from the eff ect of falling real interest rates.
Scheme funding is closely and frequently monitored and Scheme investment risks are diversi ed.
The Scheme the assets of which are held under trust separately from those of the Group is managed by the Board of the Pension Trust Trustee Board.
The Trustee Board comprises four Companynominated directors including the Chairman Graham Oakley three membernominated directors and two independent directors.
All directors are appointed for a  veyear term and may stand for additional terms.
The Trustee Board operates a number of committees including Management and Governance Investment and Audit to which responsibilities are delegated.
The Trustee Board is supported by an executive team which manages the governance and operation of the Scheme.
The Trustee Board has a business plan against which progress is measured periodically in a similar approach to the Group Board.
There is also an annual Trustee Board Eff ectiveness Review and both the Trustee Board and the Investment Committee hold annual strategy days which help drive the longterm agenda and the business plan priorities.
Each Trustee Board director has an individual training plan which is based on the Pension Regulators Trustee Knowledge and Understanding requirements and tailored to address any skill gaps and speci c committee roles.
A majority of the Trustee Board members hold the Pensions Management Institute Award in Trusteeship.
All advisers and suppliers are appointed through a rigorous tender process and in respect of investment manager appointments are made with advice from the Schemes appointed investment adviser.
They are monitored via quarterly reports and periodic meetings and there is also a rolling programme of both informal and formal adviser reviews.
In addition to sixmonthly reports from EY as covenant adviser the Trustee Board also receives presentations from the Chief Finance Offi cer after the Groups Half Year and Year End results.
The Scheme is a signatory to the UN Principles for Responsible Investment and the Financial Reporting Councils UK Stewardship Code.
It has partnered with a specialist engagement service Hermes Equity Ownership Services EOS to exercise its global equity voting rights in accordance with a detailed Trustee Board policy which addresses a range of governance social and environmental issues.
The engagement of EOS enhances the Trustee Boards stewardship and governance oversight of investee companies by engaging with companies on a global basis.
The results of these voting and engagement activities are published quarterly on the Schemes website.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present our 201 7 Remuneration Report.
The Committee has sought to further improve our disclosures once again this year to provide not only the regulatory information we are required to disclose while balancing against commercial sensitivities but also the context surrounding pay arrangements.
Additional context has been provided where we believe this will help to present a complete picture of the structure and scale of the remuneration framework its alignment with the business strategy and the rest of the workforce as well as the payments made as a result of business performance for this year.
As highlighted last year and in line with regulations we are now seeking shareholder support and approval for our Remuneration Policy at the 201 7 AGM.
This years summary Remuneration at a Glance highlights not only the key elements of the payments made to directors this year but also gives an outline of the proposed amendments to the Remuneration Policy which will govern pay arrangements in the next three years.
As required this report is split into two further distinct sections the  rst covering our updated Remuneration Policy and the second covering remuneration in action for the 201 61 7 and 201 7 1 8  nancial years.
In accordance with regulations shareholders will be requested to vote separately on these reports at our AGM in July 201 7  with this Remuneration Overview and the Annual Report on Remuneration being subject to an advisory vote.
REMUNERATION FRAMEWORK
The Board is committed to ensuring that our remuneration framework supports our strategy and provides a balance between motivating and challenging our senior leaders to deliver our business priorities as set out by our CEO and strong performance while also driving the long term sustainable success of MandS.
As a result a signi cant part of performance related reward is delivered through shares.
This ensures that our leaders have meaningful longterm investment in our business and that their interests are closely aligned with our shareholders.
The Committee spent a considerable amount of time this year liaising with many of our shareholders and sharing a wide variety of views on remuneration generally including the framework structures measures and targets.
It explored a number of options taking into account the various perspectives and views and considering these against the current framework the current economic and market environment the business strategy and progress against the goals set out last year.
As we explained in the Annual Report last year we delayed granting the 201 6 Performance Share Plan PSP awards until December 201 6 to ensure the targets set were appropriately aligned to the strategic review being undertaken by the new team following Steve Rowes appointment as CEO.
As the focus of the business plan announced in November 201 6 remains unchanged and the team has had less than one year to start to implement much of this the Committee considered that the structure of the current remuneration framework continues to support this strategy.
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO REMUNERATION POLICY Taking all of the above into account the Committee has therefore decided to maintain the principles of the framework rst introduced in 2010 and approved by shareholders in 201 4 but to make some minor amendments to incentive arrangements to ensure sharper and more relevant alignment between senior remuneration the strategic direction of the Company and the interests of our shareholders.
The PSP will continue to be the primary longterm incentive plan for executives.
We are maintaining the overall construct of the plan with the typical award being 250% of salary.
However we will be introducing a twoyear holding period post vesting for all longterm incentive awards made from 201 7  to ensure greater alignment of our leaders remuneration with longterm stakeholder interests.
Furthermore we will be reducing the cash supplement in lieu of pension contributions for new executive director appointments.
The new threshold will be reduced from 30% for the CEO and 25% for all other directors to a maximum of 20% for all future executive directors including the CEO.
Contractual arrangements for current executive directors will remain unchanged at 25%.
This removes any policy diff erential between the CEO and other executive directors.
KEY ELEMENTS OF 201718 REMUNERATION ARRANGEMENTS The Annual Bonus Scheme will continue to be based on corporate  nancial targets currently 70% and individual objectives currently 30%.
The maximum opportunity will remain 200% of salary.
The  nancial measure will continue to be Group PBT before adjusted items Group PBT.
The individual measures on page 69 highlight the importance of collective and customer focused measures to support the one team behaviours which have the customer at the heart of the business in line with the business strategy.
The PSP will be maintained but will also now include a twoyear holding period post vesting as previously outlined.
TSR will be introduced as a key measure to both reinforce alignment of executive interests with shareholders as well as being a relative measure of value creation.
TSR will replace cash  ow as a measure and the  nancial measures of EPS and ROCE will be retained as measures of pro table and effi cient business performance.
Each of the three measures will have equal weightage thus TSR will count for a third ROCE will count for a third and up from the historical 20% EPS will count for a third less than the historical 50%.
As in the past the Committee will have oversight into the quality of how the outcomes of EPS and ROCE are delivered Our remuneration framework is aligned with the strategic direction of MandS and the interests of our shareholders with a clear focus on customer simplicity and teamwork.
VINDI BANGA CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE
OVERVIEW
GOVERNANCE 55 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS and will exercise discretion as necessary.
While the Committee believes that introducing TSR at this stage provides an important measure of the success of the new strategy for the executive team the Committee also believes that certain strategic and non nancial measures may become more signi cant to MandS to warrant consideration for PSP measurements in future years.
Given the continued challenging economic and market environment consumer concerns over Brexit and ongoing currency and in ationary headwinds the Committee has set the 201 7 1 8 targets at what it believes would represent stretching business performance.
For EPS and ROCE targets have been increased from those set for the 201 6 PSP award which were rebased against the new  nancial plan.
These increased targets re ect the plans for the business to return to growth in the next three years.
TSR performance will be measured against a bespoke group of comparator companies broadly similar to that adopted by other companies in our sector.
In accordance with standard market practice targets for threshold and maximum vesting will be set at median and upper quartile performance of the Group respectively.
REMUNERATION FOR 201617 As referenced earlier in the Annual Report since his appointment as Chief Executive Steve Rowe has set out clear and decisive plans to accelerate the pace of change to return the business to growth.
A huge amount of work has already begun to implement and deliver this strategy including the investment in Clothing and Home pricing and the reshaping of both the UK store estate and the International business.
While these plans have laid the groundwork to MandSs longterm recovery the necessary investment has meant that pro ts delivered this year are lower than last year although above consensus expectations.
However this was not unexpected and our  nancial plan for the year re ected this.
The Remuneration Committee is satis ed that incentive payments for the executive directors re ect both the overall  nancial performance of the business and the hard work undertaken by the team to achieve this in the challenging environment.
Total payments are around 35% of the maximum receivable of both  xed and variable pay together if all stretch targets had been achieved.
This clearly demonstrates the philosophy of the executive directors pay arrangements in action including the rigour of target setting maximum payments will only be payable for exceptional performance.
As can been seen on page 56 there is a clear and demonstrable link between business strategy and payments for 201 61 7 performance to the executive directors.
The key business priorities are referenced on pages 81 1 of this report.
Executive director targets were aligned with these priorities and achievement against the key  nancial priorities are shown on pages 1 82 1.
ANNUAL BONUS OUTTURN As highlighted earlier the year has been one of considerable change for MandS.
When approving payments the Committee considered the overall performance of the business and of the executive directors against this as well as against their individual targets.
Details of the bonus payments to each of the executive directors are outlined on page 68.
Bonus payments ranged from 37% to 42% of maximum opportunity.
Bonus payments made to directors re ected the large proportion of collective measures for the year in support of focusing on teamwork and simplicity within the pay arrangements.
PSP VESTING The PSP awards granted in 201 4 were measured for the threeyear period up to 1 April 201 7 against EPS ROCE and Revenue targets.
As the threshold targets were not achieved all awards held by executive directors will lapse.
SALARY REVIEW The Committee discussed the annual salary review for all executive directors.
In line with the budget salary increases for the rest of the organisation the Committee approved a 2% increase for all executive directors.
However as clearly disclosed in last years report the executive directors have for the second year in succession chosen to not accept this increase.
Salaries for the executive directors will therefore remain at those levels set in July 201 5 apart from Steve Rowe whose salary changed on his appointment to CEO in April 201 6.
BOARD CHANGES In September 201 6 we announced that Laura WadeGery would not be returning to the business following her maternity leave.
Lauras remuneration terms disclosed at the time were in line with the key provisions for contract termination as per the shareholder approved Remuneration
In addition details in relation to outstanding remuneration for Marc Bolland following his departure are also provided on page 75.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT We are grateful to shareholders shareholder representative bodies regulatory bodies and remuneration advisers for their engagement feedback challenge and view on remuneration matters over the past year.
The Company has been actively involved on the subject of executive remuneration and stakeholder engagement and earlier this year responded to the UK Governments Green Paper on Corporate Governance Reform.
Stakeholder engagement including input from MandSs Business Involvement Groups are key to ensuring we continue to drive the transparency around our decisions relating to executive pay provide clarity and quality of our performance targets and associated disclosures and ensure the relevance of our longterm executive pay incentives and their alignment to the performance of the business.
We are grateful for this ongoing dialogue.
Together with the rest of the Board I look forward to hearing your views on our remuneration arrangements and will be available to answer any questions you may have at the AGM.
VINDI BANGA CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION AT A GLANCE p5657 STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT OF PAY p56 REMUNERATION POLICY p5865 Executive directors remuneration policy p58 Recruitment policy p62 Termination policy p63 Nonexecutive directors remuneration policy p64 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION p6677 Total single  gure remuneration p66 Salary and bene ts p67 Annual Bonus Scheme p6869 Performance Share Plan p7071 Directors share interests p7273 Nonexecutive directors remuneration p76 Remuneration Committee p7778 IN THIS SECTION 56 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE
AT A GLANCE
This overview summarises our Remuneration Policy in action and shows the alignment between our remuneration framework the Companys performance and payments to directors for 20161 7 .
ANNUAL
BONUS
SCHEME
Increase e se earnings and and returns
Ret Return on capital employed
Effi cient and responsible operations
Plan A Reach customers
UK LFL revenue growth Online site visits
KPI
UK gross margin Foster a skilled motivated and engaged team
MandS values Str Strong cash gen eneration KPI KPI Free cash  o  ow
KPI
Plan A
KPI
Revenue
Grow G Group reve venue
Grou oup revenue EPS growth was 1.9% over the three years ending in 20161 7 based on the outturn of 30.4p for this year which was below the 5% growth required for vesting under the 201 4 PSP award.
ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE Performance under all revenue metrics was below the threshold required for payment under the 201 4 PSP award resulting in this element of the award lapsing.
10.6bn
REVENUE
Group PBT was above the target set for bonus payments to begin.
For executive directors 1 9.5% of bonus opportunity was payable as a result of this Group PBT performance.
GROUP PBT BEFORE ADJUSTED ITEMS Average 3year ROCE performance of 1 4.5% including 1 3.7% for 20161 7 was below the threshold required for this element of the 201 4 PSP award to vest.
13.7% RETURN ON CAPITAL
Free cash  ow performance for the year had no direct impact on payments for 20161 7 but will impact PSP payments for the next two nancial years measured on a cumulative 3year basis.
The 20161 7 outturn is more than 1 3 of the annualised target under the respective outstanding awards.
FREE CASH FLOW PRE SHAREHOLDER RETURNS STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT OF REMUNERATION FRAMEWORK WITH KPIs 20162017 PERFORMANCE See KPIs on p1821
SHARE
PLAN 57 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Bonus payments made in respect of performance for the year were between 37% and 42% of maximum bonus opportunity.
This resulted in payments ranging from c.
459000 to c. malus provisions being met.
Further detail on the performance measures and targets and the extent to which they were achieved are shown on page 68 of this report.
Patrick
BousquetChavanne
Steve
Rowe
Helen
Weir
Corporate element 70% Individual element 30% Maximum Achieved 17.5% 22.5% 22.5% 19.5% 19.5% 19.5% ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME 201617 The graph opposite summarises the total payments made to executive directors in respect of the 201 61 7  nancial year.
These gures illustrate those detailed in the single gure table set out later in this report.
Fixed pay comprises salary bene ts and pension bene ts.
Further information on payments made under the Annual Bonus Scheme is illustrated below with further details provided on page 68.
Performance Share Plan awards did not meet the threshold performance required for vesting this year and as such awards will lapse in full on their vesting date.
599 1642 Fixed pay Total bonus PSP
BousquetChavanne
Steve
Rowe
Helen
Weir
Total
SINGLE FIGURE REMUNERATION 201617 SUMMARY OF POLICY AND PROPOSED AMENDMENTS Shareholders approved the Remuneration Policy at the AGM in 201 4.
As such the Company is required to seek approval for the new policy at the AGM to be held on 1 1 July 201 7 .
Pages 58 to 65 provide the full details of the proposed policy.
The Committee reviewed the senior remuneration framework during the year to ensure that it remains  t for purpose providing an appropriate framework to ful l MandSs reward philosophy which is in turn designed to support and drive the business strategy .
Changes proposed to the policy are minimal as the Committee felt the previously approved framework remains broadly appropriate.
For transparency the table below sets out an overview of the key areas of the policy.
MAIN FEATURES OF CURRENT POLICY Increases awarded are normally in line with those elsewhere in the business.
Adjustments in excess of this may be made where the Committee deems it appropriate.
Bene ts provided at a rate commensurate with the market and currently include a car or cash allowance a driver and life assurance plus other bene ts provided to all employees including employee discount.
Directors may participate in MandSs de ned contribution arrangement on the same terms as other employees or receive a cash supplement in lieu of pension contributions.
Cash alternative maximum is currently 25% of salary for other executive directors 30% for CEO.
Maximum opportunity of 200% of salary.
50% of total bonus deferred into shares for three years.
Measured against Adjusted Group PBT currently 70% of award and individual objectives.
Clawback and malus provisions apply.
Maximum award of 300% of salary.
Performance measured against nancial targets over a threeyear period.
Clawback and malus provisions apply.
Fees reviewed annually.
Comprise basic fee plus additional fee for extra responsibility of Board or committee chairman or Senior Independent NED.
In addition the Chairman may be entitled to the use of a car and driver.
POLICY CHANGE Salaries will be compared against appropriatelysized listed companies which may be outside of the FTSE 2575 detailed in the previous policy.
No change.
For current executive directors the maximum cash allowance will be limited to 25% of salary for all including the CEO.
For future appointments the cash amount payable will be capped at 20% of salary for all.
No change.
A twoyear holding period post vesting will be introduced.
Performance conditions may include quanti able non nancial strategic measures with  nancial measures comprising at least 50% of awards.
Fees will be compared against appropriately sized companies which may be outside of the FTSE 2575 detailed in the previous policy.
Base salary Bene ts Pension bene ts Annual Bonus Scheme Performance Share Plan Nonexecutive directors including Chairman See Annual Bonus Scheme below and p68 See PSP on p71 See Single  gure remuneration on p66 See Annual Bonus Scheme on p68 58 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE Base salary Bene ts To attract retain and motivate high calibre executives needed to deliver our strategy and drive business performance.
To provide marketcompetitive benets which drive employee engagement and commitment in our business.
ELEMENT
PURPOSE
AND LINK TO
This report sets out the Companys policy on remuneration for executive and nonexecutive directors to be approved by shareholders at the AGM on 1 1 July 20 1 7 from which date the policy will apply .
The policy remains largely unchanged from that approved by shareholders in 20 1 4 for transparency where amendments have been made these are highlighted.
Once approved this policy may operate for up to three years.
As previously the Committee has built in a degree of exibility to ensure the practical application of the policy over this period.
Where such discretion is reserved the extent to which it may be applied is described.
The Companys policy remains to attract retain and motivate its leaders and ensure they are focused on delivering business priorities within a framework designed to promote the longterm success of MandS aligned with shareholder interests.
Further information regarding the implementation of the previous remuneration policy is set out on pages 66 to 77 .
OPERATION  Payable in cash.
Reviewed annually by the Committee considering a number of factors including Salary increases awarded to other employees in the wider workforce which are typically reviewed annually on a similar basis and Comparable salaries in appropriate comparator groups.
Salaries reect the experience responsibility and contribution of the individual and role within the Group.
CHANGE FOR 2017 Appropriate comparator groups may include major retailers and similarlysized listed companies which may be ranked outside of the FTSE 2575.
Directors are eligible to receive benets in line with our policies which may include A car or cash allowance A driver and Life assurance.
Where appropriate our Global Domestic Mobility Policy may apply.
This may include but not be limited to travel relocation and tax equalisation allowances.
Directors are off ered a number of other benets in line with all other employees such as employee discount and salary sacrice schemes such as Cycle2Work.
Directors may participate in a Save As You Earn Scheme and a Share Incentive Plan and any other allemployee share schemes on the same terms as other employees.
MAXIMUM
OPPORTUNITY
While there is no set maximum any increases are normally in line with those in the wider workforce.
Individual adjustments in excess of this may be made outside of this cycle at the discretion of the Committee where appropriate.
Such circumstances can include Where the role scope has changed Where comparable salaries in the external market have changed or To apply salary progression for newly appointed directors.
While there is no set maximum any bene ts will be provided at a rate commensurate with the market.
Maximum participation in allemployee share schemes is in line with local statutory limits.
PERFORMANCE
CONDITIONS
NA NA FIGURE 1 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY TABLE TO BE APPROVED ON 11 JULY KEY CHANGES TO THE POLICY To further support shareholder alignment a twoyear holding period post vesting will apply to any awards granted to executive directors after the 20 1 7 AGM.
Performance conditions may now include quanti able non nancial or strategic measures.
Previously performance conditions were limited to nancial measures only.
This change will ensure strategic alignment of the PSP .
Maximum cash payments will be limited to 25% for all current executive directors and to 20% for all future executive directors.
This reduction better re ects pension arrangements in the wider workforce.
Base salaries will be compared against major retailers and appropriatelysized listed companies which may be outside of those ranked FTSE 2575.
Previously the peer group comprised FTSE 2575 ranked companies.
This change re ects MandSs FTSE ranking.
Base salary
Performance
Share Plan REMUNERATION POLICY GOVERNANCE 59 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Pension bene ts Performance Share Plan PSP Annual Bonus Scheme including Deferred Share Bonus Plan DSBP To attract and retain high calibre executives through a commitment to responsible secure retirement funding in line with our Company values.
To drive annual protability strategic change and individual performance in line with the business plan.
To recognise and reward individual contributions to the way we do business.
The deferral into shares provides alignment with shareholders longterm interests following the successful delivery of shortterm targets.
Measured against the key nancial drivers of the business plan to deliver sustainable value creation.
To encourage longterm shareholding to retain directors and provide greater alignment with shareholders interests.
Current directors may participate in the Your MandS Pension Saving Plan a dened contribution arrangement or an alternative pension saving vehicle that the Company may off er on the same terms as all other employees or receive a cash supplement in lieu of pension contributions into this scheme.
Directors are eligible to participate in this noncontractual discretionary scheme.
Payments are made subject to the satisfaction of predetermined targets set at the start of the year as approved by the Committee.
Not less than 50% of any bonus earned is paid in deferred shares under the DSBP  with the remainder payable in cash.
Deferred shares vest after a period of three years subject to continued service but no further performance conditions.
Clawback and malus rules apply to cash and DSBP awards respectively see explanatory notes page 60 for more information.
Good leaver and change of control provisions apply to the deferred shares see explanatory notes.
The value of any dividends during the deferred period will be payable see explanatory notes.
The Committee retains the right to exercise discretion both upwards and downwards to ensure that the level of award payable is appropriate and fair in the context of the directors individual performance and the Companys overall performance.
Where exercised the rationale for this discretion will be fully disclosed to shareholders in the subsequent Annual Report.
The Companys principal longterm incentive scheme approved by shareholders in 201 5.
Directors are eligible to participate in this noncontractual discretionary plan.
Directors may receive an annual award which vests after three years subject to predetermined performance conditions.
Clawback and malus rules apply to awards see explanatory notes.
Good leaver and change of control provisions apply see explanatory notes.
The value of any dividends during the vesting period will be payable.
CHANGE FOR 2017 Awards granted after 11 July 2017 will be subject to a further twoyear holding period after the vesting date.
Directors may sell suffi cient shares to satisfy the tax liability on exercise but must retain the net number of shares until the end of this twoyear period.
A maximum cash payment of 25% of salary for current executive directors.
A maximum employer contribution of 1 2% of salary where the employee contributes 6% of salary.
CHANGE FOR 2017 The cash alternative provided to current executive directors will be limited to 25% of salary for all directors.
For directors appointed to the Board after 11 July 2017 the cash alternative will be up to a maximum of 20% of salary for all directors.
A maximum annual potential of up to 200% of salary.
The maximum value of shares at grant which can be made under an award to an individual in respect of a  nancial year is 300% of salary.
Performance is measured over a threeyear period against a balanced scorecard of appropriate measures as determined by the Committee each year.
This currently includes EPS and ROCE chosen as those measures which support and drive topline and bottomline performance in line with business strategy as well as Total Shareholder Return TSR.
The threshold level of vesting is 20% of the maximum.
For performance between threshold and maximum awards vest on a straightline basis.
CHANGE FOR 2017 Awards may be measured against appropriate  nancial non nancial andor strategic measures.
Financial measures comprise at least 50% of awards.
NA  Quanti able oneyear performance measures and targets are set by the Committee around  nancial and individual objectives linked with the sustainable delivery of the business plan.
Financial performance measures comprise at least 50% of awards and may include but not be limited to Group PBT after adjusted items.
Typically no payment for individual objectives can be earned unless a threshold level of Group PBT after adjusted items has been achieved.
This threshold level is set by the Committee taking into account the previous years performance and the business operating plan for the current year.
For threshold performance up to 40% currently 30% of maximum bonus potential may be payable for the achievement of individual objectives.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE FIGURE 2 POLICY TABLE Executive directors may be in receipt of awards under share plans outside of the current remuneration framework detailed on pages 58 and 59 these may have been awarded upon recruitment or prior to their appointment as an executive director.
While awards under these plans do not form part of a forwardlooking policy for transparency details of the plans are set out in the table below EXPLANATORY NOTES GOVERNANCE CONTINUED EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED
Share Plan
Executive
Share Option Scheme ESOS To enable the recruitment of key directors who are necessary to the delivery of business strategy.
Restricted awards may be granted for the recruitment of directors.
Awards vest after a restricted period which can vary by award but is typically between one and three years.
Malus provisions good leaver and change of control provisions apply see pages 60 and 63.
The value of any dividends during the restricted period will be payable see explanatory notes below.
While there is no maximum set in the rules the Committee considers the scale and structure of awards on an individual basis.
Awards are capped at 250% of salary in respect of any nancial year of the Company but in recruitment circumstances awards may be granted up to a higher limit of 400% of salary.
The Committee may choose to apply no formal performance conditions save for continued service.
Awards vest subject to at least threeyear predetermined performance conditions.
Approved by shareholders and HMRC in 2015 the Committee may choose to award share options to directors if appropriate.
Malus provisions good leaver and change of control provisions apply see pages 60 and 63.
Options are normally exercised between the third and tenth anniversaries of grant subject to the achievement of any performance conditions set by the Committee.
Measured against the key drivers of our business plan to deliver sustainable value creation.
To encourage longterm shareholding to retain directors and provide greater alignment with shareholders interests.
ELEMENT
PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY
OPPORTUNITY
PERFORMANCE
CONDITIONS OPERATION The Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the Policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration of the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payments include the Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
Awards granted under the PSP  DSBP  and RSP can be made in the form of conditional share awards forfeitable shares options or rights with the same economic eff ect.
In addition awards may be settled in cash.
Awards may incorporate the right to receive in cash and shares the value of dividends including any dividend tax credit where applicable between grant and vesting on the shares that vest.
This amount may be calculated on a cumulative basis assuming the reinvestment of dividends into shares.
In the event of a variation of the Companys share capital or a demerger special dividend or other event which in the Committees opinion may aff ect the price of shares the Committee may alter the terms of awards and the number of shares subject to them.
The terms of awards may be amended in accordance with the relevant plan rules which were approved by shareholders on 7 July 201 5.
Any performance conditions applicable to PSP and ESOS awards may be amended by the Committee if an event occurs which causes it to consider that the performance condition would not achieve its original purpose and the amended performance condition is in the opinion of the Committee no less diffi cult to satisfy but for the event in question.
CLAWBACK AND MALUS MandS is committed to ensuring its remuneration arrangements motivate participants to strive for exceptional performance while also protecting shareholder value from the Company taking unnecessary risks.
As such clawback and malus provisions apply to the executive directors incentive arrangements.
All share awards granted from 201 3 onwards are subject to malus provisions.
These provisions allow the Committee in its absolute discretion to determine at any time prior to the vesting of an award to reduce the number of shares cancel an award or impose further conditions on an award in circumstances for which the Committee considers such action to be appropriate.
Such circumstances may include but not be limited to a material misstatement of the Companys audited results.
In addition clawback provisions were introduced in 201 5 and apply to cash payments made under the Annual Bonus
Awards made under any of the Companys other executive share schemes including the Performance Share Plan in 201 5 and onwards will similarly be subject to clawback provisions.
These provisions enable the Committee in its absolute discretion to reclaim awards paid to individuals for up to three years after the respective vesting or payment date or up to two years in the case of PSP awards where speci ed events occur.
The speci ed events include gross misconduct or where a material misstatement of the Companys nancial statements has occurred.
Clawback may be eff ected among other means by requiring the transfer of shares payment of cash or reduction of awards.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PERFORMANCE CONDITIONS AND TARGET SETTING The Committee reviews annually the measures weightings and targets for the incentive arrangements for the executive directors.
In doing so the Committee considers a number of factors which assist in forming a view.
These include but are not limited to the strategic priorities for MandS over the short to longterm shareholder feedback the risk pro le of the business and the macroeconomic climate.
The Annual Bonus Scheme is measured against a balance of pro tability and the delivery of key strategic areas of importance for the business.
The pro tability measure used is Group PBT before adjusted items as this is used internally to report and assess business performance by the Board and Operating
Refer to the glossary on pages 1 33 to 1 34 for the de nition of Group PBT before adjusted items and to Note 1 of the nancial statements for a description of adjusted items.
The PSP is assessed against a balance of measures identi ed as those most relevant to driving both sustainable topline and bottomline business performance as well as providing value for shareholders.
This is re ected in the EPS and ROCE measures which focus on a balance of pro tability cost control and the effi cient use of capital investment.
For 201 7 1 8 relative TSR will be introduced to ensure focus on the value delivered to shareholders.
This is measured against a bespoke group of retail companies which are believed to provide a balanced portfolio of those most likely to be alternative investment choices for MandS shareholders.
Targets are set against the respective annual and longterm operating plans taking into account analysts forecasts MandSs strategic plans prior year performance estimated vesting levels and the aff ordability of pay arrangements.
Targets are set to provide a sustainable balance of risk and reward to ensure that while being motivational for participants maximum payments are only made for exceptional performance.
REMUNERATION FRAMEWORK FOR THE REST OF THE ORGANISATION MandSs philosophy is to provide a fair and consistent approach to pay.
Remuneration is determined by level and is broadly aligned with those of the executive directors.
Base salaries are reviewed annually and re ect the local labour market.
All UK employees are eligible to participate in the Your MandS Pension Saving Plan on the same terms as the executive directors.
In addition all UK employees are provided with life insurance and employee discount and may choose to participate in the Companys allemployee share schemes and salary sacri ce arrangements.
All employees are eligible to be considered to participate in an annual bonus scheme which for the majority will be a cashbased payment partially determined by Group PBT performance.
For MandSs most senior executives part of the bonus is deferred into shares for three years.
Around the top 1 20 of MandSs senior executives may be invited to participate in the PSP  measured against the same performance conditions as executive directors.
Award levels granted are determined to be aligned with market practice and re ect an individuals level of seniority as well as their performance and potential within the business.
CONSIDERATION OF WIDER WORKFORCE PAY The Committee monitors and reviews the eff ectiveness of the senior remuneration policy and has regard to its impact and compatibility with remuneration policies in the wider workforce.
The Committee is provided throughout the year with information detailing pay in the wider workforce which gives additional context for the Committee to make informed decisions.
The HR Director advises the Committee of the approach which will be adopted with the forthcoming UK pay review and the Committee then considers the executive directors pay in line with these arrangements.
The HR Director consults on all executive director bonus objectives and advises the Committee on how and the extent to which these may be cascaded throughout the
In approving the budget for the annual bonus the Committee reviews all bonus costs for the Company against the operating plan.
The Committee also reviews and approves any PSP awards made to executive directors and directors below the Board prior to their grant.
The Committee also receives updates on a variety of employee engagement initiatives which form part of our normal employee engagement practices.
Employees were not consulted on the development of the policy.
The annual Your Say employee survey asks employees about the fairness and reasonableness of employee pay and benets.
Any comments made through this survey or through our network of elected employee representatives via our Business Involvement Groups are considered.
The Head of Performance and Reward annually provides these employee representatives with an explanation of the Companys reward principles and director pay arrangements during the year and is available to answer questions at this time.
CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDER VIEWS The Committee is committed to an open and transparent dialogue with its shareholders on the issue of executive remuneration.
Where appropriate the Committee will actively engage with shareholders and shareholder representative bodies seeking views which may be considered when making any decisions about changes to the directors Remuneration Policy.
The Committee seeks the views of the largest shareholders individually and others through shareholder representative bodies when considering making any signicant changes to the Remuneration Policy this may be done annually or on an ad hoc basis dependent upon the issue.
The Committee annually engages in a process of investor consultation which is typically in written format but may be through facetoface meetings etc. if considered useful.
The Committee Chairman is available to answer questions at the AGM and the answers to specic questions are posted on our website.
As part of our socially responsible reporting strategy an annual shareholder meeting is normally held and the consideration of views on a variety of topics including executive pay is taken into account.
EXPLANATORY NOTES CONTINUED 62 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED The table below sets out the Companys policy on the recruitment of new executive directors.
Similar considerations may also apply where a director is promoted within the Board.
In addition the Committee in exceptional circumstances has discretion to include any other remuneration component or award which it feels is appropriate considering the specic circumstances of the individual subject to the limit on variable remuneration set out below.
The rationale for any such component would be appropriately disclosed.
For example for internal promotional appointments to the Board the Committee would honour any preexisting contractual remuneration arrangements these arrangements may be outside of the policy detailed on pages 58 to 65.
RECRUITMENT POLICY
Bene ts
Annual
Bonus
Scheme
PSP
Buyout awards The Committee will take into consideration a number of factors including the current pay for other executive directors external market forces skills and current level of pay at the previous employer in determining the pay on recruitment.
For new appointments to the Board the Committee may set the rate of pay at the lower end of the rate for other directors andor other comparable roles within the market with the intention of applying staged increases.
The Committee will off er a package which is set in line with our policy to appropriately reect the circumstances of the individual.
Maximum contribution in line with our policy for future executive directors up to 20% of salary.
Eligible to take part in the Annual Bonus Scheme with a maximum bonus of 200% of salary in line with our policy for executive directors.
An award of up to 300% of salary in line with our policy for executive directors.
Where an individual forfeits outstanding variable pay opportunities or contractual rights at a previous employer as a result of appointment the Committee may off er compensatory payments or buyout awards dependent on the individual circumstances of recruitment determined on a casebycase basis.
The Committee in its judgement normally intends that any such payments are made on a likeforlike basis and considers issues such as the plan type time horizons and valuation of the forfeited awards.
The Committees intention would be to ensure that the expected value awarded will be no greater than the expected value forfeited by the individual.
Where appropriate the Committee may choose to apply performance conditions to any of these awards.
FIGURE 3 RECRUITMENT POLICY ELEMENT RECRUITMENT POLICY SERVICE CONTRACTS It is the Companys policy that all executive directors have rolling service contracts that can be terminated by the Company giving 1 2 months notice and the employee giving six months notice.
The directors service contracts are available for shareholder inspection at the Companys registered ofce.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TERMINATION POLICY The Company may terminate the contract of any executive director summarily in accordance with the terms of their service agreement on payment in lieu of notice of a sum equal to salary benets and pension as per their contractual notice entitlement see page 75.
The Company can make a series of phased payments which are paid in monthly instalments subject to mitigation.
This mechanism allows for the amount of any phased payments to be reduced by the income from any alternative position secured by the former director during the phased payments period.
Service agreements may be terminated without notice and without any payments in certain circumstances such as gross misconduct.
The Company may require the individual to work during their notice period or may choose to place the individual on garden leave.
Such a decision would be made to ensure the protection of the Companys and shareholders interests where the individual has had access to commercially sensitive information.
The table below sets out key provisions for directors leaving the Company under their service contracts and the incentive plan rules.
The Companys policy towards exit payments allows for a variety of circumstances whereby a director may leave the business.
In some cases where deemed suitable the Committee reserves the right to determine exit payments where the director leaves by mutual agreement.
In all circumstances the Committee does not intend to reward failure and will make decisions based on the individual circumstances.
The Committees objective is that any such agreements are determined on an individual basis and are in the best interests of the Company and shareholders at that time and reect the directors contractual and other legal rights.
CORPORATE EVENTS In the event of a change of control or windingup of the Company unvested share awards will normally vest on the date that the Board noties participants of such an event.
The number of shares which may vest under awards in these circumstances will be subject to any relevant performance conditions and in the case of PSP awards unless the Committee determines otherwise time prorating.
In the event of a demerger special dividend or other event which in the opinion of the Committee aff ects the price of shares the Committee may allow some or all of an award to vest.
TERMINATION POLICY Salary bene ts and pension bene ts
Bonus
Scheme
Longterm incentive awards
Legal expenses and outplacement Payment will be made up to the termination date in line with relevant contractual notice periods.
There is no contractual entitlement to payments under the Annual Bonus Scheme.
Should a director be under notice or not in active service at either the relevant year end or on the date of payment there will be no entitlement to any bonus payment either in cash or shares.
The Committee may use its discretion as described below to make a bonus award which is normally prorated for time worked during the relevant  nancial year and based on performance assessed at the end of the bonus period.
Where a director ceases to be an ofcer or employee of the Group before the end of the relevant vesting period the treatment of outstanding awards is determined in accordance with the plan rules.
In some circumstances where a director leaves due to retirement injury illhealth death or the sale of the directors employing company or business out of the Group or any other reason at the discretion of the Committee and in accordance with the plan rules DSBP awards normally vest in full on cessation PSP and ESOS awards which have been held for at least 1 2 months normally vest when the level of performance has been assessed and agreed at the end of the threeyear performance period.
The Committee may determine these awards vest upon cessation as permitted in the plan rules.
In either circumstance any relevant performance conditions would still apply to the PSP and ESOS awards and unless the Committee determines otherwise would be time prorated and subject to the twoyear holding period post vesting.
Where a director has been recruited either to the Company or the Board from overseas the Company may pay for repatriation.
The Company may reimburse for reasonable legal fees in the event a director leaves by mutual consent.
It may also pay for professional outplacement services in these circumstances.
FIGURE 4 KEY PROVISIONS UPON CONTRACT TERMINATION ELEMENT TERMINATION POLICY 64 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY FIGURE 5 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY TABLE FIGURE 6 RECRUITMENT POLICY
Nonexecutive director basic fee
Bene ts
PURPOSE
AND LINK TO
OPERATION
To provide a fair fee at a level that attracts and retains a highcalibre Chairman.
Total fee comprised of the nonexecutive director basic fee and the additional fee for undertaking the role.
Paid in equal monthly instalments may be made in cash andor shares.
Fees are determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Fees reect the time commitment demands and responsibility of the role.
Reviewed annually taking into account market practice in appropriate comparator groups e. companies etc.
CHANGE FOR 2017 Appropriate comparator groups may include major retailers and similarly sized listed companies which may be ranked outside of the FTSE 2575.
To facilitate the execution of responsibilities and duties required by the role.
To provide compensation to nonexecutive directors taking on additional Board responsibilities.
To provide a fair basic fee at a rate that attracts and retains highcalibre nonexecutive directors.
In addition to the annual fee the Chairman may be entitled to the use of a car and driver.
In line with other employees the Chairman and nonexecutive directors receive employee product discount.
No other benets are provided.
The Chairman and nonexecutive directors do not participate in pension or performance related schemes.
Additional fees are paid for extra responsibilities undertaken by nonexecutive directors for the role of Board Chairman a committee chairman or the Senior Independent Director role.
Fees are paid in equal monthly instalments and may be made in cash andor shares.
Fees are determined by the Chairman and executive directors.
The fee level recognises the scope of the role and time commitment required.
Reviewed annually taking into account market practice in appropriate comparator groups e. listed companies etc.
The maximum aggregate nonexecutive director basic fees including the Chairman is 750000 p.
Articles of Association.
CHANGE FOR 2017 Appropriate comparator groups may include major retailers and similarly sized listed companies which may be ranked outside of the FTSE 2575.
The table below sets out our policy for the operation of nonexecutive directors fees and benets at the Company.
AGREEMENTS FOR SERVICE All nonexecutive directors including the Chairman have an agreement for service for an initial threeyear term these are available for shareholder inspection at the Companys registered ofce.
The Chairman has an agreement for service which requires six months notice by either party.
Nonexecutive directors service agreements may be terminated by either party giving three months notice.
In line with the UK Corporate Governance Code all nonexecutive directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders at our AGM.
The table below sets out the recruitment policy for nonexecutive directors.
Fees
Bene ts The Committee takes into account a number of factors when determining an appropriate fee level for the Chairman.
The CEO and executive directors determine appropriate fee levels for the nonexecutive directors.
This consideration includes the time commitment and responsibility of the individual role and market practice in appropriate comparator groups.
The Company may off er bene ts to the Chairman and nonexecutive directors as detailed in the nonexecutive director policy table above.
ELEMENT RECRUITMENT POLICY KEY CHANGES TO THE POLICY Fees will be compared against major retailers and similarlysized listed companies which may be ranked outside of the FTSE 2575 detailed in the previous policy.
Fees 65 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Fixed remuneration only.
No vesting under the ABS and PSP .
Target
Includes the following assumptions for the vesting of the incentive components of the package ABS 50% of maximum and PSP 20% of maximum.
Maximum
Includes the following assumptions for the vesting of the incentive components of the package ABS 100% of maximum and PSP 100% of maximum.
Fixed remuneration Includes all elements of  xed remuneration Base salary eff ective 1 July 201 7  as shown in the table on page 67 Pension bene ts using the cash supplement policy on pages 58 to 59 and Bene ts using the value for 20161 7 included in the single  gure table on page 66.
Annual Bonus Scheme ABS Represents the potential value of the annual bonus for 201 7 1 8.
Half of any bonus would be deferred into shares for three years and this is included in the value shown.
No share price growth is assumed.
PSP
PSP represents the potential value of the PSP to be awarded in 201 7  which would vest in 2020 subject to the performance against the targets disclosed on page 71.
Awards would then be held for a further two years.
No share price growth is assumed.
DIRECTORS
KEY BASIS OF CALCULATIONS Maximum Target Fixed Steve Rowe 100% 46% 22% 35% 43% 36% 18% Maximum Target Fixed Patrick BousquetChavanne 100% 46% 22% 35% 43% 36% 18% Maximum Target Fixed Helen Weir 100% 46% 22% 35% 43% 36% 18% APPLICATION OF THE REMUNERATION POLICY FIGURE 8 REMUNERATION ILLUSTRATIONS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY FIGURE 7 SUMMARY OF REMUNERATION POLICY TO BE APPROVED ON 11 JULY 2017 See KPIs on p1821 The diagram below illustrates the balance of pay and time period of each element of the proposed remuneration policy for executive directors which if approved will take eff ect after the 201 7 AGM.
The Committee believes this mixture of short and longterm incentives xed to performancerelated pay is appropriate for MandSs strategy and risk pro le.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total pay
Base salary Bene ts Pension bene ts
Bonus
Scheme
Up to 100% salary 3year deferral period No further performance conditions Malus provisions apply Up to 100% salary 1year performance Clawback provisions apply
2year holding period post vesting No further performance conditions Clawback provisions apply Awarded typically 250% salary 3year performance Malus provisions apply The charts below provide an illustration of what could be received by each of the executive directors in 201 7 1 8.
These charts are illustrative as the actual value which will ultimately be received will depend on business performance in the year 201 7 1 8 for the cash element of the Annual Bonus Scheme and in the threeyear period to 201 920 for the PSP as well as share price performance to the date of the vesting of the share element of the Annual Bonus Scheme and PSP awards in 2020.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE The Remuneration Committee annually reviews the senior remuneration framework and considers whether the existing incentive arrangements remain appropriately challenging in the context of the business strategy current external guidelines and a range of internal factors including the pay arrangements and policies throughout the rest of the organisation.
In its discussions the Remuneration Committee aims to ensure that not only is the framework strategically aligned to the delivery of business priorities but also that payments made during the year fairly re ect the performance of the business.
As illustrated on page 56 a signi cant proportion of the performance measures used in the incentive schemes are integrated with MandSs business objectives and key performance indicators detailed on pages 1 8 to 2 1.
The diagram below illustrates the extent to which each executive director achieved the maximum opportunity under the Companys incentive schemes as a result of short and longterm performance to the end of the reported  nancial year and summarises the main elements of the senior remuneration framework.
Further details of payments made during the year are set out in the single  gure table below Figure 10.
FIGURE 10 TOTAL SINGLE FIGURE REMUNERATION audited Director Year
Bene ts
Total PSP vested
Total
Steve Rowe 2016 1642 Patrick BousquetChavanne 2016 1164 Laura WadeGery to 1 2 September 201 6 201617 35800tel Helen Weir 2016 1253 20151tel0 148 1566 Laura WadeGery left the Board on 1 2 September 201 6 and as such the payments above relate to those made until that date.
Further details of Lauras leaving arrangements are detailed on page 75 of this report.
As disclosed in the 201 5 report for Helen Weir bene ts for 201 51 6 also included 1 88500 the diff erential value in contractual pension she forfeited to join MandS.
This was paid in 1 2 monthly instalments.
Note that the value of awards vesting in 201 51 6 has been restated to re ect the actual value of dividend equivalents and share price at the time of vesting.
REMUNERATION REPORT
GOVERNANCE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION FIGURE 9 REMUNERATION STRUCTURE 201617 See KPIs on p1821 Fixed pay Annual bonus PSP Total pay for 201617 Base salary Bene ts Pension bene ts No salary increase 200% salary maximum bonus opportunity with 50% deferral 250% salary awarded Measured against a balance of Group PBT and individual performance.
Measured against EPS ROCE and Revenue targets.
Achievement was below threshold against these measures.
Payments made are between 37%  42% of maximum bonus opportunity 0% of award vested
35% and 37% of maximum potential For more information see p68 For more information see p71 67 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SALARY audited When reviewing salary levels the Committee takes into account a number of internal and external factors including Company performance during the year external market data and the salary review principles applied to the rest of the organisation to ensure a consistent approach.
As reported in last years report all executive directors were awarded a salary increase of 2% for July 201 6 but in support of the proposed new pay arrangements being made elsewhere in the UK organisation they chose to decline this increase.
Further they also indicated that should an increase be awarded for July 201 7  they would be similarly minded to decline that increase.
The Committee noted this intention but for completeness discussed the executive directors annual salary review during the year.
All executive directors were eligible to be considered for a review and after taking into account several factors including the average increases to be awarded to the wider UK workforce the Committee approved a 2% pay increase.
All executive directors have again this year declined their respective pay increases.
Their next annual review will be eff ective in July 201 8.
The table below details the executive directors salaries as at 1 April 201 7 and salaries which will take eff ect from 1 July 201 7 .
FIGURE 11 SALARIES Annual salary as of 1 April 201 7 Annual salary as of 1 July 201 7
Steve Rowe Patrick BousquetChavanne 546 546 0 Helen Weir 590 590 0 BENEFITS audited Each executive director receives a car or cash allowance and is off ered the benet of a driver.
The Company also provides each director with life assurance.
Executive directors receive employee product discount and are eligible to participate in salary sacrice schemes such as Cycle2Work in line with all other employees.
PENSION BENEFITS audited Executive directors currently all receive a 25% cash payment in lieu of participation in an MandS pension scheme.
Steve Rowe is a deferred member of the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme.
Details of the pension accrued during the year ended 1 April 201 7 are shown below.
FIGURE 12 PENSION BENEFITS
Accrued pension entitlement as at year end
Increase
Increase
Transfer value of total accrued pension Steve Rowe 60  4301 The accrued pension entitlement is the deferred pension amount that Steve Rowe would receive at age 60 if he left the Company on 1 April 201 7 .
All transfer values have been calculated on the basis of actuarial advice in accordance with the current Transfer Value
The transfer value of the accrued entitlement represents the value of the assets that the pension scheme would transfer to another pension provider on transferring the schemes liability in respect of a directors pension bene ts.
It does not represent sums payable to a director and therefore cannot be added meaningfully to annual remuneration.
The following sections detail additional disclosures regarding each of the components set out in the previous single gure table.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION CONTINUED 68 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME 201617 audited Annual performance for 201 61 7 was measured against Group PBT 70% of awards and individual performance 30% of awards.
Group PBT is used in the bonus as the Group considers this to be an important measure of Group performance and is consistent with how the business performance is assessed internally by the Board and Operating Committee.
Individual performance was measured against both collective corporate performance and performance aligned with the individuals speci c areas of responsibility.
Individual performance measures for the year were aligned with the key strategic business priorities identi ed at the start of the year.
Figure 1 3 provides an overview of the key achievements against each executive directors accountabilities over the period.
Group PBT outturn for the year was 6 1 3.8m which was above the targets set to trigger payments under both the corporate and individual elements of the Scheme.
As shown in Figure 1 4 below this meant that executive directors were awarded 27 .9% of maximum opportunity under the corporate element of the Scheme and on average c.70% of maximum for individual performance.
The Committee reviewed achievement to ensure that total payments were appropriate in the context of several factors.
These included MandSs overall  nancial performance the outturn of individual objectives the level of bonus payable elsewhere in the business and success towards Plan A targets and MandS values which underpinned the entire Scheme again during the year.
See Plan A Report for more detail The Committee was satis ed that each director continued to ensure that the delivery of Plan A commitments and the behavioural ways of working supported the delivery of the business priorities.
As such the Committee determined that no adjustments were required against the underpin and that the  nal payments calculated were appropriate.
The Committee ensures that targets set are the relevant drivers of required annual performance.
Consequently some of the 201 61 7 targets are too commercially sensitive to disclose as they are not disclosed elsewhere in the report.
MandS remains committed to transparent reporting within the context of operating in a highly competitive market.
The
Committee will continue to assess the commercial sensitivity of targets with the aim of disclosing wherever possible while ensuring that any measures set are those most appropriate to grow the business.
Figure 1 4 below sets out the Group PBT targets comprising 70% of awards and illustrates the extent to which each director achieved their three individual objectives.
Total payments shown below directly correspond to the  gure included in the single  gure table on page 66 .
FIGURE 13 KEY ACHIEVEMENTS OF INDIVIDUAL OBJECTIVES 201617 Director Collective customer 10% Collective strategic 10% Local  nancial 10%
Rowe
Customer satisfaction over the year improved.
Net
Promoter Score NPS which was the measure for this element of bonus increased four points for Food and for Clothing and Home remained level although improved amongst frequent customers and in larger stores.
This led to a payment against this measure of 7 .5%.
Action taken this year to simplify the business included the successful organisation transformation and restructure of Head Offi ce.
Role reductions were made and there was no overall impact on engagement scores for this population.
Employee engagement within the total business increased to 81%.
As a result of this performance including above target restructure cost savings maximum payment was made under this measure 10%.
Performance impacted by reduction in promotional and markdown activity leading to below target UK LFL Clothing and Home revenue growth of 3.4%.
As a result no payment was made against this element.
Patrick
BousquetChavanne
Continued improvements in online sales conversion and successful marketing campaigns to help drive store footfall.
Target payment made as a result of performance against these measures.
Helen
Weir
Continued to develop and strengthen a cost control culture.
Necessary investment in a number of key business areas led to costs increasing by 3.8% broadly in line with plan.
Target payment was achieved.
FIGURE 14 ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME 201617
CORPORATE GROUP PBT 70% INDIVIDUAL 30% TOTAL PAYMENT Targetperformance Performance Achievement % salary 000 Min 593m Max 685m
Rowe
27.9% of max bonus 58.3% of max bonus 74.0% 599
BousquetChavanne
27.9% of max bonus 75.0% of max bonus 84.0% 459
Weir
27.9% of max bonus 75.0% of max bonus 84.0% 496 ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME Performance assessment key Below Threshold Threshold  Target Target  Stretch Above Stretch GOVERNANCE CONTINUED 69 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS DEFERRED SHARE BONUS PLAN audited Currently 50% of any bonus payment is compulsorily deferred into nilcost optionsconditional shares.
These awards vest after three years subject to continued employment as well as malus provisions.
The table opposite provides details of share awards made during the year in respect of bonus payments made in 201 51 6.
The face value of each award re ects half of the value shown for 201 51 6 bonus payments in the single  gure table.
As reported at the time Laura WadeGerys award vested in full on the date she left the Company.
ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME FOR 201718 During the year the Committee reviewed the 201 7 1 8 Scheme considering the drive to continue the new strategic way forward for MandS to grow the business.
It determined that the structure of the 201 61 7 Scheme remained appropriate and only minor amendments were necessary to ensure alignment with the delivery of the business priorities.
The 201 7 1 8 Scheme is designed to continue to focus on putting the customer at the heart of the business and driving the pro table growth of MandS while supporting the one team strategy as has been described to stakeholders.
Performance will again be partially measured against collective corporate performance as well as performance in the individuals speci c business area.
As in previous years individual performance will continue to be measured independently of Group PBT performance.
However to maintain the important principle that below a de ned level of  nancial performance no bonus will be earned no individual element can be earned unless a threshold level of Group PBT has been achieved.
As shown below 70% of awards will once again be measured against Group PBT under the corporate element.
The remaining 30% of the bonus will be measured against individual objectives and will be a mixture of collective objectives and measures bespoke to each director.
The individual element of the Scheme will comprise three equally weighted objectives identi ed as those key priorities required to support the delivery of the strategy.
These will focus on LFL sales growth improvement delivering  nancial effi ciencies enhancing our customer experience and satisfaction and building on the bene ts of the customer loyalty Sparks programme and our Plan A initiatives.
The bonus performance targets for 201 7 1 8 are deemed by the Board to be too commercially sensitive to disclose at this time but where possible will be disclosed in next years report.
The Committee will continue to judge overall performance against our ecological ethical and behavioural achievements to ensure consistency with MandSs values and behaviours.
Success towards Plan A targets and the MandS values which all employees including executive directors are required to uphold will underpin the entire Scheme.
The Committee in its absolute discretion may use its judgement to adjust overall nal payments accordingly.
Where any adjustments are made these will be fully disclosed in next years report.
FIGURE 16 ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME TARGETS 201718
CORPORATE TARGETS INDIVIDUAL OBJECTIVES GROUP PBT Customer Financial Strategic Measure % bonus % bonus % bonus % bonus
Rowe
70% 10% 10% 10% Customer satisfaction Total UK LFL sales Strength of leadership succession
BousquetChavanne
70% 10% 10% 10% Customer satisfaction
Plan A
Weir
70% 10% 10% 10% Customer satisfaction UK store estate Cost effi ciencies FIGURE 15 DSBP AWARDS MADE IN 201516 Basis of award Face value of award End of deferral period Steve Rowe 50% of bonus 1 1 5 2206201 9 Patrick BousquetChavanne 50% of bonus 1 83 2206201 9 Laura WadeGery 50% of bonus 104 3009201 6 Helen Weir 50% of bonus 3 10 2206201 9 The face value of awards is calculated as the number of nilcost optionsconditional shares awarded multiplied by the average midmarket share price on the  ve dealing days prior to the date of grant.
For this year the share price was calculated as 3.558 being the average share price between 1 5 June 2016 and 21 June 2016.
ANNUAL BONUS SCHEME CONTINUED 70 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE The Committee believes that longterm share awards reward executives for the delivery of longterm business goals and so makes annual awards under the PSP to incentivise executive directors and MandSs most senior managers.
PSP AWARDS MADE IN 201617 audited As was disclosed last year PSP awards made for 201 61 7 were granted in December 201 6 shortly after the announcement of the Interim results.
This was to ensure that the measures and targets were aligned to the longterm strategic business plan developed by Steve Rowe and his leadership team.
As we communicated to shareholders during this period of review the strategy to create a simpler more sustainable business with the customer at its heart and operating as one team will require several actions.
These actions will lead to reduced pro ts in the short term but will deliver a stronger more sustainable business in the longer term.
These include an investment in pricing in the Clothing and Home business to ensure market competitiveness reshaping the UK store estate and restructuring the International business.
The revised  nancial plan also took account of the signi cant currency impact which has arisen since the EU Referendum which will adversely impact pro ts.
In approving targets the Committee also considered the consensus forecasts for the three  nancial years over which the Plan would operate.
As shown in Figure 1 7 below performance for these awards is measured against EPS ROCE and cumulative free cash  ow.
Each performance condition is measured independently over the threeyear period.
The balance of measures has been designed to drive the pro table effi cient growth of MandS while also focusing on providing returns to shareholders.
The Committee believes that the targets set for the 201 61 7 PSP award are very stretching in the current environment and achievement of these levels of performance in 201 81 9 would drive substantial value for shareholders.
The changes made are felt necessary to provide suffi cient realignment with the new strategic  nancial plan to ensure the PSP supports and drives the desired business performance.
Consistent with previous years for achievement of threshold performance 20% of the relevant portion of the award will vest increasing to 100% on a straightline basis between the achievement of threshold and maximum performance.
FIGURE 17 PERFORMANCE CONDITIONS FOR PSP AWARDS MADE IN 201617 Adjusted EPS in 201819 Average ROCE 20161 7  201819 % Cumulative free cash  ow 20161 7  201819 20161 7 Award 50% of award 20% of award 30% of award Threshold performance 28.9p 1 3.0% 1350m Maximum performance 35.8p 16.0% 1650m Each measure is de ned in the glossary on pages 1 33 and 1 34.
Pre dividends and shareholder returns.
Figure 1 8 below summarises the award made to each of the executive directors in December 201 6.
The maximum award permitted under the Plan is 300% of salary although the Committee typically makes awards of 250% of salary to executive directors.
For 201 61 7  awards of 225% of salary were awarded to all executive directors.
In approving this award level the Committee noted that award levels for executives have typically been 250% of salary.
Upon discussion the Committee decided that in recognition of the rebased  nancial plan and associated PSP performance measures lower awards were appropriate for this particular grant only.
In line with the Remuneration Policy awards to executive directors will vest on 5 December 201 9 three years after the date of grant to the extent that the performance conditions are met.
FIGURE 18 PSP AWARDS MADE IN 201617 Basis of award Face value of award End of performance period Steve Rowe 225% of salary 1823 051 2201 9 Patrick BousquetChavanne 225% of salary 1229 051 2201 9 Helen Weir 225% of salary 1328 051 2201 9 When calculating the face value of awards to be granted the number of nilcost optionsconditional shares awarded is multiplied by the average midmarket share price on the  ve dealing days prior to the date of grant.
For this year the share price was calculated as 3.28 being the average share price between 28 November 201 6 and 2 December 201 6.
PERFORMANCE SHARE PLAN PSP
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 71
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FIGURE 19 PSP AWARDS VESTING IN 201617 audited For directors in receipt of PSP awards granted in 201 4 the awards will vest in June 201 7 based on threeyear performance over the period to 1 April 201 7 .
Performance has been assessed and it has been determined that the award will lapse in full.
Details of performance against the specic targets set are shown in the table below.
The total vesting values shown in Figure 20 directly correspond to the  gure included in the single  gure table on page 66.
201 41 5 Award 20161 7 Revenue
Average
ROCE % UK
International
50% of award 20% of award 10% of award 10% of award 10% of award Total vesting Threshold performance 5.0% 15.0% 8900m 1100m 1400m 0.0% Maximum performance 12.0% 16.5% 9600m 1300m 1800m Actual performance achieved 1.9% 1 4.5% 8530m 957m 11 34m Percentage of maximum achieved 00000 Excluding multichannel.
Net of VATgross of returns.
Excluding multichannelincluding Republic of Ireland.
FIGURE 20 VESTING VALUE OF AWARDS VESTING IN 201617 On grant At the end of performance period Number of shares granted % of salary granted Number of shares vesting Number of shares lapsing Total vesting value Steve Rowe 300343 250% 0 300343 0 Patrick BousquetChavanne 300343 250% 0 300343 0 Laura WadeGery 3 15789 250% 0 3 15789 0 Helen Weir  0 PSP AWARDS TO BE MADE IN 201718 During the year the Committee reviewed the longterm incentive framework at MandS assessing the extent to which it remained appropriate.
As part of these discussions the Committee deliberated on a number of possible structures including those outlined in the Investment Associations Executive
Remuneration Working Group report.
After extensive consideration it was decided that the current structural arrangements remain those most appropriate to support the delivery of the necessary development and performance in MandS.
That said the Committee determined that during this period the business must continue to ensure a focus on returns to shareholders.
As such relative Total Shareholder Return TSR will for this year form onethird of PSP awards although the Committee believes that in future years other strategic or non nancial measures may be more appropriate and will consider this for future grants.
Relative TSR will be measured against a bespoke group of 1 5 companies taken from the FTSE 350 General and Food and Drug Retailers indices and are believed to be appropriately aligned to MandSs business operations to re ect the value of shareholder investment in MandS over the performance period see Figure 22 for details of these companies.
The remainder of the award will be measured equally against EPS and ROCE.
The balance of measures has been designed to ensure an appropriate focus on all three performance metrics.
As noted on the previous page recognising last years rebased  nancial plan and associated PSP performance targets the Remuneration Committee reduced the 201 6201 7 awards to 225% of salary from the typical level of 250%.
However the Committee is mindful of the need to strongly incentivise the CEO and management team to deliver the agreed strategy.
In light of this and given that EPS targets are returning to a growth trajectory the Committee has determined that awards in 201 7 should revert to the previous normal level of 250% of salary.
Performance will be measured as shown in Figure 21 below with 20% of awards vesting for threshold performance and 100% for maximum.
In line with the new policy awards will vest three years after the date of grant and must then be held for a further two years.
FIGURE 21 PERFORMANCE CONDITIONS FOR PSP AWARDS TO BE MADE IN 201718 Adjusted EPS in 201920 Average ROCE % Relative TSR 201 718 Award 13 of award 13 of award 13 of award Threshold performance 31.7p 13.0% Median Maximum performance 38.7p 1 7 .0% Upper quartile FIGURE 22 TSR COMPARATOR GROUP 201718 AWARD J Sainsbury BandM European King sher Wm Morrisons Debenhams N Brown Group Tesco Dixons Carphone Next Ocado Group Dunelm Group Sports Direct International ASOS JD Sports Fashion WHSmith PERFORMANCE SHARE PLAN PSP CONTINUED 72 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE FIGURE 23 DIRECTORS SHAREHOLDINGS audited The table below sets out the total number of shares held at 1 April 201 7 or date of retirement from the Board by each executive director serving on the Board during the year.
Shares owned outright include those held by connected persons.
There have been no changes in the current directors interests in shares or options granted by the Company and its subsidiaries between the end of the nancial year and 23 May 201 7 .
No director had an interest in any of the Companys subsidiaries at the statutory end of the year.
Shares owned outright
Vested but unexercised shares
Without performance conditions
Share Plan Deferred Share Bonus Plan Steve Rowe 253408 11 16809 91932 0 Patrick BousquetChavanne 123098 930790 7 166 1 0 Laura WadeGery at 1 2 September 201 6 1 72955 340460 49096 1 25836 Helen Weir 50000 681252 87057 0 FIGURE 24 SHAREHOLDING REQUIREMENTS audited All executive directors are required to hold shares equivalent in value to a minimum percentage of their salary within a veyear period from their appointment date.
For the CEO this requirement is 250% of salary and for other executive directors the requirement is 1 50% of salary.
Similar guidelines of 100% of salary also apply to directors below board level.
The chart below shows the extent to which each executive director has met their target shareholding as at 1 April 201 7 .
For Steve Rowe his 250% shareholding requirement is measured from the date he was appointed CEO.
For the purposes of the requirements the net number of unvested share awards not subject to performance conditions is included and is re ected in the chart below.
The Committee is satis ed that the current level of shareholding requirement provides an appropriate level of investment in MandS for each director.
The Committee will continue to keep this issue under review and will amend accordingly if necessary.
Helen Weir Patrick BousquetChavanne Steve Rowe 125.7% Shares owned outright Key 103.4% 54.9% Vested and unexercised Unvested DSBP shares Shareholding requirement 150% of salary 250% of salary EMPLOYEE SHARE SCHEMES ALLEMPLOYEE SHARE SCHEMES audited Executive directors may participate in both ShareSave the Companys Save As You Earn Scheme and ShareBuy the Companys Share Incentive Plan on the same basis as all other eligible employees.
Further details of the schemes are set out in note 1 3 to the nancial statements on pages 1 1 2 and 1 1 3.
DILUTION OF SHARE CAPITAL BY EMPLOYEE SHARE PLANS Awards granted under the Companys Save As You Earn Scheme and the Executive Share Option Scheme are met by the issue of new shares when the options are exercised.
All other share plans are currently met by market purchase shares.
The Company monitors the number of shares issued under these schemes and their impact on dilution limits.
The Companys usage of shares compared to the dilution limits set by The Investment Association in respect of all share plans 10% in any rolling tenyear period and executive share plans 5% in any rolling tenyear period as at 1 April 201 7 was as follows FIGURE 25 ALL SHARE PLANS
Actual
10% 7.21% FIGURE 26 EXECUTIVE SHARE PLANS
Actual
5% 0% EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 73
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION CONTINUED FIGURE 27 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN THE COMPANYS SHARE SCHEMES audited
3 April 2016
Exercised during the year
Maximum receivable at 1 April 201 7 or date of retirement Steve Rowe Performance Share Plan 86 15 1 2 555640 1 44 1 6 285927 11 1 6809 Deferred Share Bonus Plan 1 1001 3 32376 50457 0 9 1932 SAYE 2222 3461 0 0 5683 Total 973747 591477 64873 285927 1214424 Patrick BousquetChavanne Performance Share Plan 772669 37 4542 10388 206033 930790 Deferred Share Bonus Plan 46448 5 1408 261 95 0 7166 1 SAYE 2 2222 Total 821339 425950 36583 206033 1004673 Laura WadeGery Performance Share Plan 9 1 7 582 0 0 5424 1 2 3751 70 Deferred Share Bonus Plan 1 1 1064 29 40222 Total 1028646 29158 0 542412 515392 Helen Weir Performance Share Plan 276527 404252 Deferred Share Bonus Plan 0 87 057 SAYE 2083 3461 0 2083 3461 Total 278610 495243 0 2083 771770 The aggregate gains of directors arising in the year from the exercise of awards granted under the PSP and DSBP totalled 303435.
The market price of the shares at the end of the  nancial year was 337 .0p the highest and lowest share price during the  nancial year were 446.1 p and 285.2p respectively.
Laura WadeGery retired from the Board on 1 2 September 201 6 and left the Company on 30 September 201 6.
Details of her leaving arrangements are set out on page 75.
Her outstanding Performance Share Plan awards were prorated for time held on leaving.
For transparency these lapses are shown in the lapsed during the year column.
Figure 28 shows the time horizons for each of the executive directors outstanding discretionary share awards i.
Performance Share Plan the Deferred Share Bonus Plan and if it had been applicable the Restricted Share Plan.
As detailed earlier in this report the 201 4 PSP awards included within the totals shown in Figure 27 will lapse in full on their respective vesting dates.
This has been re ected below in the 201 7 1 8 column to provide an accurate and transparent overview of directors interests in discretionary share awards.
FIGURE 28 VESTING SCHEDULE OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS OUTSTANDING DISCRETIONARY SHARE AWARDS Maximum receivable at 1 April 201 7 all discretionary schemes Maximum receivable in 201718 201819 201920 Steve Rowe 12087 4 1 300343 320382 58801 6 Patrick BousquetChavanne 100245 1 300343 2761 58 425950 Helen Weir 768309 0 276527 49 1782 74 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION CONTINUED
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
FIGURE 31 RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF SPEND ON PAY The table opposite illustrates the Companys expenditure on pay in comparison to prots before tax and distributions to shareholders by way of dividend payments and share buyback.
Total employee pay is the total pay for all Group employees.
Group pro t before tax and adjusted items has been used as a comparison as this is the key nancial metric which the Board considers when assessing Company performance.
Total employee pay 1486.7 1552.6 4.4 Total returns to shareholders Pro t before tax and adjusted items 684.1 613.8 10.3 Total returns to shareholders for 201 516 includes distribution to shareholders via share buyback.
For 20161 7 this  gure is inclusive of special dividend.
FIGURE 29 PERFORMANCE AND CEO REMUNERATION COMPARISON This graph illustrates the Companys performance against the FTSE 100 over the past eight years.
The FTSE 100 has been chosen as the appropriate comparator as MandS is a constituent of this index.
The calculation of TSR is in accordance with the relevant remuneration regulations.
The table below the TSR chart sets out the remuneration data for directors undertaking the role of CEO during each of the last eight nancial years.
CEO
CEO single gure of remuneration 000 Steve Rowe        1642 Marc Bolland  5998 3324 21 42 1568 2095 201 5 Stuart Rose 4294 269 Annual bonus payment % of maximum Steve Rowe        36.98% Marc Bolland  45.80% 34.00% 42.50% 0.00% 30.55% 3 1.90% Stuart Rose 97 .00% 57 .40% PSP vesting % of maximum Steve Rowe        0.00% Marc Bolland   3 1.96% 0.00% 7 .60% 4.70% 4.80% Stuart Rose 0.00% 0.00% Marc Bolland was appointed CEO on 1 May 2010.
His single  gure for 20101 1 includes recruitment awards made to him at that time to compensate him for incentive awards forfeited on cessation from his previous employer.
Stuart Rose undertook the role of CEO from 3 1 May 2004 to 30 April 2010.
FIGURE 30 PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN CEOS REMUNERATION The table opposite sets out the change in the CEOs remuneration i. employees.
This group has been chosen as the majority of our workforce is UKbased.
The CEO comparison is Steve Rowe for 201 61 7 to Marc Bolland for 201 51 6.
The percentage changes for UK employees is a consequence of organisational transformation including reduction in senior management roles and the business investment in store staffi ng levels.
Base salary Bene ts Annual bonus UK employees average per FTE 1.1 1 2.0 8.7 5teltel10 200809 201011 201 112 201213 201314 201415 201516 201617 FTSE 100 Index Source Thomson Reuters Marks and Spencer Group plc 75 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION CONTINUED EXECUTIVE CHANGES TO THE BOARD DURING 201617 DIRECTORS APPOINTED TO THE BOARD There were no directors appointed to the Board during the year.
PAYMENTS FOR THE LOSS OF OFFICE audited Laura WadeGery stepped down from the Board on 1 2 September 201 6 and left MandS on 30 September 201 6.
Remuneration terms on leaving were in line with the approved Remuneration Policy.
As was reported at the time Laura received monthly payments of eight months salary and bene ts which were subject to mitigation.
Her unvested nilcost options granted under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan vested in full on termination.
Unvested nilcost options awarded under the PSP were time prorated and will vest subject to performance conditions on a wait and see basis at the normal vesting date.
As reported earlier in this report PSP awards made in 201 4 will lapse in full in June 201 7 .
Laura has one further unvested PSP award granted in 201 5.
This will vest next year to the extent that performance conditions have been made and will be reported as appropriate in next years report.
PAYMENTS TO PAST DIRECTORS audited Marc Bolland retired from the Board on 2 April 201 6.
In line with his contractual arrangements Marc received salary bene ts and pension bene ts until the end of his notice period on 7 January 201 7 .
Per the approved Remuneration Policy any unvested nilcost options awarded to Marc Bolland under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan vested in full on leaving and may be exercised in accordance with the Plan rules.
He had two outstanding PSP awards on leaving granted in June 201 4 and July 201 5 which were prorated for time held.
As reported on page 71 of this report the 201 4 award will lapse in full in June 201 7 as performance conditions have not been met.
Performance for the 201 5 award and any subsequent shares which will vest will be disclosed in next years report.
FIGURE 33 EXTERNAL APPOINTMENTS The Company recognises that executive directors may be invited to become nonexecutive directors of other companies and that these appointments can broaden their knowledge and experience to the benet of the Company.
The policy is for the individual director to retain any fee.
The table opposite sets out the details for these fees earned for the period 3 April 201 6 to 1 April 201 7 .
Fees for Laura WadeGerys appointment at British Land Company are reported until 1 2 September 201 6 the date she left the MandS Board.
Fees for Helen Weirs appointment at SABMiller are to 7 October 201 6 the date at which the company was acquired by AnheuserBusch InBev.
Director Company
Patrick BousquetChavanne BrownForman 283 Laura WadeGery to 1 2 September 201 6 British Land Company 30 Helen Weir SABMiller 61 Rugby Football Union 3 1 FIGURE 32 SERVICE AGREEMENTS In line with our policy directors have rolling contracts which may be terminated by the Company giving 1 2 months notice or the director giving six months notice.
Date of appointment Notice periodunexpired term Steve Rowe 0204months6 months Patrick BousquetChavanne 1007 months6 months Helen Weir 01 04months6 months 76 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION FIGURE 34 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS TOTAL SINGLE FIGURE REMUNERATION audited Nonexecutive directors receive fees reecting the time commitment demands and responsibilities of the role.
The table opposite details the fees paid to the nonexecutive directors for In recognition and support of the proposed new pay arrangements which were made in the UK organisation during the year the Chairman and the nonexecutive directors declined to accept any increase in their fees.
Director Year Basic fees Additional fees Bene ts
Robert Swannell 20161 7 70 380tel Vindi Banga 2016 Alison Brittain 2016 Miranda Curtis 2016 Andrew Fisher 201616 2300 23 Andy Halford 2016 Richard Solomons 2016 FIGURE 35 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS SHAREHOLDINGS audited The nonexecutive directors are not permitted to participate in any of the Companys incentive arrangements.
All nonexecutive directors are required to build and maintain a shareholding of at least 2000 shares in the Company within two months of their appointment to the Board.
The table opposite details the shareholding of the nonexecutive directors who served on the Board during the year as at 1 April 201 7 or upon their date of retiring from the Board including those held by connected persons.
There have been no changes in the current nonexecutive directors interests in shares in the Company and its subsidiaries between the end of the nancial year and 23 May 201 7 .
Director Number of shares held Robert Swannell 169298 Vindi Banga 93700 Alison Brittain 5096 Miranda Curtis 5500 Andrew Fisher 3536 Andy Halford 21000 Richard Solomons 5000 FIGURE 36 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AGREEMENTS FOR SERVICE Nonexecutive directors have an agreement for service for an initial threeyear term which can be terminated by either party giving three months notice six months for the Chairman.
The table opposite sets out these terms for all current members of the Board.
Director Date of appointment Notice periodunexpired term Robert Swannell 23082010 6 months3 months Vindi Banga 01 09201 1 3 months3 months Alison Brittain 01 01 201 4 3 months3 months Miranda Curtis 01 02201 2 3 months3 months Andrew Fisher 01 1 2201 5 3 months3 months Andy Halford 01 01 201 3 3 months3 months Richard Solomons 1 304201 5 3 months3 months NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS CHANGES TO THE BOARD DURING 201617 DIRECTORS APPOINTED TO THE BOARD There were no changes to the Board during the year.
DIRECTORS RETIRING FROM THE BOARD No directors retired from the Board during the year.
CHANGES TO THE BOARD DURING 201718 Robert Swannell will retire from the Board on 1 September 201 7 .
There will be no payments for loss of offi ce payable to Robert.
Miranda Curtis will retire from the Board on 1 February 201 8.
There will be no payments for loss of offi ce payable to Miranda.
Archie Norman will join the Board as Chairman on 1 September 201 7  upon Robert Swannells retirement from the business.
In line with the policy set out on page 64 Archie will receive the standard nonexecutive director fee plus an additional fee as the Board Chairman.
Archies total annual fee will be 600000.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REMIT The role of the Remuneration Committee is to make recommendations regarding the senior remuneration strategy and framework to the Board to ensure the executive directors and senior management are appropriately rewarded for their contribution to the Companys performance taking into account the nancial and commercial position of the Company.
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES Setting a strategy that ensures the most talented leaders are recruited retained and motivated to deliver results.
Reviewing the eff ectiveness of the senior remuneration framework with regard to its impact.
Considering the appropriateness of the senior remuneration framework when reviewed against arrangements throughout the rest of the organisation.
Determining the terms of employment and remuneration for executive directors and senior managers including recruitment and termination arrangements.
Approving the design targets and payments for all annual incentive schemes that include executive directors and senior managers.
Agreeing the design targets and annual awards made for all share incentive plans requiring shareholder approval.
Assessing the appropriateness and subsequent achievement of performance targets relating to any share incentive plan.
In line with its remit the Committee considered a number of key matters during the year.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE AGENDA FOR 201617 REGULAR ITEMS Pay arrangements Annual review of all executive directors and senior managers base salaries and bene ts in line with Company policies and approval of any salary increase.
Review of and agreement to remuneration packages for new senior managers.
Annual Bonus Scheme ABS Review of achievement of ABS Group PBT against targets.
Review of achievement of executive directors individual objectives for 20161 7.
Review of the structural design measures and approach to targets for the 201 7 1 8 ABS.
Performance Share Plan PSP Review and approval of all awards made under the PSP taking into account the total value of all awards made under this plan.
Half year and year end review of all plan performance against targets.
Approval of the vesting level of the 201 41 5 PSP awards.
Approval of the measures and targets for the 201 61 7 and 201 7 1 8 PSP awards.
Consideration of the approach to be taken for the 201 7 1 8 PSP awards.
Clear articulation of the Committees reasoning and consideration for vesting and payment levels to executive directors.
Consideration and debate of the senior remuneration framework in the context of external guidance and views on longterm incentives for the future.
Governance and external market Approval of the Directors Remuneration Report for 201 61 7 and review of the AGM voting outcome for the 201 51 6
Review of Committee performance Review of Committee Terms of
Signi cant consideration of institutional investors current guidelines on executive compensation.
Consideration of external market developments and best practice in remuneration.
Assessment of the external environment surrounding the Companys current remuneration arrangements.
Consideration of remuneration arrangements for the wider workforce.
Note The full Terms of Reference for the Committee can be found on the Companysitethecompany.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE ACTION PLAN 201718 Ensure the continued strategic alignment of the directors incentive arrangements.
Debate and agree the appropriateness of the senior remuneration framework in the context of the rest of the organisation and external governance.
Ensure a formal annual review of the wider workforce reward framework.
Review the eff ectiveness and transparency of remuneration reporting.
MEMBER
MEMBER
SINCE
1 September 201 1 FIGURE 37 REMUNERATION COMMITTEE MEETINGS The following independent nonexecutive directors were members of the Committee during 201 61 7 Vindi Banga
Robert Swannell 1 March 2015 Miranda Curtis 1 February 201 2 Richard Solomons 21 July telMAXIMUM
MEETINGS
NUMBER OF
ATTENDED % OF
ATTENDED 78 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CONTINUED COMMITTEE ADVISERS In carrying out its responsibilities the Committee is independently advised by external advisers.
The Committee was advised by PwC during the year.
PwC is a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and voluntarily operates under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the
The Committee has not explicitly considered the independence of the advice it receives although it regularly re ects on the quality and objectivity of this advice.
The Committee is satis ed that any con icts are appropriately managed.
PwC was appointed by the Committee as its independent advisers in 201 4 following a rigorous and competitive tender process.
PwC provides independent commentary on matters under consideration by the Committee and updates on legislative requirements best practice and market practice.
PwCs fees are typically charged on an hourly basis with costs for work agreed in advance.
During the year PwC charged 1 1 6200 for Remuneration Committee matters.
This is based on an agreed fee for business as usual support with additional work charged at hourly rates.
PwC has provided tax consultancy and risk consulting services to the Group in the nancial year.
The Committee also seeks internal support from the CEO Group Secretary HR Director and Head of Performance and Reward as necessary.
All may attend the Committee meetings by invitation but are not present for any discussions that relate directly to their own remuneration.
The Committee also reviews external survey and bespoke benchmarking data including that published by New Bridge Street the trading name of Aon Hewitt Limited KPMG PwC and Willis Towers Watson.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT The Committee is committed to ensuring that executive pay remains competitive appropriate and fair in the context of the external market Company performance and the pay arrangements of the wider workforce.
In collaboration with the Head of Performance and Reward the Committee gives employees through employee representatives the opportunity to raise questions or concerns regarding the remuneration of the executive directors.
During the year employee representatives were given the opportunity to discuss in detail the directors pay arrangements.
Details of the directors pay arrangements were discussed in the context of the reward framework for the rest of the organisation and external factors no concerns were raised.
SHAREHOLDER CONSULTATION The Committee is committed to a continuous open and transparent dialogue with shareholders on the issue of executive remuneration.
The Committee was represented at the Companys annual Governance Event held in June 201 6 at which major institutional investors and representative bodies were provided with the opportunity to review and debate remuneration with the Committee Chairman Vindi Banga.
SHAREHOLDER SUPPORT FOR THE 201516 DIRECTORS
REMUNERATION REPORT
At the Annual General Meeting on 1 2 July 201 6 98.02% of shareholders voted in favour of approving the Directors Remuneration Report for 201 51 6.
The
Committee believes this illustrates the strong level of shareholder support for the senior remuneration framework.
The table below shows full details of the voting outcomes for the 201 51 6 Directors
Remuneration Report.
FIGURE 38 VOTING OUTCOMES FOR 201516 REMUNERATION REPORT Votes for % Votes for Votes against % Votes against Votes withheld Remuneration Report 986080026 98.02 19885063 1.98 1979099 FIGURE 39 VOTING OUTCOMES FOR REMUNERATION POLICY for 201314 when the policy was approved Votes for % Votes for Votes against % Votes against Votes withheld Remuneration Policy 1012469256 98.27 17840854 1.73 9040797 APPROVED BY THE BOARD VINDI BANGA CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE London 23 May 201 7 This Remuneration Policy and these remuneration reports have been prepared in accordance with the relevant provision of the Companies Act 2006 and on the basis prescribed in the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 201 3 the Regulations.
Where required data has been audited by Deloitte and this is indicated appropriately.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS DIRECTORS REPORT Marks and Spencer Group plc the Company is the holding company of the Marks and Spencer Group of companies the
With our rich heritage MandS is one of the most recognisable brands in the UK retail sector and is regularly voted as one of its most trusted.
Our business is driven by a desire to inspire and innovate to act with integrity and to stay in touch with our customers shareholders and employees alike.
These are our corporate values and they underpin everything we do.
They are what make the MandS diff erence across the 55 territories in which we operate.
The Directors Report which is also the Management Report for the purpose of Disclosure and Transparency Rule DTR 4.1.8R for the year ended 1 April 201 7 comprises pages 34 to 83 and pages 1 35 to 1 36 of this report together with the sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference.
As permitted by legislation some of the matters required to be included in the Directors Report have instead been included in the Strategic Report on pages 2 to 33 as the Board considers them to be of strategic importance.
Speci cally these are Future business developments throughout the Strategic Report.
Research and development on p1217.
Risk management on p3033.
Details of branches operated by the Company on p2324.
Information relating to  nancial instruments can be found on pages 1 1 8 to 1 23.
For information on our approach to social environmental and ethical matters please refer to our Plan A Reportsiteplana2017.
Other information to be disclosed in the Directors Report is given in this section.
Both the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been drawn up and presented in accordance with and in reliance upon applicable English company law and the liabilities of the directors in connection with those reports shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
INFORMATION TO BE DISCLOSED UNDER LR 9.8.4R Listing Rule Detail
514 A B Not applicable NA
BOARD OF DIRECTORS The membership of the Board and biographical details of the directors are given on pages 36 and 37 and are incorporated into this report by reference.
Changes to the directors during the year and up to the date of this report are set out below.
Details of directors bene cial and nonbene cial interests in the shares of the Company are shown on pages 73 and 76.
Options granted to directors under the Save As You Earn SA YE and Executive Share Option Schemes are shown on page 73.
Further information regarding employee share option schemes is given in note 1 3 to the  nancial statements.
Name Role Eff ective date of appointment retirement
Wade
Gery
Executive
Director
Multichannel
Retired
1 2 September
Swannell Chairman
1 September
Curtis
NonExecutive
Director
Retiring
1 February Proposed Appointment
Norman Chairman Eff ective 1 September The appointment and replacement of directors is governed by the Companys Articles of Association the Articles the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code the Companies Act 2006 and related legislation.
The Articles may be amended by a special resolution of the shareholders.
Subject to the Articles the Companies Act 2006 and any directions given by special resolution the business of the Company will be managed by the Board who may exercise all the powers of the Company.
The Company may by ordinary resolution declare dividends not exceeding the amount recommended by the Board.
Subject to the Companies Act 2006 the Board may pay interim dividends and also any  xed rate dividend whenever the nancial position of the Company in the opinion of the Board justi es its payment.
The directors may from time to time appoint one or more directors.
The Board may appoint any person to be a director so long as the total number of directors does not exceed the limit prescribed in the Articles.
Under the Articles any such director shall hold offi ce only until the next AGM and shall then be eligible for election.
The current Articles also require that at each AGM at least onethird of the current directors should retire as directors by rotation all those directors who have been in offi ce at the time of the two previous AGMs and who did not retire at either of them must retire.
In addition a director may at any AGM retire from offi ce and stand for reelection.
However in line with the Code and the Companys current practice the proposed new Articles will require all directors to stand for annual election see resolution 24.
All current directors will stand for reelection at the 201 7 AGM.
DIRECTORS CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The Company has procedures in place for managing con icts of interest.
Should a director become aware that they or any of their connected parties have an interest in an existing or proposed transaction with Marks and Spencer they should notify the Board in writing or at the next Board meeting.
Internal controls are in place to ensure that any related party transactions involving directors or their connected parties are conducted on an arms length basis.
Directors have a continuing duty to update any changes to these con icts.
DIRECTORS INDEMNITIES The Company maintains directors and offi cers liability insurance which gives appropriate cover for legal action brought against its directors.
The Company has also granted indemnities to each of its directors and the Group Secretary to the extent permitted by law.
Qualifying third party indemnity provisions as de ned by Section 234 of the Companies Act 2006 were in force during the year ended 1 April 201 7 and remain in force in relation to certain losses and liabilities which the directors or Group Secretary may incur to third parties in the course of acting as directors or Group Secretary or employees of the Company or of any associated company.
OTHER
DISCLOSURES 80 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS ATTACHING TO SHARES Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 any resolution passed by the Company under the Companies Act 2006 and other shareholders rights shares may be issued with such rights and restrictions as the Company may by ordinary resolution decide or if there is no such resolution or so far as it does not make speci c provision as the Board as de ned in the Articles may decide.
Subject to the Articles the Companies Act 2006 and other shareholders rights unissued shares are at the disposal of the Board.
POWERS FOR THE COMPANY ISSUING OR BUYING BACK ITS OWN SHARES The Company was authorised by shareholders at the 201 6 AGM to purchase in the market up to 10% of the Companys issued share capital as permitted under the Companys Articles.
No shares were bought back under this authority during the year ended 1 April 201 7 .
This standard authority is renewable annually the directors will seek to renew this authority at the 201 7 AGM.
It is the Companys present intention to cancel any shares it buys back rather than hold them in treasury.
The directors were granted authority at the 201 6 AGM to allot relevant securities up to a nominal amount of 1 353 1 3863.
This authority will apply until the conclusion of the 201 7 AGM.
At this years AGM shareholders will be asked to grant an authority to allot relevant securities i up to a nominal amount of 1 353941 36 and ii comprising equity securities up to a nominal amount of 270788271 after deducting from such limit any relevant securities allotted under i in connection with an off er of a rights issue the Section 55 1 amount such Section 55 1 amount to apply until the conclusion of the AGM to be held in 2018 or if earlier on 1 October 2018.
A special resolution will also be proposed to renew the directors powers to make non preemptive issues for cash in connection with rights issues and otherwise up to a nominal amount of 203091 20.
A special resolution will also be proposed to renew the directors authority to repurchase the Companys ordinary shares in the market.
The authority will be limited to a maximum of 1 62 million ordinary shares and sets the minimum and maximum prices which will be paid.
DEADLINES FOR EXERCISING VOTING RIGHTS Votes are exercisable at a general meeting of the Company in respect of which the business being voted upon is being heard.
Votes may be exercised in person by proxy or in relation to corporate members by corporate representatives.
The Articles provide a deadline for submission of proxy forms of not less than 48 hours before the time appointed for the holding of the meeting or adjourned meeting.
However when calculating the 48hour period the directors can and have decided not to take account of any part of a day that is not a working day.
Qualifying pension scheme indemnity provisions as de ned by Section 235 of the Companies Act 2006 were in force during the course of the  nancial year ended 1 April 201 7 for the bene t of the Trustees of the Marks and Spencer Pension Scheme both in the UK and the Republic of Ireland.
PROFIT AND DIVIDENDS The pro t for the  nancial year after taxation amounts to 1 1 5.7m last year The directors have declared dividends as follows Ordinary shares m Special dividend of 4.6p per share Paid 15 July 2016 75m Paid interim dividend of 6.8p per share last year 6.8p per share 1 10.3m Proposed  nal dividend of 11.9p per share last year 1 1.9p per share 193.3m Total dividend of 18.7p per share for 201617 last year 18.7p per share 303.6m Subject to shareholder approval at this years AGM the  nal ordinary dividend will be paid on 1 4 July 201 7 to shareholders whose names were on the Register of Members at the close of business on 2 June 201 7 .
SHARE CAPITAL The Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 1 April 201 7 comprised a single class of ordinary share.
Each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings of the Company.
During the period 1763039 ordinary shares in the Company were issued under the terms of the United Kingdom Employees Save As You Earn Share Option Scheme at prices between 258p and 432p.
Details of movements in the Companys issued share capital can be found on page 1 25 in note 24 to the  nancial statements.
RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF SECURITIES There are no speci c restrictions on the transfer of securities in the Company which is governed by its Articles of Association and prevailing legislation.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or that may result in restrictions on voting rights.
VARIATION OF RIGHTS Subject to applicable statutes rights attached to any class of share may be varied with the written consent of the holders of at least threequarters in nominal value of the issued shares of that class or by a special resolution passed at a separate general meeting of the shareholders.
OTHER DISCLOSURES CONTINUED Information provided to the Company pursuant to the Financial Conduct Authoritys FCA Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTRs is published on a Regulatory Information Service and on the Companys website.
As at 1 April 201 7  the following information has been received in accordance with DTR 5 from holders of noti able interests in the Companys issued share capital.
The information provided below was correct at the date of noti cation however the date received may not have been within the current  nancial year.
It should be noted that these holdings are likely to have changed since the Company was noti ed.
However noti cation of any change is not required until the next noti able threshold is crossed.
Noti able interests
Blackrock Inc.
90664081 5.58 Indirect Interest 4.85% Securities lending 0.65% and CFD 0.06% Ameriprise Financial Inc.
82524463 5.079 Indirect Interest 5.054% Direct 0.025% The Wellcome Trust 47464282 3.01 Direct Interest Subsequent to year end Majedie Asset Management Limited noti ed the Company in accordance with DTR5 of an indirect holding of 8 1569767 ordinary shares representing 5.02% of the Companys issued share capital.
INTERESTS IN VOTING RIGHTS 81 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT AGREEMENTS CHANGE OF CONTROL There are a number of agreements to which the Company is party that take eff ect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid.
Details of the signi cant agreements of this kind are as follows The 400m Medium Term Notes issued by the Company on 30 November 2009 the 300m Medium Term Notes issued by the Company on 6 December 201 1 the 400m Medium Term Notes issued by the Company on 1 2 December 201 2 and the 300m Medium Term Notes issued by the Company on 8 December 201 6 to various institutions MTN and under the Groups 3bn euro Medium Term Note EMTN programme contain an option such that upon a change of control event combined with a credit ratings downgrade to below sub investment level any holder of an MTN may require the Company to prepay the principal amount of that MTN.
The 500m US Notes issued by the Company to various institutions on 6 December 2007 under Section 1 44a of the US Securities Act contain an option such that upon a change of control event combined with a credit ratings downgrade to below subinvestment level any holder of such a US Note may require the Company to prepay the principal amount of that US Note.
The 300m US Notes issued by the Company to various institutions on 6 December 2007 under Section 1 44a of the US Securities Act contain an option such that upon a change of control event combined with a credit ratings downgrade to below subinvestment level any holder of such a US Note may require the Company to prepay the principal amount of that US Note.
The amended and restated 1.1 bn Credit Agreement dated 1 6 March 201 6 originally dated 29 September 201 1 between the Company and various banks contains a provision such that upon a change of control event unless new terms are agreed within 60 days the facility under this agreement will be cancelled with all outstanding amounts becoming immediately payable with interest.
The amended and restated Relationship Agreement dated 6 October 201 4 originally dated 9 November 2004 as amended on 1 March 2005 between HSBC and the Company and relating to MandS Bank contains certain provisions which address a change of control of the
Upon a change of control the existing rights and obligations of the parties in respect of MandS Bank continue and HSBC gains certain limited additional rights in respect of existing customers of the new controller of the Company.
Where a third party arrangement is in place for the supply of  nancial services products to existing customers of the new controller the Company is required to procure the termination of such arrangement as soon as reasonably practicable while not being required to do anything that would breach any contract in place in respect of such arrangement.
Where a third party arrangement is so terminated or does not exist HSBC gains certain exclusivity rights in respect of the sale of  nancial services products to the existing customers of the new controller.
Where the Company undertakes a rebranding exercise with the new controller following a change of control which includes using any MandS brand in respect of the new controllers business or vice versa HSBC gains certain termination rights exercisable at its election in respect of the Relationship Agreement.
The Company does not have agreements with any director or employee that would provide compensation for loss of offi ce or employment resulting from a takeover except that provisions of the Companys share schemes and plans may cause options and awards granted to employees under such schemes and plans to vest on a takeover.
EMPLOYEE INVOLVEMENT We remain committed to employee involvement throughout the business.
Employees are kept well informed of the performance and strategy of the Group through personal brie ngs regular meetings emails and broadcasts by the Chief Executive and members of the Board.
These take place at key points in the year to all Head Offi ce distribution centre and store management employees.
In addition store colleagues can also hear business brie ngs by telephone and there are quarterly CEO CFO trading updates broadcast by Skype to our store management teams.
These communications are supplemented by various employee publications including MandS World magazine Plan A updates and DVD presentations.
Our Making Every Moment Special employee engagement programme was launched last summer with two hours of training to empower store colleagues to put customers at the heart of the business and to make decisions based on customers speci c needs.
The programme engaged with 70000 employees through 75 regional leadership events and 1500 store events taking ideas from colleagues from across the business and has had tremendous results.
More than 3500 employees from across every store distribution centre and Head
Involvement Groups BIG to represent colleagues in twoway communication and consultation with the Company.
These representatives have continued to play a key role in a number of business changes this year.
The National BIG Chair meets with the Group Chairman and CEO regularly as well as providing updates to and attending Board meetings annually.
In addition directors and senior management regularly attend the National BIG meetings.
They also visit stores and discuss matters of interest and concern to both employees and the business through meetings with local BIG representatives listening groups and informal discussions.
The 22nd meeting of the European Works Council EWC established in 1 995 will take place in November 201 7 .
The EWC provides an additional forum for informing consulting and involving employee representatives from the countries in the European Economic Area.
The EWC has the opportunity to be addressed by the Chief Executive International Director and other senior members of the Company on issues that aff ect the European business.
Share schemes are a longestablished and successful part of colleagues total reward packages encouraging and supporting employee share ownership.
The Company operates both an all employee Save As You Earn Scheme and Share Incentive Plan.
Approximately 25000 employees currently participate in ShareSave the Companys Save As You Earn Scheme.
Full details of all schemes are given on pages 1 1 2 and 1 1 3.
There are websites for both pension schemes  the de ned contribution Scheme Your MandS Pension Saving Plan and the de ned bene t scheme the MandS Pension Scheme  which are fully accessible to employees and former employees who have retained bene ts in either scheme.
Employees are updated as needed with any pertinent information on their pension savings.
In April 201 6 the business launched a campaign which engaged all employees in putting forward their ideas for how MandS could drive down costs and reduce ineffi ciency.
The Crunch Costs campaign received an overwhelming response with colleagues submitting 1300 ideas from stores and offi ces.
So far the implemented ideas have generated savings of 20m which has enabled the business to add over 3000 colleagues to our stores.
By recognising and celebrating employee ideas and contributions the Company has driven high levels of engagement and motivation from employees.
The most recent results of the Your Say employee survey show that the employee engagement score has increased by three percentage points on the previous year and currently sits at 8 1 %.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT GOVERNANCE Over 1500 employees took part in Wellbeing Goals a new initiative launched to inspire people to take a more holistic look at their overall wellbeing and follow simple steps each week to improve what matters to them whether from a physical mental social or  nancial perspective.
The business has also taken steps to connect the two important agendas of Diversity and Inclusion with Wellbeing in a bold twoweek campaign inviting people to Be Yourself at work.
This was supported by hosted events and colleague videos on what it means to be yourself at work and how inclusivity at work positively impacts wellbeing.
The Company continued to promote its free service provided by a con dential team of mental wellbeing specialists LiveWellWorkWell by distributing wallet cards with details of the service across all stores and business areas.
The Company also invested in supporting the Buddy Network a peertopeer support group to provide colleagues with a way to share experiences and support each other in managing physical or mental health conditions alongside work.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES The Group is committed to an active equal opportunities policy from recruitment and selection through training and development performance reviews and promotion to retirement.
The Companys policy is to promote an environment free from discrimination harassment and victimisation where everyone will receive equal treatment regardless of gender colour ethnic or national origin disability age marital or civil partner status sexual orientation or religion.
All decisions relating to employment practices will be objective free from bias and based solely upon work criteria and individual merit.
The Company is responsive to the needs of its employees customers and the community at large.
MandS is an organisation which uses everyones talents and abilities and where diversity is valued.
MandS was one of the  rst major companies to remove the default retirement age in 200 1 and has continued to see an increase in employees wanting to work past the state retirement age.
Our oldest employee is 90 years old and joined the business at age 80.
In April 20 1 7  the Company once again featured in The Times T op 50 Employers for Women highlighting how equal opportunities are available for all at MandS.
Employeeled diversity networks give a voice to under represented groups provide peer topeer support and help to in uence the Company to become more inclusive.
These networks cover gender ethnicity disability parents and sexual orientationgender identity.
Each network has support from a senior sponsor .
Throughout the year employees have been involved in celebrating International Womens Day Pride Black History Month and the International Day of Persons with Disabilities.
EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES The Company is clear in its policy that people with disabilities should have full and fair consideration for all vacancies.
MandS has continued to demonstrate its commitment to interviewing those people with disabilities who ful l the minimum criteria and endeavouring to retain employees in the workforce if they become disabled during employment.
MandS will actively retrain and adjust employees environments where possible to allow them to maximise their potential and will continue to work with external organisations to provide workplace opportunities through our innovative Marks and Start scheme and by working closely with Jobcentre Plus.
The Marks and Start scheme was introduced into the distribution centre at Castle Donington in 201 21 3 working with Remploy to support people with disabilities and health conditions into work.
GROCERIES SUPPLY CODE OF PRACTICE The Groceries Supply Chain Practices Market Investigation Order 2009 the Order and The Groceries Supply Code of Practice GSCOP impose obligations on MandS relating to relationships with its suppliers of groceries.
Under the Order and GSCOP  MandS is required to submit an annual compliance report to the Audit Committee for approval and then to the Competition and Markets Authority and Groceries Code Adjudicator.
MandS submitted its report covering the period from 3 April 201 6 to 1 April 201 7 to the Audit Committee on 1 8 May 201 7 .
In accordance with the Order a summary of that compliance report is set out below MandS believes that it has complied in full with GSCOP and the Order during the relevant period.
No formal disputes have arisen during the reporting period.
Two allegations regarding potential breaches of GSCOP were raised by suppliers during the relevant period.
Neither is being pursued and both are considered closed by MandS.
TOTAL GLOBAL MandS GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS 201617 The disclosures required by law and additional information relating to the Groups greenhouse gas emissions are included in the table below.
For full details of calculations and performance against our 200607 voluntary baseline see the 201 7 Plan A Report.
000 tonnes 000 tonnes % change Direct emissions scope 1  185 1 68  10 Indirect emissions from energy scope 2 293 340 14 Total statutory emissions scope 1 and 2 478 508 6 Transport energy TandD waste and travel emissions scope 3 48 59 19 Total grosslocationbased emissions 526 567 7 Carbon intensity measure per 1000 sq ft of sales oor 26 30 13 Green tariff s and biomethane procured 305 302 1 Remaining marketbased emissions 221 265 17 Carbon off sets 221 265 1 7 Total net operational emissions 00 Level Emissions are from operationally controlled activities in accordance with WRIWBCSD GHG Reporting Protocols Revised edition and 201 4 Scope 2 Guidance using 201 5 DEFRADECC conversion factors.
201 31 4 is the mandatory baseline year.
As these emissions account for less than 10% of MandSs total carbon footprint we also engage with suppliers and customers to address the most signi cant sources.
OTHER DISCLOSURES CONTINUED 83 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS POLITICAL DONATIONS The Company did not make any political donations or incur any political expenditure during the year ended 1 April 201 7 .
MandS has a policy of not making donations to political organisations or independent election candidates or incurring political expenditure anywhere in the world as de ned in the Political Parties Elections and Referendums Act 2000.
GOING CONCERN In adopting the going concern basis for preparing the  nancial statements the directors have considered the business activities as set out on pages 2 to 25 as well as the Groups principal risks and uncertainties as set out on pages 32 and 33.
Based on the Groups cash  ow forecasts and projections the Board is satis ed that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its facilities for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Board considers it appropriate for the Group to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its nancial statements.
See note 20 to the Financial Statements for more information on our Facilities LONGTERM VIABILITY STATEMENT The directors have assessed the prospects of the Company over a threeyear period to 28 March 2020.
This has taken into account the business model strategic aims risk appetite and principal risks and uncertainties along with the Companys current  nancial position.
Based on this assessment the directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period under review.
See our approach to assessing longterm viability on p31
Resolutions to reappoint Deloitte LLP as auditor of the Company and to authorise the Audit Committee to determine its remuneration will be proposed at the 201 7 AGM.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The AGM of Marks and Spencer Group plc will be held at Wembley Stadium Wembley London on 1 1 July 201 7 at 1 1am.
The
Notice of Meeting is given together with explanatory notes in the Performance Overview booklet which accompanies this report.
DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Board is of the view that the Annual Report should be truly representative of the year and provide shareholders with the information necessary to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
This cannot be achieved by merely reviewing the  nal document at the end of the preparation process.
The Board ensured that its requirements were clearly communicated from the outset to each of the departments involved in the production of the Annual Report.
The Board has advised that the narrative reports should contain the key information needed by investors and other users of the report and should avoid being promotional in nature.
Furthermore the narrative reports in the front and the accounting information in the back of the report should be consistent and the teams involved in its production work closely together to achieve this.
For an independent opinion the Board also requested the Audit Committee review the Annual Report and provide feedback.
The Committees opinion on whether the report is fair balanced and understandable is on page 50.
The directors are also responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Remuneration Report and Policy and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare nancial statements for each  nancial year.
Under that law the directors have prepared the Group and Company  nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Under company law the directors must not approve the  nancial statements unless they are satis ed that they give a true and fair view of the state of aff airs of the Group and the Company and of the pro t or loss of the Group and the Company for that period.
In preparing these nancial statements the directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently.
Make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent.
State whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the EU have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the  nancial statements.
Prepare the  nancial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are suffi cient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose at any time and with reasonable accuracy the  nancial position of the Company and the Group and to enable them to ensure that the  nancial statements and the Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group  nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of  nancial statements may diff er from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Each of the current directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 36 and 37 of the Annual Report con rms that to the best of their knowledge The Group  nancial statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities  nancial position and pro t or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole.
The Management Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
The Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITORS Each of the persons who are Directors at the time when this Directors Report is approved con rms that so far as heshe is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and that heshe has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken as a director to make himself herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
The Directors Report was approved by a duly authorised committee of the Board of Directors on 23 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by AMANDA MELLOR GROUP SECRETARY London 23 May 201 7 84 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
AUDITORS REPORT
IN OUR OPINION the  nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys aff airs as at 1 April 2017 and of the Groups pro t for the 52 weeks then ended the Group  nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union the parent Company  nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the  nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The  nancial statements comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Company Statements of Financial Position the Consolidated and Company Statements of Changes in Equity the Consolidated and Company Statements of Cash Flows the reconciliation of net cash  ow to movement in net debt note and the related notes 1 to 28 and C1 to C6.
The  nancial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the nancial statements is applicable law and IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company nancial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
OPINION ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC SUMMARY OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH SEPARATE OPINION IN RELATION TO IFRS AS ISSUED BY THE IASB As explained in note 1 to the  nancial statements in addition to complying with its legal obligation to apply IFRS as adopted by the European Union the Group has also applied IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
In our opinion the Group  nancial statements comply with IFRS as issued by the IASB.
KEY RISKS The key risks that we identi ed in the current year were Accounting for exit costs of certain of the wholly owned international businesses Presentation of adjusted performance measures of the  nancial statements Impairment of UK store assets UK Clothing and Home inventory provision Retirement bene ts Manual adjustments to reported revenue Accounting for supplier rebates The description of risks below should be read in conjunction with the signi cant issues considered by the Audit Committee discussed on pages 50 and 51.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the  nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Within this report any new risks are identi ed with   any risks which are the same as the prior year identi ed with and any risks which have increased compared with the prior year are identi ed with .
MATERIALITY
We determined materiality for the Group to be 24.5 million 2016 30 million based on a calculation of 5% of pro t before tax adjusted for certain adjusted items due to the nature and signi cance of these adjusted items.
SCOPING
We performed a full scope audit on six components of the business representing 97% of the Groups revenue 89% of the Groups pro t before tax and 85% of the Groups net assets.
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN OUR
Our audit approach is consistent with the previous year with the exception of We have included an additional risk in respect of the accounting for the exit costs of certain of the wholly owned international businesses given the signi cance of the charge incurred during the year and the level of estimation uncertainty and Specific audit procedures were performed on certain signi cant balances for China and analytical review procedures were completed for Greece in the previous year these components were subject to full audits.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ACCOUNTING FOR THE EXIT COSTS OF CERTAIN OF THE WHOLLY OWNED INTERNATIONAL BUSINESSES RISK DESCRIPTION As set out on page 10 of the Strategic Report management announced their proposal to close 53 stores across 10 international markets over the period from November 2016 to October 201 7 .
The Group has recognised a cost of 1 3 1 million in the year in respect of exit costs which is reported as an adjusted item in the Groups alternative performance measures.
When calculating the exit costs management has estimated future settlement and exit costs where these are not yet known.
The costs recognised in the period primarily relate to Property exit costs estimation uncertainty arises in managements assessment of likely exit costs where these may diff er from the contracted future obligations under lease agreements.
Staff restructuring costs in certain territories estimation uncertainty arises in the application of local staff restructuring and redundancy laws where there are a range of possible outcomes dependent on factors outside the groups control.
Further detail of these estimates are included in the sources of estimation uncertainty disclosure in note 1.
Given the magnitude of the exit costs and the level of estimation uncertainty we have directed a signi cant level of our senior audit resource to assessing the valuation of the costs recorded during the year.
HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We have evaluated the assumptions applied in calculating the charge for the year and where possible agreed inputs to the cost calculations to supporting factual evidence.
Our audit eff ort was focussed on the two key sources of estimation uncertainty described above.
Property exit costs we obtained an understanding of managements assumptions in deriving estimated exit costs for a sample of properties that are being closed assessing these in the context of the possible maximum obligations under the various lease arrangements.
This included meeting with internal property experts reviewing lease agreements and any correspondence with landlords consulting with our own property experts in certain local markets and reviewing the actual settlements for stores where the exit negotiations had concluded.
Staff restructuring costs we evaluated the calculations for redundancy payments agreeing the methodology applied to local laws and regulations for all signi cant countries.
We tested the accuracy of the underlying data in these calculations on a sample basis.
Where a range of possible outcomes exists we performed a sensitivity analysis on the key inputs to the valuation model and consulted with our local experts in those countries to validate key assumptions.
Key observations The outcome of future exit negotiations and other future events gives rise to a source of estimation uncertainty.
We consider the restructuring charge recorded in the year to have been appropriately calculated.
We have reviewed the disclosure in note 1 and consider it to be appropriate.
As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 1 to the  nancial statements and the directors statement on the longerterm viability of the Group contained within the Other disclosures section on page 3 1.
We have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors con rmation on page 30 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages 3233 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors statement in note 1 to the nancial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identi cation of any material uncertainties to the groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the  nancial statements the directors explanation on page 3 1 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary quali cations or assumptions.
We agreed with the directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups ability to continue as a going concern.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT GOING CONCERN AND THE DIRECTORS ASSESSMENT OF THE PRINCIPAL RISKS THAT WOULD THREATEN THE SOLVENCY OR LIQUIDITY OF THE GROUP MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
RISK
PRESENTATION OF ADJUSTED PERFORMANCE METRICS RISK DESCRIPTION The presentation of income and costs within adjusted measures to derive adjusted pro t before tax under IFRS is judgemental with IFRS only requiring the separate presentation of material items.
Judgement is exercised by management in determining the classi cation of items as adjusted.
In the Groups reported results signi cant adjustments have been made to statutory pro t before tax of 1 76 million to derive adjusted pro t before tax of 614 million.
Explanations of each adjustment are set out in notes 1 and 5 to the  nancial statements and are summarised in the graphic to the right tel800
PBT
Legal settlements
MandS
Bank
UK organisational restructure
Pensions
UK store estate review UK Store impairments
Exit Costs
PBT
In calculating the reported adjusted measures there are two risks which may result in the adjusted pro t measure being misstated and therefore not being reliable to users of the  nancial statements items may be included in the adjustments inappropriately distorting the reported adjusted earnings and items may be omitted from the adjustments which are signi cant in nature andor quantum to the reported adjusted earnings.
HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We evaluated the appropriateness of the inclusion of items both individually and in aggregate within adjusted items including assessing the consistency of items included year on year and ensuring adherence to IFRS requirements and latest Financial Reporting Council FRC guidance.
We also agreed these items to supporting evidence.
We assessed all items either highlighted by management or identi ed through the course of our audit which were regarded as signi cant in nature andor quantum but included within adjusted pro t to ensure that these are not material either individually or in aggregate.
For all adjustments recorded in calculating pro ts before adjusted items we discussed the appropriateness of the item with the Audit Committee and any disclosure considerations.
Key observations We are satis ed that the items excluded from pro t before adjusted items and the related disclosure of these items in the nancial statements are appropriate.
RISK
IMPAIRMENT OF UK STORE ASSETS RISK DESCRIPTION On 8 November 2016 the Group announced that a full review of the UK store estate was to be performed.
As a result we consider the risk of impairment of UK store assets has increased due to the impact of decisions resulting from the store review.
In addition continuing economic uncertainty depreciation of sterling increases in business rates the introduction of the National Living Wage and the cost of the Apprenticeship Levy impact the trading performance of the UK store estate.
As described in the Accounting Policies in note 1 and in note 15 to the Financial Statements the Group held 4838 million 2016 5027 million of property plant and equipment at 1 April 201 7 .
Included within this value are assets which relate to UK Stores and in light of the UK store portfolio review and trading performance in certain stores there is a risk that the assets held in and associated with each store are not recoverable.
Management has performed a full impairment assessment for all stores other than those within their shelter period see below to determine if the carrying value of these UK assets is supported.
This assessment has included where appropriate the Groups ongoing strategic review of the UK store estate as described on page 10 of the Strategic Report.
As a result a total charge of 101 million has been recorded in respect of impairments and closure provisions.
When a review for impairment is conducted the recoverable amount is determined based on value in use calculations which rely on the directors assumptions and estimates of future trading performance.
The key assumptions applied by the directors in the impairment reviews are forecast periods in the context of strategic decisions made to exit a location future revenue growth discount rates gross margin and store costs including the impact of the National Living Wage.
The directors consider that each retail store constitutes its own cash generating unit CGU with the exception of the outlet stores which are used to clear old season Clothing and Home inventories at a discount.
The outlet stores are considered to represent one CGU in aggregate and strategic stores are evaluated as part of a countrywide impairment review.
The groups accounting policy sets out a relevant shelter period for new stores to be taken into account when assessing indicators of impairment during initial years of trading to enable the store to establish itself in the market.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT CONTINUED ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
IMPAIRMENT OF UK STORE ASSETS
HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We considered the appropriateness of the methodology applied by the directors in calculating the impairment charges and the judgements applied in determining the CGUs of the business.
In addition we assessed the design and implementation of controls in respect of the impairment review process and considered the adequacy of disclosures made in the nancial statements.
We assessed the impairment models and calculations by checking the mechanical accuracy of the impairment models assessing the discount rates applied to the impairment reviews with support from our internal valuations specialist and comparing the rates to our internal benchmark data comparing forecast growth rates to economic data and evaluating the information included in the impairment models through our knowledge of the business gained through reviewing trading plans strategic initiatives minutes of property board and investment committee meetings and meeting with regional store managers and senior trading managers from key product categories and our retail industry knowledge.
We assessed the appropriateness of the shelter period for each store opened within that time frame and compared the original investment case for the store against its current trading performance.
Where stores were trading signi cantly below the original case we considered the evidence available to support future improvements in performance speci cally by assessing the trading plans and actions being taken on an individual store basis.
Key observations We assessed the level of impairment recorded in respect of the UK business and are satis ed that the judgements applied by management and the level of impairments recorded in the year are appropriate.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT CONTINUED
UK CLOTHING and HOME INVENTORY
RISK DESCRIPTION At 1 April 201 7 the Group held UK Clothing and Home inventories of 541 million 2016 583 million.
As described in the Accounting Policies in note 1 to the Financial Statements inventories are carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
As a result the directors apply judgement in determining the appropriate provisions for obsolete stock based upon a detailed analysis of old season inventory net realisable value below cost based upon plans for inventory to go into sale and stock loss based upon the run rate from recent inventory counts.
We consider the assessment of inventory provisions within UK Clothing and Home to require the most judgement based on the level of inventory held and recent trading performance.
HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We obtained assurance over the appropriateness of managements assumptions applied in calculating the value of the inventory provisions by checking the eff ectiveness of key inventory controls operating across the UK business including those at 1 2 distribution centres and 1 3 retail stores attending inventory counts at 1 2 distribution centres and 1 3 retail stores checking for a sample of individual products that invoiced costs have been correctly recorded and that the allocation of directly attributable costs has been correctly calculated comparing the net realisable value obtained through a detailed review of sales subsequent to the yearend using audit analytics to the cost price of inventories to check for completeness of the associated provision performing audit analytics on stock holding and movement data to identify product lines with indicators of low stock turn or signi cant levels of aged stock and meeting with buyers to validate the assumptions applied by management compared to the current purchasing strategy and ranging plans.
We evaluated consumer trends identi ed through benchmarking and external market data to challenge the assumptions underlying sales forecasts by category to assess the completeness of provisions for obsolescence.
Key observations The results of our testing were satisfactory and we concur that the level of UK inventory provisions is appropriate.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
RISK
RETIREMENT BENEFITS RISK DESCRIPTION As described in the Accounting Policies in note 1 and in note 1 1 to the Financial Statements the Group has a de ned bene t pension plan for its UK employees which is closed to new entrants and a funded de ned bene t pension scheme in the Republic of Ireland where no new bene ts have accrued since 31 October 2013 therefore the key risk relates to the UK scheme only.
At 1 April 2017 the Group recorded a net retirement bene t asset of 702 million 2016 833 million being the net of scheme assets of 10135 million 2016 8515 million scheme liabilities of 9433 million 2016 7682 million and unfunded retirement bene ts of 9 million 2016 9 million.
The Group net retirement bene t asset has shown signi cant volatility as the valuation is sensitive to changes in key assumptions such as the discount rate in ation and mortality estimates.
In addition curtailment charges have been recognised in relation to the closure of the de ned bene t pension scheme which occurred during the year to future accrual.
The setting of these assumptions is complex and an area of signi cant judgement changes in any of these assumptions can lead to a material movement in the net surplus.
The increasedecrease in scheme surplus caused by a change in each of the key assumptions is set out below A decrease in the discount rate of 0.25% 70 90 A decrease in the in ation rate of 0.25% 20 20 A decrease in the average life expectancy of one year 370 300 HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We evaluated the directors assessment of the assumptions made in the valuation of the scheme liabilities and evaluated the information contained within the actuarial valuation reports for each scheme.
We assessed the design and implementation of controls in respect of the pension scheme valuation process.
We tested the membership census data used in the valuation of the schemes and with support from our own actuarial specialists we considered the process applied by the Groups actuaries the scope of the valuation performed and the key assumptions applied and evaluated their expertise.
We benchmarked and performed a sensitivity analysis on the key variables in the valuation model including in ation rates mortality rates and discount rates.
We assessed the accounting treatment applied to the schemes closure to future accrual and the resulting curtailment charge.
Key observations We are satis ed that all assumptions applied in respect of the valuation of the scheme assets and liabilities are appropriate.
RISK
MANUAL ADJUSTMENTS TO REPORTED REVENUE RISK DESCRIPTION As described in the Accounting Policies in note 1 to the Financial Statements the groups revenue recognition policies require the directors to make a number of adjustments and estimates in determining the reported revenue for the period.
The most signi cant adjustments are gift cards vouchers and loyalty schemes the directors apply an expected redemption rate to the total value of gift cards vouchers and loyalty points in issue based on historic trends. be reversed in the next  nancial period.
The directors apply judgement in determining the provision required for returns based on actual sales data and recent product return rates.
Returns from online sales are commonly at a higher level than traditional store retailing resulting in this judgement becoming more signi cant in determining the level of provision required.
HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We considered each revenueimpacting manual adjustment individually and assessed the appropriateness of the assumptions and judgements applied to each.
We assessed the design and implementation of controls in respect of these revenue judgements in addition to testing the eff ectiveness of key revenue controls operating across the UK business.
For the key assumptions used in the gift card and voucher and loyalty scheme provisions we assessed the historic rates of redemption and compared these to the directors judgements.
We assessed the appropriateness of the methodology and inputs used in calculating the returns provision.
Key observations We are satis ed that the key assumptions applied in calculating the returns gift card voucher and loyalty scheme provisions are appropriate.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT CONTINUED ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ACCOUNTING FOR SUPPLIER REBATES RISK DESCRIPTION As described in the Accounting Policies in note 1 and note 1 7 to the Financial Statements the Group recognises a reduction in cost of sales as a result of amounts receivable from suppliers primarily comprising contributions in relation to promotions in the Food business strategic volume moves and some annual volumebased rebates.
The majority of these contributions tend to be small in unit value but high in volume and span relatively short periods of time although these can be across the  nancial year end.
There are a small number of larger arrangements which relate to multiyear periods.
Judgement is required in determining the period over which the reduction in cost of sales should be recognised requiring both a detailed understanding of the contractual arrangements themselves as well as complete and accurate source data to apply the arrangements to.
HOW THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT RESPONDED TO THE RISK We tested that amounts recognised were accurate and recorded in the correct period based on the contractual performance obligations by agreeing a sample to individual supplier agreements.
We also conducted interviews with a range of buyers and trading managers.
In addition we circularised a sample of 15 suppliers to test whether the arrangements recorded were complete.
We performed revenue and margin analysis to understand detailed trends by product category in order to identify apparent anomalies which may indicate potential rebate income errors.
Such anomalies were investigated to assess whether they were indicative of a mis application of contractual terms or other calculation errors.
We also tested a sample of rebates recognised pre and postyear end to test the completeness and accuracy of accrued supplier income at 1 April 201 7 .
Key observations The results of our testing were satisfactory.
We consider the disclosure given around supplier rebates to provide an accurate understanding of the types of rebate income received and the impact on the statement of  nancial position as at 1 April 201 7 .
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT CONTINUED We determined materiality for the group to be 24.5 million.
We reported all audit diff erences in excess of 1m.
We de ne materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the  nancial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or in uenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 24.5 million 2016 30 million based on a calculation of 5% of pro t before tax adjusted for certain adjusted items due to the nature and signi cance of these items.
The adjusted pro t used in our determination of materiality was 479 million which is 301 million higher than statutory pro t before tax of 1 76 million.
The items we excluded from our determination are listed below and explained further in note 5 to the  nancial statements Changes to pay and pensions 156 million International store closures and impairments  1 3 1 million Strategic programmes  UK organisation and logistics  14 million The materiality applied by the component auditors see below ranged from 2.5 million to 22.5 million 2016 2 million to 27 million depending on the scale of the components operations and our assessment of risks speci c to each location.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit diff erences in excess of 1 million 2016 1 million as well as diff erences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identi ed when assessing the overall presentation of the  nancial statements.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY
PBT
Group materiality Group materiality
2.5m to 22.5m Audit Committee reporting threshold 1m MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS We performed a full scope audit on six components representing 97% of the Groups revenue 89% of the Groups pro t before tax and 85% of the Groups net assets.
We continue to adopt a rotational approach to visiting the signi cant locations of the Groups activities.
Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the group level.
A summary of the Groups retail operations is set out below including the UK business.
Number of countries 2017 2016 Wholly owned retail businesses 12 17 Retail joint ventures 2 2 Retail franchise operations 31 33 Website only territories 7 7 Total 52 59 includes two countries where wholly owned businesses also operate Based on our assessment we focused our Group audit scope primarily on the audit work at six wholly owned locations United Kingdom Republic of Ireland Czech Republic France China and Hong Kong and the joint venture in India.
All of these were subject to a full audit with the exception of China where speci c audit procedures were performed on certain signi cant balances.
In the prior year Greece was subject to a full audit however is subject to analytical review procedures in the current year following changes to the Groups international strategy.
Analytical review procedures were completed for the current year for those locations not subject to full audit procedures.
These components were selected to provide an appropriate basis for undertaking audit work to address the risks of material misstatement identi ed above.
All other wholly owned and joint venture businesses were subject to analytical review procedures.
Whilst we audit the revenues received by the Group from franchise operations which ac c oun t for 3 %   3 %  of t he Gr oup s revenue we do not audit the underlying franchise operations as part of our Group audit.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to con rm our conclusion that there were no signi cant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated  nancial information of the remaining components not subject to a full audit.
REVENUE PROFIT BEFORE TAX NET ASSETS Full audit Specic audit procedures
Revenue
Pro t
Tax
Net
Assets
Full audit 97% 89% 85% Speci c audit procedures 2% 7% 8% Analytical procedures 1% 4% 7% The most signi cant component of the Group is its retail business in the United Kingdom which accounts for 89% 2016 90% of the Groups reported revenue of 10622 million and generates operating pro t of 253 million 2016 627 million which is off set by operating losses from the international segment resulting in a Group operating pro t of 253 million 2016 584 million.
The Group audit team performs the audit of the UK business without the involvement of a component team.
During the course of our audit the Group audit team conducted 1 2 distribution centre and 1 3 retail store visits in the UK to understand the current trading performance and at certain locations performed tests of internal controls and validated levels of inventory held.
We operate a programme of planned visits to signi cant locations so that a senior member of the Group audit team visits each of the components subject to a full audit or speci c audit procedures at least once every two years and the most signi cant of them at least once a year.
In addition to our programme of planned visits we send detailed instructions to our component audit teams include them in our team brie ngs discuss their risk assessment attend closing meetings and review their audit working papers.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the nancial year for which the  nancial statements are prepared is consistent with the  nancial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and the company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identi ed any material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT OPINION ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 91 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ADEQUACY OF EXPLANATIONS RECEIVED AND ACCOUNTING RECORDS Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company  nancial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Under the Listing Rules we are also required to review part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the companys compliance with certain provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
OUR DUTY TO READ OTHER INFORMATION IN THE ANNUAL REPORT Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited  nancial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the directors statement that they consider the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the Annual Report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We con rm that we have not identi ed any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the nancial statements and for being satis ed that they give a true and fair view.
Our
International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
We also comply with International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are eff ective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and we con rm that we are independent of the Group and we have ful lled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also con rm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the  nancial statements suffi cient to give reasonable assurance that the  nancial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appr opriat e t o the Gr oup s and the Compan y s circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of signi cant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the  nancial statements.
In addition we read all the  nancial and non nancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited  nancial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
IAN WALLER SENIOR STATUTORY AUDITOR FOR AND ON BEHALF OF DELOITTE LLP CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS AND STATUTORY AUDITOR LONDON UNITED KINGDOM 23 May 201 7 MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION RESPECTIVE RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS AND AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE SCOPE OF THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 92 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
52 weeks ended 1 April 2017 53 weeks ended 2 April 2016
Adjusted items
Before adjusted items Adjusted items
Revenue 2 310622.0 10622.0 10555.4  10555.4 Finance income 6 36.2  36.2 21.1  21.1 Finance costs 6 113.0  113.0 1 16.4  1 16.4 Income tax expense 7 122.4 61.7 60.7 118.8 34.4 84.4 Attributable to Owners of the parent 492.8 375.7 117.1 573.3 166.4 406.9 Noncontrolling interests 1.4  1.4 2.5  2.5 Basic earnings per share 830.4p 7.2p 35.0p 24.9p Diluted earnings per share 830.2p 7.2p 34.9p 24.8p
52 weeks ended 1 April 2017 53 weeks ended 2 April 2016 Pro t for the year 115.7 404.4 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassi ed to pro t or loss Remeasurements of retirement bene t schemes 1 1 68.9 346.2 Tax chargecredit on items that will not be reclassi ed 25.3 45.6 Items that will be reclassi ed subsequently to pro t or loss Foreign currency translation diff erences 31.0 7.3 Cash  ow hedges and net investment hedges fair value movements recognised in other comprehensive income 56.1 30.1 reclassi ed and reported in pro t or loss 72.4 22.1 amount recognised in inventories 20.1 5.9 Tax credit on cash  ow hedges and net investment hedges 4.1 6.5 Other comprehensive expenseincome for the year net of tax 44.9 268.1 Total comprehensive income for the year 70.8 672.5 Attributable to Owners of the parent 72.2 675.0 Noncontrolling interests 1.4 2.5 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
As at 1 April 2017 As at 2 April 2016
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 14 709.0 802.8 Property plant and equipment 15 4837.8 5027.1 Investment property 15.5 15.5 Investment in joint ventures 7.0 6.9 Other  nancial assets 16 3.0 3.0 Retirement bene t asset 11 706.0 851.0 Trade and other receivables 17 234.1 234.7 Derivative  nancial instruments 21 56.8 74.0 Deferred tax assets 23 6569.2 701 5.0 Current assets Inventories 758.5 799.9 Other  nancial assets 16 14.5 19.1 Trade and other receivables 17 318.6 321.1 Derivative  nancial instruments 21 163.1 72.1 Current tax assets  1.6 Cash and cash equivalents 18 468.6 247 .6 1723.3 1461.4 Total assets 8292.5 8476.4
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 19 1553.8 161 7 .7 Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme 1 2 71.9 71.9 Borrowings and other  nancial liabilities 20 518.0 297.5 Derivative  nancial instruments 21 10.5 28.5 Provisions 22 147.2 14.0 Current tax liabilities 66.6 75.2 2368.0 2104.8 Noncurrent liabilities Retirement bene t de cit 11 13.2 26.9 Trade and other payables 19 328.5 353.0 Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme 1 2 324.6 383.8 Borrowings and other  nancial liabilities 20 1711.7 177 4.7 Derivative  nancial instruments 21 0.8 0.2 Provisions 22 113.5 52.0 Deferred tax liabilities 23 281.8 337 .6 2774.1 2928.2 Total liabilities 5142.1 5033.0 Net assets 3150.4 3443.4
Issued share capital 24 406.2 405.8 Share premium account 416.4 41 1.3 Capital redemption reserve 2210.5 2210.5 Hedging reserve 17.3 32.3 Other reserve 6542.2 6542.2 Retained earnings 6648.1 6927.5 Total shareholders equity 3156.3 3445.2 Noncontrolling interests in equity 5.9 1.8 Total equity 3150.4 3443.4 The  nancial statements were approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 23 May 201 7 .
The  nancial statements also comprise the notes on pages 96 to 1 27 .
Steve Rowe Chief Executive Offi cer Helen Weir Chief Finance Offi cer 94 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
Share premium account
Hedging reserve
Foreign exchange reserve
Total
Non controlling interest
As at 29 March 2015 412.0 392.4 2202.6 64.3 6542.2 12.6 6683.1 3199.6 0.83198.8 Pro tloss for the year       406.9 406.9 2.5 404.4 Other comprehensive expenseincome Foreign currency translation    0.5  7 .8  7 .3  7 .3 Remeasurements of retirement bene t schemes       346.2 346.2  346.2 Tax charge on items that will not be reclassi ed      45.6 45.6  45.6 Cash  ow hedges and net investment hedges fair value movement recognised in other comprehensive income    2 1.8   8.3 30.1   30.1 reclassi ed and reported in pro t or loss amount recognised in inventories    5.9    5.9  5.9 Tax on cash  ow hedges and net investment hedges    6.5    6.5  6.5 Other comprehensive incomeexpense    32.0  7 .8 292.3 268.1  268.1 Total comprehensive incomeexpense    32.0  7 .8 699.2 675.0 2.5 672.5 Transactions with owners Dividends       301.7 301.7  301.7 Transactions with noncontrolling shareholders         1.5 1.5 Shares issued on exercise of employee share options 1.7 1 8.9      20.6  20.6 Purchase of own shares held by employee trusts       10.9 10.9  10.9 Shares purchased in buy back 7 .9  7 .9    1 50.7 1 50.7  1 50.7 Credit for sharebased payments       1 7 .2 1 7 .2  1 7 .2 Deferred tax on share schemes       3.9 3.9  3.9 As at 2 April 2016 405.8 411.3 2210.5 32.3 6542.2 4.86932.3 3445.2 1.83443.4 As at 3 April 2016 405.8 411.3 2210.5 32.3 6542.2 4.86932.3 3445.2 1.83443.4 Pro tloss for the year       117.1 117.1 1.4 115.7 Other comprehensive expenseincome Foreign currency translation    4.3  35.3  31.0  31.0 Remeasurements of retirement bene t schemes       68.9 68.9  68.9 Tax credit on items that will not be reclassi ed       25.3 25.3  25.3 Cash  ow hedges and net investment hedges fair value movement recognised in other comprehensive income   77.7  21.656.1 56.1 reclassi ed and reported in pro t or loss amount recognised in inventories    20.1    20.1  20.1 Tax on cash  ow hedges and net investment hedges    4.1    4.1  4.1 Other comprehensive incomeexpense  15.0  35.365.244.9 44.9 Total comprehensive incomeexpense   15.0  35.3 51.9 72.2 1.4 70.8 Transactions with owners Dividends       377.5 377.5  377.5 Transactions with noncontrolling shareholders      2.72.7 Shares issued on exercise of employee share options 0.4 5.1      5.5  5.5 Purchase of own shares held by employee trusts Credit for sharebased payments       13.5 13.5  13.5 Deferred tax on share schemes       2.6 2.6  2.6 As at 1 April 2017 406.2 416.4 2210.5 17.3 6542.2 30.5 6617.6 3156.3 5.9 3150.4 The Other reserve was originally created as part of the capital restructuring that took place in 2002.
It represents the diff erence between the nominal value of the shares issued prior to the capital reduction by the Company being the carrying value of the investment in Marks and Spencer plc and the share capital share premium and capital redemption reserve of Marks and Spencer plc at the date of the transaction.
Amounts reclassi ed and reported in pro t or loss includes the revaluation of the cross currency swaps off setting the revaluation of the US dollar hedged bonds within  nance costs.
In the prior year  nancial statements the foreign exchange reserve was presented within Retained earnings.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
52 weeks ended 1 April 2017 53 weeks ended 2 April 2016 Cash  ows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 26 1165.7 13 1 1.3 Income tax paid 98.0 99.3 Net cash in ow from operating activities 1067.7 121 2.0 Cash  ows from investing activities Proceeds on property disposals 27.0 30.6 Purchase of property plant and equipment 309.1 363.3 Purchase of intangible assets 101.1 186.8 Reductionpurchase of current  nancial assets 4.6 7.2 Interest received 6.6 6.8 Acquisition of subsidiary  56.2 Net cash used in investing activities 372.0 576.1 Cash  ows from  nancing activities Interest paid 111.2 1 1 3.5 Cash out owin ow from borrowings 32.7 3.1 Repayment of syndicated loan notes 215.3 19.9 Issuance of mediumterm notes 300.0 Decrease in obligations under  nance leases 2.0 2.4 Payment of liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme 57.9 56.0 Equity dividends paid 377.5 301.7 Shares issued on exercise of employee share options 5.5 20.6 Purchase of own shares by employee trust  10.9 Share buy back  150.7 Net cash used in  nancing activities 491.1 63 1.4 Net cash in ow from activities 204.6 4.5 Eff ects of exchange rate changes 5.6 3.7 Opening net cash 196.0 187 .8 Closing net cash 27 406.2 196.0 Includes interest on the partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme.
Notes
52 weeks ended 1 April 2017 53 weeks ended 2 April 2016 Reconciliation of net cash  ow to movement in net debt Opening net debt 2138.3 2223.2 Net cash in ow from activities 204.6 4.5 Decreaseincrease in current  nancial assets 4.6 7.2 Decrease in debt  nancing 7.9 75.2 Exchange and other noncash movements 4.3 2.0 Movement in net debt 203.6 84.9 Closing net debt 27 1934.7 21 38.3 96 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 1 ACCOUNTING POLICIES General information The current  nancial statements are prepared for the 52week period ended 1 April 201 7  whereas the prior  nancial period was the 53 weeks ended 2 April 201 6.
Basis of preparation The  nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations as adopted by the European Union and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
In adopting the going concern basis for preparing the  nancial statements the directors have considered the business activities as set out on pages 1 to 33 including the Groups principal risks and uncertainties as set out on pages 30 to 33.
Based on the Groups cash  ow forecasts and projections the Board is satis ed that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its bank facilities for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its  nancial statements.
The Marks and Spencer Scottish Limited Partnership has taken an exemption under paragraph 7 of the Partnership Accounts Regulations 2008 for the requirement to prepare and deliver nancial statements in accordance with the Companies Act.
New accounting standards adopted by the Group There have been no signi cant changes to accounting under IFRS which have aff ected the Groups results for the current  nancial year.
The only changes to the IFRS IFRS IC interpretations and amendments that are eff ective for the  rst time in this  nancial year and are applicable for the Group are the Annual Improvements to IFRSs 201 2201 4 cycle.
These have not had a material impact on the Group.
New accounting standards in issue but not yet eff ective The following IFRS have been issued but are not yet eff ective IFRS 9 Financial Instruments replaces all phases of the  nancial instruments project and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
The standard is eff ective from periods beginning on or after 1 January 201 8 and introduces new requirements for the classi cation and measurement of  nancial assets and  nancial liabilities a new model for recognising provisions based on expected credit losses and simpli ed hedge accounting by aligning hedge accounting more closely with an entities risk management methodology.
Work is under way to assess the necessary changes to existing IT systems that will be required to aid the Groups implementation of the standard.
The adoption of IFRS 9 is unlikely to have a material impact on the consolidated results of the Group.
Any potential impact of IFRS 9 will be quanti ed in the Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ending 3 1 March 201 8.
IFRS 1 5 Revenue from Contracts with Customers is eff ective for periods beginning on or after 1 January 201 8.
The standard establishes a principles based approach for revenue recognition and is based on the concept of recognising revenue for obligations only when they are satis ed and the control of goods or services is transferred.
It applies to all contracts with customers except those in the scope of other standards.
It replaces the separate models for goods services and construction contracts under the current accounting standards.
The Group has completed an assessment on the impact of IFRS 1 5 and it is expected adoption will not have a material impact on any of the Groups revenue streams.
IFRS 1 6 Leases was issued on 1 3 January 201 6 and is eff ective for periods beginning on or after 1 January 201 9.
Early adoption is permitted if IFRS 1 5 Revenue from Contracts with Customers has also been applied.
IFRS 1 6 is not yet endorsed by the EU.
The standard represents a signi cant change in the accounting and reporting of leases for lessees as it provides a single lessee accounting model.
As such it requires lessees to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases unless the underlying asset has a low value or the lease term is 1 2 months or less.
The standard may also require the capitalisation of a lease element of contracts held by the Group which under the existing accounting standard would not be considered a lease.
Accounting requirements for lessors are substantially unchanged from IAS 1 7 .
The Group has established a working group to assess the impact of the new standard.
Work performed includes assessing the accounting impacts of the change the process of collecting the required data from across the business and the necessary changes to systems and processes.
From work performed to date it is expected implementation of the new standard will have a signi cant impact on the consolidated results of the Group.
On adoption lease agreements will give rise to both a right of use asset and a lease liability for future lease payables.
Depreciation of the right of use asset will be recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis with interest recognised on the lease liability.
This will result in a change to the pro le of the net charge taken to the income statement over the life of the lease.
These charges will replace the lease costs currently charged to the income statement.
The Group continues to assess the full impact of IFRS 1 6 however the impact will greatly depend on the facts and circumstances at the time of adoption and upon transition choices adopted.
It is therefore not yet practicable to provide a reliable estimate of the  nancial impact on the Groups consolidated results.
Alternative Performance Measures In reporting  nancial information the Group presents alternative performance measures APMs which are not de ned or speci ed under the requirements of IFRS.
The Group believes that these APMs which are not considered to be a substitute for or superior to IFRS measures provide stakeholders with additional helpful information on the performance of the business.
The APMs are consistent with how the business performance is planned and reported within the internal management reporting to the Board and Operating Committee.
Some of these measures are also used for the purpose of setting remuneration targets.
The key APMs that the Group uses include likeforlike sales gross margin pro t before tax and adjusted items adjusted earnings per share net debt free cash  ow and return on capital employed.
Each of these APMs and others used by the Group are set out in the Glossary on pages 1 33 and 1 34 including explanations of how they are calculated and how they can be reconciled to a statutory measure where relevant.
The Group reports some  nancial measures primarily International sales on both a reported and constant currency basis.
The constant currency basis which is an APM retranslates the previous year revenues at the average actual periodic exchange rates used in the current  nancial year.
This measure is presented as a means of eliminating the eff ects of exchange rate  uctuations on the year onyear reported results.
The Group makes certain adjustments to the statutory pro t measures in order to derive many of these APMs.
The Groups policy is to exclude items that are considered to be signi cant in both nature andor quantum and where treatment as an adjusted item provides stakeholders with additional useful information to assess the yearonyear trading performance of the Group.
On this basis the following items were included within adjusted items for the 52week period ended 1 April 201 7 Signi cant pension charges arising as a result of changes to the de ned bene t schemes rules and practices 97 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 1 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Signi cant restructuring costs and other associated costs arising from signi cant strategy changes that are not considered by the Group to be part of the normal operating costs of the business.
Net gains and losses on the disposal of properties or impairments of properties where a commitment to close has been demonstrated.
Impairment charges and provisions that are considered to be signi cant in nature andor value to the trading performance of the business.
Adjustments to income from MandS Bank due to a provision recognised by MandS Bank for the cost of providing redress to customers in respect of possible misselling of MandS Bank nancial products.
Various legal settlements that are signi cant in value to the results of the Group or to a segment.
Refer to note 5 for a summary of the adjusted items.
A summary of the Companys and the Groups accounting policies is given below Accounting convention The  nancial statements are drawn up on the historical cost basis of accounting as modi ed by  nancial assets and  nancial liabilities including derivative instruments  at fair value through pro t and loss.
Basis of consolidation The Group  nancial statements incorporate the  nancial statements of Marks and Spencer Group plc and all its subsidiaries made up to the period end date.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the  nancial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used in line with those used by the Group.
Subsidiaries
Subsidiary undertakings are all entities including special purpose entities over which the Group has the power to govern the  nancial and operating policies.
This power is generally accompanied by the Group having a shareholding of more than one half of the voting rights.
Subsidiary undertakings acquired during the year are recorded using the acquisition method of accounting and their results are included from the date of acquisition.
The separable net assets including property plant and equipment and intangible assets of the newly acquired subsidiary undertakings are incorporated into the consolidated  nancial statements on the basis of the fair value as at the eff ective date of control.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Revenue
Revenue comprises sales of goods to customers outside the Group less an appropriate deduction for actual and expected returns discounts and loyalty scheme vouchers and is stated net of value added tax and other sales taxes.
Revenue is recognised when goods are delivered to our franchise partners or the customer and the signi cant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer.
Supplier income In line with industry practice the Group enters into agreements with suppliers to share the costs and bene ts of promotional activity and volume growth.
The Group receives income from its suppliers based on speci c agreements in place.
This supplier income received is recognised as a deduction from cost of sales based on the entitlement that has been earned up to the balance sheet date for each relevant supplier agreement.
Marketing contributions equipment hire and other nonjudgemental xed rate supplier charges are not included in the Groups de nition of supplier income.
The types of supplier income recognised by the Group and the associated recognition policies are
Promotional contribution Includes supplier contributions to promotional giveaways and preagreed contributions to annual spend and save activity.
Income is recognised as a deduction to cost of sales over the relevant promotional period.
Income is calculated and invoiced at the end of the promotional period based on actual sales or according to  xed contribution arrangements.
Contributions earned but not invoiced are accrued at the end of the relevant period.
B.
Volumebased rebates Includes annual growth incentives seasonal contributions and contributions to share economies of scale resulting from moving product supply.
Annual growth incentives are calculated and invoiced at the end of the  nancial year once earned based on  xed percentage growth targets agreed for each supplier at the beginning of the year.
They are recognised as a reduction in cost of sales in the year to which they relate.
Other volumebased rebates are agreed with the supplier and spread over the relevant seasoncontract period to which they relate.
Contributions earned but not invoiced are accrued at the end of the relevant period.
Uncollected supplier income at the balance sheet date is classi ed within the  nancial statements as follows
Trade and other payables The majority of income due from suppliers is netted against amounts owed to that supplier as the Group has the right to off set these balances.
As such the outstanding supplier income within trade and other payables at year end is immaterial.
B.
Trade and other receivables Supplier income that has been earned but not invoiced at the balance sheet date is recognised in trade and other receivables and primarily relates to volumebased rebates that run up to the period end.
In order to provide users of the accounts with greater understanding in this area additional balance sheet disclosure is provided in note 1 7 to the  nancial statements.
Dividends
Final dividends are recorded in the  nancial statements in the period in which they are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recorded in the period in which they are approved and paid.
Pensions
Funded pension plans are in place for the Groups UK employees and some employees overseas.
For de ned bene t pension schemes the diff erence between the fair value of the assets and the present value of the de ned bene t obligation is recognised as an asset or liability in the statement of nancial position.
The de ned bene t obligation is actuarially calculated using the projected unit credit method.
The service cost of providing retirement bene ts to employees during the year together with the cost of any curtailment is charged to operating pro t in the year.
The net interest cost on the net retirement bene t assetliability is calculated by applying the discount rate measured at the beginning of the year to the net de ned bene t assetliability and is included as a single net amount in  nance income.
Remeasurements being actuarial gains and losses together with the diff erence between actual investment returns and the return implied by the net interest cost are recognised immediately in the statement of comprehensive income.
Payments to de ned contribution retirement bene t schemes are charged as an expense on an accruals basis.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 1 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Intangible assets
Goodwill Goodwill arising on consolidation represents the excess of the consideration paid and the amount of any non controlling interest in the acquiree over the fair value of the identi able assets and liabilities including intangible assets of the acquired entity at the date of the acquisition.
Goodwill is recognised as an asset and assessed for impairment annually or as triggering events occur.
Any impairment in value is recognised within the income statement.
B.
Brands Acquired brand values are held on the statement of nancial position initially at cost.
De nite life intangibles are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives.
Inde nite life intangibles are tested for impairment annually or as triggering events occur.
Any impairment in value is recognised within the income statement.
C.
Software intangibles Where computer software is not an integral part of a related item of computer hardware the software is treated as an intangible asset.
Capitalised software costs include external direct costs of goods and services as well as internal payrollrelated costs for employees who are directly associated with the project.
Capitalised software development costs are amortised on a straightline basis over their expected economic lives normally between three and ten years.
Computer software under development is held at cost less any recognised impairment loss.
Any impairment in value is recognised within the income statement.
Property plant and equipment The Groups policy is to state property plant and equipment at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Property is not revalued for accounting purposes.
Assets in the course of construction are held at cost less any recognised impairment loss.
Cost includes professional fees and for qualifying assets borrowing costs.
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost of tangible non current assets including investment properties less estimated residual values on a straight line basis as follows Freehold land  not depreciated.
Freehold and leasehold buildings with a remaining lease term over 50 years  depreciated to their residual value over their estimated remaining economic lives.
Leasehold buildings with a remaining lease term of less than years  depreciated over the remaining period of the lease.
Fixtures  ttings and equipment  3 to 25 years according to the estimated economic life of the asset.
Residual values and useful economic lives are reviewed annually.
Depreciation is charged on all additions to or disposals of depreciating assets in the year of purchase or disposal.
Any impairment in value is recognised within the income statement.
Leasing
Where assets are  nanced by leasing agreements and the risks and rewards are substantially transferred to the Group  nance leases the assets are treated as if they had been purchased outright and the corresponding liability to the leasing company is included as an obligation under  nance leases.
Depreciation on leased assets is charged to the income statement on the same basis as owned assets unless the term of the lease is shorter.
Leasing payments are treated as consisting of capital and interest elements and the interest is charged to the income statement.
All other leases are operating leases and the costs in respect of operating leases are charged on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The value of any lease incentive received to take on an operating lease for example a rentfree period is recognised as deferred income and is released over the life of the lease.
Leasehold prepayments Payments made to acquire leasehold land and buildings are included in prepayments at cost and are amortised over the life of the lease.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents includes shortterm deposits with banks and other  nancial institutions with an initial maturity of three months or less and credit card payments received within 48 hours.
Inventories
Inventories are valued on a weighted average cost basis and carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost includes all direct expenditure and other attributable costs incurred in bringing inventories to their present location and condition.
All inventories are  nished goods.
Certain purchases of inventories may be subject to cash  ow hedges for foreign exchange risk.
The Group applies a basis adjustment for those purchases in a way that the cost is initially established by reference to the hedged exchange rate and not the spot rate at the day of purchase.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions are measured at the best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the end of the reporting period and are discounted to present value where the eff ect is material.
Sharebased payments The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees.
A fair value for the equitysettled share awards is measured at the date of grant.
The Group measures the fair value of each award using the BlackScholes model where appropriate.
The fair value of each award is recognised as an expense over the vesting period on a straightline basis after allowing for an estimate of the share awards that will eventually vest.
The level of vesting is reviewed at each reporting period and the charge is adjusted to re ect actual and estimated levels of vesting.
Foreign currencies The results of overseas subsidiaries are translated at the weighted average of monthly exchange rates for revenue and pro ts.
The statements of  nancial position of overseas subsidiaries are translated at year end exchange rates.
The resulting exchange diff erences are booked into reserves and reported in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities held at the end of the reporting period are translated at the closing balance sheet rate.
The resulting exchange gain or loss is recognised within the income statement except when deferred in other comprehensive income as qualifying cash  ow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges.
Taxation
Tax expense comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity in which case the related tax is recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Provision is made for uncertain tax positions when it is considered probable that there will be a future out ow of funds to a tax authority.
The provision is calculated using the single best estimate where that outcome is more likely than not and a weighted average probability in other circumstances.
The position is reviewed on an ongoing basis to ensure appropriate provision is made for each known tax risk.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 1 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Deferred tax is accounted for using a temporary diff erence approach and is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on temporary diff erences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the statement of  nancial position and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable pro t.
Deferred tax is calculated based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities applying tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted at the end of the reporting period.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary diff erences.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary diff erences arising on investments in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures except where the reversal of the temporary diff erence can be controlled by the Group and it is probable that the diff erence will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax liabilities are not recognised on temporary diff erences that arise from goodwill which is not deductible for tax purposes.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent it is probable that taxable pro ts will be available against which the deductible temporary diff erences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at the end of each reporting period and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that suffi cient taxable pro ts will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are not recognised in respect of temporary diff erences that arise on initial recognition of assets and liabilities acquired other than in a business combination.
Financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities are recognised in the Groups statement of  nancial position when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
A.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are recorded initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Subsequently this results in their recognition at nominal value less any allowance for any doubtful debts.
B.
Other  nancial assets Other  nancial assets consist of investments in debt and equity securities and shortterm investments and are classi ed as either availableforsale or fair value through pro t and loss.
Availableforsale  nancial assets are initially measured at fair value including transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition of the  nancial asset.
Financial assets held at fair value through pro t and loss are initially recognised at fair value and transaction costs are expensed.
Where securities are designated as fair value through pro t and loss gains and losses arising from changes in fair value are included in the income statement for the period.
For availableforsale investments gains or losses arising from changes in fair value are recognised in other comprehensive income until the security is disposed of or is determined to be impaired at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in other comprehensive income is included in the income statement for the period.
Equity investments that do not have a quoted market price in an active market and whose fair value cannot be reliably measured by other means are held at cost.
C.
Classi cation of  nancial liabilities and equity Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classi ed according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
D.
Bank borrowings Interestbearing bank loans and overdrafts are initially recorded at fair value which equals the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
They are subsequently held at amortised cost.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are accounted for using an eff ective interest rate method and are added to the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
E.
Loan notes Longterm loans are initially measured at fair value net of direct issue costs and are subsequently held at amortised cost unless the loan is designated in a hedge relationship in which case hedge accounting treatment will apply.
F.
Trade payables Trade payables are recorded initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Generally this results in their recognition at their nominal value.
G.
Equity instruments Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the consideration received net of direct issue costs.
Derivative  nancial instruments and hedging activities The Group primarily uses interest rate swaps crosscurrency swaps and forward foreign currency contracts to manage its exposures to  uctuations in interest rates and foreign exchange rates.
These instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the trade date and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value at the end of the reporting period.
The method of recognising the resulting gain or loss is dependent on whether the derivative is designated as a hedging instrument and the nature of the item being hedged.
The Group designates certain hedging derivatives as either A hedge of a highly probable forecast transaction or change in the cash  ows of a recognised asset or liability a cash  ow hedge.
A hedge of the exposure to change in the fair value of a recognised asset or liability a fair value hedge.
A hedge of the exposure on the translation of net investments in foreign entities a net investment hedge.
At the inception of a hedging relationship the hedging instrument and the hedged item are documented along with the risk management objectives and strategy for undertaking various hedge transactions and prospective eff ectiveness testing is performed.
During the life of the hedging relationship prospective and retrospective eff ectiveness testing is performed to ensure the instrument remains an eff ective hedge of the transaction.
Changes in the fair value of derivative  nancial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognised in the income statement as they arise.
A.
Cash  ow hedges Changes in the fair value of derivative nancial instruments that are designated and eff ective as hedges of future cash  ows are recognised in other comprehensive income in the hedging reserve and any ineff ective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
If the  rm commitment or forecast transaction that is the subject of a cash  ow hedge results in the recognition of a non nancial asset or liability then at the time the asset or liability is recognised the associated gains or losses on the derivative that had previously been recognised in comprehensive income are included in the initial measurement of the asset or liability.
For hedges that do not result in the recognition of an asset or a liability amounts deferred in other comprehensive income are recognised in the income statement in the same period in which the hedged items aff ect net pro t or loss.
B.
Fair value hedges Changes in the fair value of a derivative instrument designated in a fair value hedge or for nonderivatives the foreign currency component of carrying value are recognised in the income statement.
The hedged item is adjusted for changes in fair value attributable to the risk being hedged with the corresponding entry in the income statement.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 1 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
Net investment hedges Changes in the fair value of derivative or nonderivative  nancial instruments that are designated and eff ective as hedges of net investments are recognised in other comprehensive income in the hedging reserve and any ineff ective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Changes in the fair value of derivative  nancial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognised in the income statement as they arise.
D.
Discontinuance of hedge accounting Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised the hedge relationship no longer quali es for hedge accounting the forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur or the Group dedesignates the hedge relationship.
When a cash  ow hedge is discontinued any cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument recognised in other comprehensive income is retained in equity until the forecast transaction occurs.
Subsequent changes in the fair value of the hedging instruments when the forecast transaction is no longer highly probable but is still expected to occur are recognised in the income statement.
If a hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur the net cumulative gain or loss recognised in comprehensive income is transferred to the income statement for the period.
When a fair value hedge is discontinued the fair value adjustment to the carrying amount of the hedged item arising from the hedged risk is amortised to the income statement from that date.
When a net investment hedge is discontinued the subsequent changes in fair value of a derivative or foreign exchange gains losses on recognised  nancial liabilities are recognised in the income statement.
The gain or loss on the hedging instrument recognised in other comprehensive income is reclassi ed to the income statement only on disposal of the net investment.
The Group does not use derivatives to hedge income statement translation exposures.
Embedded derivatives Derivatives embedded in other  nancial instruments or other host contracts are treated as separate derivatives when their risks and characteristics are not closely related to those of the host contracts and the host contracts are not carried at fair value with unrealised gains or losses reported in the income statement.
Embedded derivatives are carried in the statement of  nancial position at fair value from the inception of the host contract.
Changes in fair value are recognised within the income statement during the period in which they arise.
Critical accounting judgements and sources of estimation uncertainty The preparation of consolidated  nancial statements requires the Group to make estimates and judgements that aff ect the application of policies and reported amounts.
Critical judgements represent key decisions made by management in the application of the Group accounting policies.
Where a signi cant risk of materially diff erent outcomes exists due to management assumptions or sources of estimation uncertainty this will represent a critical accounting estimate.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may diff er from these estimates.
The estimates and judgements which have a signi cant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets and liabilities are discussed below.
Critical accounting judgements Adjusted items The directors believe that the adjusted pro t and earnings per share measures provide additional useful information for shareholders on the performance of the business.
These measures are consistent with how business performance is measured internally by the Board and Operating Committee.
The adjusted pro t before tax measure is not a recognised pro t measure under IFRS and may not be directly comparable with adjusted pro t measures used by other companies.
The classi cation of adjusted items requires signi cant management judgement after considering the nature and intentions of a transaction.
Note 5 provides further details on current year adjusted items and their adherence to Group policy.
Sources of estimation uncertainty Useful lives and residual values of property plant and equipment Depreciation is provided to write down the cost of property plant and equipment to their estimated residual values over their estimated useful lives as set out above.
The selection of the residual values and useful lives gives rise to estimation uncertainty.
The Group is undertaking a strategic multiyear programme in relation to the UK store estate which will result in future store closures.
The timing of these closures and the identi cation of the speci c stores that will be impacted are not yet known giving rise to additional estimation uncertainty when assessing the residual values and useful lives as at 1 April 201 7 .
The useful lives of property plant and equipment are reviewed by management annually.
See note 1 5 for further details.
Impairment of property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
When a review for impairment is conducted the recoverable amount is determined based on value in use calculations.
This method requires the Group to determine the appropriate period over which to assess future cash  ows and discount rate assumptions.
See notes 1 4 and 1 5 for further details on the Groups assumptions and associated sensitivities.
Postretirement bene ts The determination of the pension cost and de ned bene t obligation of the Groups de ned bene t pension schemes depends on the selection of certain assumptions which include the discount rate in ation rate salary growth mortality and expected return on scheme assets.
Diff erences arising from actual experiences or future changes in assumptions will be re ected in subsequent periods.
The fair value of unquoted investments within total plan assets is determined using fair value estimates provided by the manager of the investment or fund.
See note 1 1 for further details on the impact of changes in the key assumptions and estimates and note 1 2 for critical judgements associated with the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme interest in the Marks and Spencer Scottish Limited Partnership.
Revenue recognition Accruals for sales returns deferred income in relation to loyalty scheme redemptions and gift card and credit voucher redemptions are estimated on the basis of historical returns and redemptions.
These are recorded so as to be allocated against revenue in the same period as that in which the original revenue is recorded.
These balances are reviewed regularly and updated to re ect managements latest best estimates.
However actual returns and redemptions could vary from those estimates.
International closure costs During the year the Group announced its strategy for the International business resulting in the planned exit from owned stores in ten international markets.
The Group will incur signi cant closure costs associated with the exits which gives rise to estimation uncertainty at 1 April 201 7  most notably in respect of the expected costs to exit leases and the expected redundancy costs.
See note 5 for further details.
Inventory provisioning Inventory provisions are recognised where the net realisable value from the sale of inventory is estimated to be lower than its carrying value requiring estimation of the expected future sale price.
The estimation includes judgement on a number of factors including historic sales patterns expected sales pro les potential obsolescence and shrinkage.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 2 SEGMENTAL INFORMATION IFRS 8 requires operating segments to be identi ed on the basis of internal reporting on components of the Group that are regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker to allocate resources to the segments and to assess their performance.
The chief operating decision maker has been identi ed as the Operating Committee.
The Operating Committee reviews the Groups internal reporting in order to assess performance and allocate resources across each operating segment.
The operating segments are UK and International which are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting to the Operating Committee.
The UK segment consists of the UK retail business and UK franchise operations.
The International segment consists of Marks and Spencer owned businesses in Europe and Asia together with international franchise operations.
The Operating Committee assesses the performance of the operating segments based on a measure of operating pro t.
This measurement basis excludes the eff ects of adjusted items from the operating segments.
The Operating Committee also monitors revenue within the segments and gross pro t within the UK segment.
To increase transparency the Group has decided to include an additional voluntary disclosure analysing revenue within the reportable segments by subcategory and gross pro t within the UK segment by subcategory.
The following is an analysis of the Groups revenue and results by reportable segment 52 weeks ended 1 April 2017 53 weeks ended 2 April 2016
Logistics adjustment
Statutory
Management
Logistics adjustment
Statutory
Clothing and Home revenue 3792.7  3792.7 3961.3   3961.3 Food revenue 5649.0  5649.0 5509.5  5509.5 UK revenue 9441.7  9441.7 9470.8   9470.8 International revenue 1180.3  1180.3 1084.6  1084.6 Group revenue 10622.0   10622.0 10555.4  10555.4 Clothing and Home gross pro t 2128.7 2180.7 Food gross pro t 1837.7 1806.2 UK gross pro t 3966.4 360.5  3605.9 3986.9 300.9  3686.0 UK operating costs 3390.4 360.5 254.5 3284.4 3320.1 300.9 49.1 3068.3 International operating pro t 64.4  138.8 74.4 58.2  101.4 43.2 Group operating pro t690.6  437.4 253.2 784.9  200.8 584.1 Finance income 36.2   36.2 21.1   21.1 Finance costs 113.0   113.0 1 16.4   1 16.4 Management gross pro t for the UK segment excludes certain expenses resulting in an adjustment between cost of sales and selling and administrative expenses of 360.5m last year 300.9m.
Updates to the methodology have been made in the current year to include depreciation of the relevant Distribution Centres within gross margin.
This is to ensure consistent treatment with the underlying warehousing costs.
The prior year comparatives have not been restated.
Management pro t excludes the adjusted items income or charges made to reported pro t before tax that are signi cant in value andor nature see note 5.
Please refer to the Glossary on pages 1 33 and 1 34 for the de nition of these items.
Other segmental information 2017 2016
International
Total
UK
International
Total
Additions to property plant and equipment and intangible assets excluding goodwill 374.1 12.2 386.3 624.9 20.0 644.9 Depreciation and amortisation 549.1 29.1 578.2 531.9 30.9 562.8 Impairment and asset writeoff s 72.7 31.2 103.9 60.8 98.8 159.6 Total assets 7917.3 375.2 8292.5 8062.3 414.1 8476.4 Noncurrent assets 6324.4 244.8 6569.2 6751.9 263.1 7015.0 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 3 EXPENSE ANALYSIS
Total
Revenue 10622.0 10555.4 Cost of sales 6534.2 6427 .0 Gross pro t 4087.8 4128.4 Selling and administrative expenses 3460.4 341 2.9 Other operating income 63.2 69.4 Operating pro t before adjusted items 690.6 784.9 Adjusted items see note 5 437.4 200.8 Operating pro t 253.2 584.1 The selling and administrative expenses are further analysed below
Total
Employee costs 1491.4 1435.7 Occupancy costs 757.2 723.2 Repairs renewals and maintenance of property 95.1 99.5 Depreciation amortisation and asset impairments and writeoff s before adjusted items 589.5 576.8 Other costs 527.2 577 .7 Selling and administrative expenses 3460.4 3412.9 There is an additional 61.2m last year 51.0m of employee costs recorded within cost of sales.
These costs are included within the aggregate remuneration disclosures note 10A.
4 PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION The following items have been included in arriving at pro t before taxation Net foreign exchange gainslosses 0.2 6.9 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 5776.1 5778.6 Writedown of inventories to net realisable value 234.9 239.7 Depreciation of property plant and equipment owned assets 410.3 41 2.7 under  nance leases 0.5 1.4 Amortisation of intangible assets 167.4 148.7 Pro t on property disposals  0.6 Impairments and writeoff s of assets 103.9 159.6 Operating lease rentals payable property 350.1 337 .1 xtures  ttings and equipment 4.3 3.5 Included in administrative expenses is the auditors remuneration including expenses for audit and nonaudit services payable to the Companys auditor Deloitte LLP and its associates as follows Annual audit of the Company and the consolidated  nancial statements 0.9 0.7 Audit of subsidiary companies 0.7 0.7 Auditrelated assurance services 0.3 0.2 Total audit and auditrelated assurance services fees 1.9 1.6 Other services  0.1 Total other services  0.1 103 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 5 ADJUSTED ITEMS The total adjusted items reported for the 52week period ended 1 April 201 7 is a net charge of 437 .4m.
The adjustments made to reported pro t before tax to arrive at adjusted pro t are
Strategic programmes changes to pay and pensions 22 156.0 UK organisation 15 22 24.0 UK store estate 15 22 51.6 37.0 International store closures and impairments 1 5 22 132.5 31.6 UK store impairments and onerous lease charges 1 5 22 48.8 MandS Bank charges incurred in relation to the insurance misselling provision 44.1 50.3 UK logistics 15 22 9.8 9.2 Legal settlements 9.8 Other impairments IAS 39 fair value movement of embedded derivative  2.0 Net gain on acquisition of joint venture holding Bradford warehouse  5.4 Adjustments to pro t before tax 437.4 200.8 Other impairments in the prior year included the impairment of Czech and Hungary goodwill 19.1m the MandS Mode brand 32.4m an enterprise management system used by the International business of 19.3m and impairment costs of 23.7m related to the Clothing and Home buying and merchandising systems.
Changes to pay and pensions 156.0m On 25 May 201 6 the Group announced proposals for a fairer simpler and more consistent approach to pay and premia as well as proposals to close the UK de ned bene t DB pension scheme to future accrual eff ective from 1 April 201 7 .
The consultation with employees on these changes completed on 2 September 201 6.
The closure of the UK DB pension scheme to future accrual has resulted in a curtailment charge of 1 27 .0m.
As all remaining active members of the scheme have transitioned to deferred status all future pensionable increases will be in line with in ation CPI as opposed to the lower 1% salary cap applied to active members.
Other costs of 5.4m directly associated with the closure primarily in relation to third party advisory costs have also been incurred.
The Group considers the curtailment cost and directly associated costs to be an adjusted item on the basis that they relate to a signi cant cost impacting the Group results.
Following the completion of the consultation in respect of pay and premia the Group has committed to transition payments of 23.6m in respect of the removal of premia.
The full amount of 23.6m has been recognised as a liability at 1 April 201 7 as the criteria for recognition under IAS 37 have been met at this date.
The Group anticipates making further transition payments to impacted employees in relation to the closure of the UK DB scheme expected to be c.
25m in total over the next three years.
These amounts will be recognised within adjusted items in future years as incurred.
The premia buyout costs are considered to be an adjusted item as they represent costs that are signi cant in value to the results of the Group.
Strategic programmes  UK organisation 24.0m During the year the Group announced the results of a wideranging strategic review across a number of areas of the business including customer brand UK organisation UK store estate and International.
The completion of this review has resulted in the Group incurring a number of signi cant charges.
On 5 September 20 1 6 following completion of a detailed review of the UK organisation the Group announced changes to the UK Head Offi ce structure.
The changes have resulted in a net reduction of c.590 Head Offi ce roles achieved through a combination of fewer contractors natural attrition and redundancies and resulted in costs of  1 5.4m inclusive of fees.
On 2 March 201 7  as part of the ongoing strategic programme the Group announced an 1 8month programme to centralise its London Head Offi ce functions into one building.
The Group has recognised a net charge of 8.6m associated with this rationalisation inclusive of the impairment and writeoff of assets upon exit of vacated buildings an expected net sublet shortfall and the costs of relocation.
These costs are considered to be an adjusted item as they are signi cant in value and relate to a strategic initiative.
As a result they are not considered to be normal operating costs of the business.
Strategic programmes  UK store estate 51.6m The Group has revised its previously announced strategic programme in relation to the UK store estate.
As part of this programme ten UK stores were approved for closure in the period resulting in closure costs of 47 .3m relating to dilapidations sublet shortfalls accelerated depreciation of  xtures and  ttings and impairment of assets.
The balance of the charges of 4.3m in the period relate to the ongoing review of assumptions associated with previously closed stores.
Whilst costs associated with the closure and recon guration of the UK store estate will recur across  nancial years the Group considers that they should be treated as an adjusted item given they are part of a strategic programme and are signi cant in value to the results of the Group.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 5 ADJUSTED ITEMS CONTINUED Strategic programmes  International store closures and impairments 132.5m The Group has announced its intention to close its owned stores in ten international markets resulting in the recognition of a cost of 1 30.5m in the period.
The expected closure costs primarily relate to redundancy lease exit and property dilapidations.
The closure programmes are ongoing in all markets with the exception of China where the  nal store was closed on 1 April 201 7 .
The costs are considered to be an adjusted item as they are part of a strategic programme and are signi cant in both value and nature to the results of the Group.
International store impairment testing during the year identi ed a number of stores where current and anticipated future performance does not support the carrying value of the stores with a resulting impairment charge of 9.0m being incurred which is considered signi cant in value to the results of the International segment.
Refer to note 1 5 for further details of these impairments.
Off setting these store impairments are credits of 7 .0m relating to the reversal of historic impairments against  ve stores and the release of unutilised provisions on completion of the exit from the Balkans.
This impairment reversal and release are considered to be adjusted items consistent with treatment in previous periods when the original charges were recognised as adjusted items.
UK store impairments and onerous lease charges 48.8m The UK store impairment testing during the year has identi ed a number of stores where the current and anticipated future performance does not support the carrying value of the stores.
As a result a charge of 39.4m has been incurred in respect of the impairment of assets associated with these stores.
A future charge of 9.4m has been incurred in respect of onerous lease provisions associated with some of these stores.
Refer to note 1 5 for further details of these impairments.
The charges associated with the impairment of stores and associated onerous leases have been classi ed as an adjusted item on the basis of the signi cant value of the charge in the year to the results of the Group.
MandS Bank charges incurred in relation to the insurance misselling provision 44.1m The Group has an economic interest in MandS Bank a whollyowned subsidiary of HSBC by way of a Relationship Agreement that entitles the Group to a 50% share of the pro ts of MandS Bank after appropriate deductions.
The Group does not share in any losses of MandS Bank and is not obliged to refund any pro t share received from HSBC although future income may be impacted by signi cant deductions.
Since the year ended 3 1 December 2010 MandS Bank has recognised in its audited  nancial statements an estimated liability for redress to customers in respect of possible misselling of  nancial products.
The Groups income from MandS Bank has been reduced by the deduction of our share of the estimated liability in both the current and prior years.
The deduction in the period is 44.1 m.
The Group considers this cost to be an adjusted item despite its recurring nature as the charges are signi cant in nature and value in each period to the results of the Group.
UK logistics 9.8m credit A net credit of 9.8m has been recognised in the year relating to an updated view of the estimated closure costs of legacy logistics sites associated with the transition to a single tier distribution network.
This credit largely arises following a decision to retain two logistics warehouses within the network which had previously been identi ed for closure.
This net credit is considered to be an adjusted item consistent with treatment in previous periods when the original charges were recognised as an adjusted item.
Legal settlements 9.8m credit During the year the Group has reached various legal settlements resulting in a net credit to the income statement of 9.8m.
No further detail is provided in respect of these legal settlements due to the requirement to comply with con dentiality clauses within the agreements.
The settlements are considered to be adjusted items as they are signi cant in value to the results of the Group or to the segment.
6 FINANCE INCOMECOSTS Bank and other interest receivable 6.6 5.8 Unwind of discount on  nancial instruments 0.3 Pension net  nance income see note 1 1  29.3 15.3 Finance income 36.2 21.1 Interest on bank borrowings 2.8 3.6 Interest payable on syndicated bank facility 4.3 5.5 Interest payable on mediumterm notes 91.2 89.9 Interest payable on  nance leases 1.9 1.9 Unwind of discount on  nancial instruments  0.4 Unwind of discount on provisions 0.2 0.4 Unwinding of discount on partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme see note 1 2 12.6 1 4.7 Finance costs 113.0 1 16.4 Net  nance costs 76.8 95.3 105 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 7 INCOME TAX EXPENSE
Taxation charge Current tax UK corporation tax on pro ts for the year at 20% last year 20% current year 98.3 111 .6 adjustments in respect of prior years 17.4 5.6 UK current tax 80.9 106.0 Overseas current taxation current year 8.9 12.4 adjustments in respect of prior years 7.3 0.5 Total current taxation 97.1 11 7 .9 Deferred tax origination and reversal of temporary diff erences 48.3 28.3 adjustments in respect of prior years 11.5 2.6 changes in tax rate 0.4 7.8 Total deferred tax see note 23 36.4 33.5 Total income tax expense 60.7 84.4
Taxation reconciliation The eff ective tax rate was 34.4% last year 1 7 .3% and is reconciled below Pro t before tax 176.4 488.8 Notional taxation at standard UK corporation tax rate of 20% last year 20% 35.3 97 .8 Depreciation and other amounts in relation to  xed assets that do not qualify for tax relief 4.7 2.3 Other income and expenses that are not taxable or allowable for tax purposes 0.7 9.6 Retranslation of deferred tax balances due to the change in statutory UK tax rates 3.9 7.8 Overseas pro ts taxed at rates diff erent to those of the UK 2.3 4.3 Overseas tax losses where there is no relief anticipated in the foreseeable future 0.5 3.7 Adjustments to the current and deferred tax charges in respect of prior periods 1.4 3.5 Adjusted items depreciation and other amounts in relation to  xed assets that do not qualify for tax relief  2.6 UK store impairments and strategic programmes  UK store estate where no tax relief is available 7.7 International store closures and impairments where no tax relief is available 26.0 15.3 strategic programmes  UK organisation and logistics income and expenses that are not taxable or allowable for tax purposes 1.7 pro ts and losses on property disposals  1.5 acquisition of Lima Bradford S. r.
Total income tax expense 60.7 84.4 After excluding adjusted items the adjusted eff ective tax rate was 1 9.9% last year 1 7 .2%.
On 1 5 September 201 6 the Finance Bill received Royal Assent to enact the previously announced reductions in the rate of corporation tax to 1 9% from 1 April 201 7 and 1 7% from 1 April 2020.
The Group has remeasured its UK deferred tax assets and liabilities at the end of the reporting period at the rates of 1 9% and 1 7% based on an expectation of when those balances are expected to unwind.
This has resulted in the recognition of a deferred tax charge of 0.4m in the income statement and the recognition of a deferred tax credit of 1 1.0m in other comprehensive income.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 7 INCOME TAX EXPENSE CONTINUED
Taxation reconciliation continued Pro t before taxation 176.4 488.8 Notional taxation at standard UK corporation tax rate of 20% last year 20% 35.3 97 .8 Disallowable accounting depreciation and other similar items 90.2 85.4 Deductible capital allowances 67.2 71.5 Allowable deductions for employee share schemes 1.0 3.4 Allowable deductions for employee pension schemes 11.7 1 3.4 Overseas pro ts taxed at rates diff erent to those of the UK 2.3 4.3 Overseas tax losses where there is no immediate relief 0.5 3.7 Other income and expenses that are not taxable or allowable 3.8 7.6 Adjusted items UK store impairments and strategic programmes  UK store estate where no tax relief is available 17.3 21.0 International store closures and impairments where no tax relief is available 27.3 strategic programmes  UK organisation and logistics income and expenses that are not taxable or allowable for tax purposes 1.8 pay and pensions where tax relief is due in the future 25.4 pro ts and losses on property disposals  0.5 UK property and investment deductions where no tax relief is available  7.5 Lima Bradford S. r.
Current year current tax charge 107.2 124.0 Represented by UK current year current tax 98.3 111 .6 Overseas current year current tax 8.9 12.4 UK adjustments in respect of prior years 17.4 5.6 Overseas adjustments in respect of prior years 7.3 0.5 Total current taxation note 7A 97.1 11 7 .9 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 8 EARNINGS PER SHARE The calculation of earnings per ordinary share is based on earnings after tax and the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
The adjusted earnings per share  gures have also been calculated based on earnings before adjusted items that are signi cant in nature andor value see note 5.
These have been presented to provide shareholders with an additional measure of the Groups yearonyear performance.
For diluted earnings per share the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue is adjusted to assume conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The Group has four types of dilutive potential ordinary shares being those share options granted to employees where the exercise price is less than the average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year unvested shares granted under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan unvested shares granted under the Restricted Share Plan and unvested shares within the Performance Share Plan that have met the relevant performance conditions at the end of the reporting period.
Details of the adjusted earnings per share are set out below Pro t attributable to equity shareholders of the Company 117.1 406.9 Addless net of tax Strategic programmes changes to pay and pensions 128.6 UK organisation 20.3 UK store estate 46.5 30.5 International store closures and impairments 120.8 25.2 UK store impairments and onerous lease charges 41.3 MandS Bank charges incurred in relation to the insurance misselling provision 35.3 40.2 UK logistics 9.2 7.3 Legal settlements 7.9 Other Impairments  85.9 IAS 39 fair value movement of embedded derivative  1.6 Net gain on acquisition of joint venture holding Bradford warehouse  9.7 Pro t before adjusted items attributable to equity shareholders of the Company 492.8 573.3 Million Million Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 1623.1 1635.9 Potentially dilutive share options under the Groups share option schemes 8.0 6.3 Weighted average number of diluted ordinary shares 1631.1 1642.2 Pence Pence Basic earnings per share 7.2 24.9 Diluted earnings per share 7.2 24.8 Adjusted basic earnings per share 30.4 35.0 Adjusted diluted earnings per share 30.2 34.9 9 DIVIDENDS per share per share Dividends on equity ordinary shares Paid  nal dividend 11.9p 11 .6p 192.7 190.8 Special dividend 4.6p  74.5 Paid interim dividend 6.8p 6.8p 110.3 11 0.9 The directors have proposed a  nal dividend in respect of the year ended 1 April 201 7 of 1 1.9p per share last year 1 1.9p amounting to a dividend of 1 93.3mlast year 1 92.7m.
This payment is subject to approval of shareholders at the Annual General Meeting AGM to be held on 1 1 July 201 7 .
A dividend reinvestment plan DRIP is available to shareholders who would prefer to invest their dividends in the shares of the Company.
The shares will go exdividend on 1 June 201 7 .
For those shareholders electing to receive the DRIP  the last date for receipt of a new election is 23 June 201 7 .
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 10 EMPLOYEES
Aggregate remuneration The aggregate remuneration and associated costs of Group employees including the Operating Committee were
Total
Wages and salaries 1333.8 1278.8 Social security costs 89.7 80.6 Pension costs 100.3 102.0 Sharebased payments see note 1 3 10.6 16.0 Employee welfare and other personnel costs 47.1 46.7 Capitalised staffi ng costs 28.9 37.4 Total aggregate remuneration 1552.6 1486.7 Excludes amounts recognised within adjusted items see note 5 such as the transition payments the Group has committed to in respect of removal of premia and redundancy costs associated with the UK and International strategic programmes.
Details of key management compensation are given in note 28.
B.
Average monthly number of employees 2017 2016 UK stores management and supervisory categories 5617 5696 other 66385 63733 UK head offi ce management and supervisory categories 3172 3191 other 862 881 UK operations management and supervisory categories 191 257 other 1267 11 27 Overseas 7445 8063 Total average number of employees 84939 82948 If the number of hours worked was converted on the basis of a normal working week the equivalent average number of fulltime employees would have been 59764 last year 58895.
11 RETIREMENT BENEFITS The Group provides pension arrangements for the bene t of its UK employees through the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme a de ned bene t DB arrangement and Your MandS Pension Saving Plan a de ned contribution DC arrangement.
The UK DB pension scheme operated on a  nal salary basis and is governed by a Trustee board which is independent of the Group.
On closure of the UK DB pension scheme all remaining active members moved to deferred status which resulted in a curtailment charge of 1 27 .0m.
There will be no future service charge relating to the scheme and no future monthly employer contributions for current service.
At year end the UK DB pension scheme had no active members last year 1 11 76 62655 deferred members last year 53589 and 51198 pensioners last year 5 1047.
The most recent actuarial valuation of the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme was carried out as at 3 1 March 201 5 and showed a funding surplus of 204m.
During the year the Group paid the  nal contribution of 28m as agreed at the 201 2 actuarial valuation in respect of bene ts already accrued by members.
In addition the UK DB pension scheme will continue to receive income from the Scottish Limited
See Note 1 2 for further details.
The DC plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays contributions to an independently administered fund.
Such contributions are based upon a  xed percentage of employees pay.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions to the fund once the contributions have been paid.
Members bene ts are determined by the amount of contributions paid by the Group and the member together with the investment returns earned on the contributions arising from the performance of each individuals investments and how each member chooses to receive their retirement bene ts.
As a result actuarial risk that bene ts will be lower than expected and investment risk that assets invested in will not perform in line with expectations fall on the employee.
At the year end the de ned contribution arrangement had some 5366 1 active members last year 4071 2 and some 1 2866 deferred members last year 8823.
The Group also operates a small funded DB pension scheme in the Republic of Ireland.
This scheme closed to future accrual on 3 1 October 201 3.
Other retirement bene ts also include a UK postretirement healthcare scheme and unfunded retirement bene ts.
The total Group retirement bene t cost was 1 98.4m last year 86.7m.
Of this 1 48.0m last year 4 1.0m relates to the UK DB pension scheme including curtailment charges 45.1 m last year 40.3m to the UK DC plan and 5.3m last year 5.4m to other retirement bene t schemes.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 11 RETIREMENT BENEFITS CONTINUED By funding its DB pension schemes the Group is exposed to the risk that the cost of meeting its obligations is higher than anticipated.
This could occur for several reasons for example Investment returns on the schemes assets may be lower than anticipated especially if falls in asset values are not matched by similar falls in the value of the schemes liabilities.
The level of price in ation may be higher than that assumed resulting in higher payments from the schemes.
Scheme members may live longer than assumed for example due to advances in healthcare.
Members may also exercise or not exercise options in a way that lead to increases in the schemes liabilities for example through early retirement or commutation of pension for cash.
Legislative changes could also lead to an increase in the schemes liabilities.
In addition the Group is exposed to additional risks through its obligation to the UK DB pension scheme via its interest in the Scottish Limited Partnership see note 1 2.
In particular under the legal terms of the Partnership a default by the Group on the rental payments to the Partnership or a future change in legislation could trigger earlier or higher payments to the pension scheme or an increase in the collateral to be provided by the Group.
A.
Pensions and other postretirement liabilities Total market value of assets 10135.1 8515.3 Present value of scheme liabilities 9433.3 7682.3 Net funded pension plan asset 701.8 833.0 Unfunded retirement bene ts 1.0 0.9 Postretirement healthcare 8.0 8.0 Net retirement bene t surplus 692.8 824.1 Analysed in the statement of  nancial position as Retirement bene t asset 706.0 851.0 Retirement bene t de cit 13.2 26.9 Net retirement bene t surplus 692.8 824.1 In the event of a plan windup the pension scheme rules provide MandS with an unconditional right to a refund of surplus assets assuming the full settlement of plan liabilities.
In the ordinary course of business the Trustees have no rights to wind up or change the bene ts due to members of the scheme.
As a result any net surplus in the UK DB pension scheme is recognised in full.
B.
Financial assumptions The  nancial assumptions for the UK DB pension scheme and the most recent actuarial valuations of the other postretirement schemes have been updated by independent quali ed actuaries to take account of the requirements of IAS 1 9 Employee Bene ts in order to assess the liabilities of the schemes and are as follows % % Rate of increase in salaries NA Rate of increase in pensions in payment for service 2.03.2 1.93.0 Discount rate 2.55 3.40 In ation rate 3.20 2.95 Longterm healthcare cost increases 7.20 6.95 Rate of increase in salaries is no longer applicable as the UK DB pension scheme is closed to future accrual.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 11 RETIREMENT BENEFITS CONTINUED
Demographic assumptions The UK demographic assumptions are in line with those adopted for the last formal actuarial valuation of the scheme performed as at 3 1 March 201 5.
The UK postretirement mortality assumptions are based on an analysis of the pensioner mortality trends under the scheme for the period to March 201 5.
The speci c mortality rates used are based on the VITA lite tables.
The life expectancies underlying the valuation are as follows 2017 2016 Current pensioners at age 65  males 23.2 23.1 female 24.7 24.6 Future pensioners  currently in active status at age 65 males NA female NA Future pensioners  currently in deferred status at age 65 males 24.7 24.1 female 27.1 26.4 No future pensioners currently in an active status.
All employees in the UK DB pension scheme are in deferred status due to the decision to close the scheme to future accrual from 1 April 201 7 .
D.
Sensitivity analysis The table below summarises the estimated impact of changes in the principal actuarial assumptions on the UK DB pension scheme surplus Decrease in scheme surplus caused by a decrease in the discount rate of 0.25% 70.0 90.0 Decrease in scheme surplus caused by a decrease in the in ation rate of 0.25% 20.0 20.0 Increase in scheme surplus caused by a decrease in the average life expectancy of one year 370.0 300.0 The sensitivity analysis above is based on a change in one assumption while holding all others constant.
Therefore interdependencies between the assumptions have not been taken into account within the analysis.
E.
Analysis of assets The investment strategy of the UK DB pension scheme is driven by its liability pro le including its in ationlinked pension bene ts.
In addition to its interest in the Scottish Limited Partnership see note 1 2 the scheme invests in diff erent types of bonds including corporate bonds and gilts and derivative instruments including in ation interest rate crosscurrency and total return swaps in order to align movements in the value of its assets with movements in its liabilities arising from changes in market conditions.
Broadly the scheme has hedging that covers 92% of interest rate movements and 90% of in ation movements as measured on the Trustees funding assumptions which use a discount rate derived from gilt yields.
The fair value of the total plan assets at the end of the reporting period for each category is as follows Debt investments government bonds net of repurchase agreements 5219.7 4165.7 corporate bonds 901.9 1058.2 assetbacked securities and structured debt 547.9 459.0 Scottish Limited Partnership interest see note 1 2 412.1 469.5 Equity investments  quoted 1504.0 1047 .5 Equity investments  unquoted 315.1 236.7 Property 509.3 420.7
Hedge and reinsurance funds 322.0 31 7.9 Cash and cash equivalents 158.3 190.5 Other 69.5 109.1 10135.1 8515.3 Repurchase agreements were 1333.9m last year 1333.0m.
All pension assets have quoted prices in an active market with the exception of 1444.9m last year 12 19.1 m of unquoted assets.
The fair values of the above equity and debt investments are based on publicly available market prices wherever available.
Unquoted investments hedge funds and reinsurance funds are stated at fair value estimates provided by the manager of the investment or fund.
Property includes both quoted and unquoted investments.
The fair value of the Scottish Limited Partnership interest is based on the expected cash  ows and benchmark assetbacked credit spreads.
It is the policy of the scheme to hedge a proportion of interest rate and in ation risk.
The scheme reduces its foreign currency exposure using forward foreign exchange contracts.
At year end the UK schemes UK DB pension scheme and postretirement healthcare indirectly held 1 93506 last year 1 69509 ordinary shares in the Company through its investment in UK Equity Index Funds.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 11 RETIREMENT BENEFITS CONTINUED
Analysis of amounts charged against pro ts Amounts recognised in comprehensive income in respect of retirement bene t plans are as follows Current service cost 96.5 98.0 Administration costs 3.2 3.0 Past service costs  curtailment charge 128.0 1.0 Net interest income 29.3 1 5.3 Total 198.4 86.7 Remeasurement on the net de ned bene t surplus actual return on scheme assets excluding amounts included in net interest income 1543.8 156.3 actuarial gain  experience 1.5 164.8 actuarial loss  demographic assumptions  100.8 actuarial gainloss   nancial assumptions 1614.2 438.5 Components of de ned bene t cost recognised in other comprehensive income 68.9 346.2
Scheme assets Changes in the fair value of the scheme assets are as follows Fair value of scheme assets at start of year 8515.3 8596.5 Interest income based on discount rate 284.9 262.4 Actual return on scheme assets excluding amounts included in net interest income 1543.8 156.3 Employer contributions 137.0 11 8.4 Bene ts paid 347.7 31 1.7 Administration costs 3.0 3.0 Exchange movement 4.8 9.0 Fair value of scheme assets at end of year 10135.1 8515.3 The actual return on scheme assets was a gain of 1828.7m last year gain of 106.1m.
H.
Pensions and other postretirement liabilities Changes in the present value of retirement bene t obligations are as follows Present value of obligation at start of year 7691.2 8147.5 Current service cost 96.5 98.0 Administration costs 0.2 Curtailment charge 128.0 1.0 Interest cost 255.6 247 .1 Bene ts paid 347.7 31 1.7 Actuarial gain  experience 1.5 164.8 Actuarial loss  demographic assumptions  100.8 Actuarial lossgain   nancial assumptions 1614.2 438.5 Exchange movement 5.8 11 .8 Present value of obligation at end of year 9442.3 769 1.2 Analysed as Present value of pension scheme liabilities 9433.3 7682.3 Unfunded pension plans 1.0 0.9 Postretirement healthcare 8.0 8.0 Present value of obligation at end of year 9442.3 769 1.2 The average duration of the de ned bene t obligation at 1 April 201 7 is 1 9 years last year 1 8 years.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 12 MARKS AND SPENCER SCOTTISH LIMITED PARTNERSHIP Marks and Spencer plc is a general partner and the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme is a limited partner of the Marks and Spencer Scottish Limited Partnership the Partnership.
Under the partnership agreement the limited partners have no involvement in the management of the business and shall not take any part in the control of the partnership.
The general partner is responsible for the management and control of the partnership and as such the Partnership is consolidated into the results of the Group.
The Partnership holds 1.6bn last year 1.6bn of properties which have been leased back to Marks and Spencer plc at market rates.
The
Group retains control over these properties including the  exibility to substitute alternative properties into the Partnership.
The  rst limited partnership interest held by the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme entitles the Pension Scheme to receive an annual distribution of 71.9m until 2022 from the Partnership.
The second partnership interest also held by the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme entitles the Pension Scheme to receive a further 36.4m annually from 201 7 until 203 1.
The partnership liability in relation to the  rst interest of 396.5m last year 455.7m is valued at the net present value of the future expected distributions from the Partnership.
During the year to 1 April 201 7 an interest charge of 1 2.6m last year 1 4.7m was recognised in the income statement representing the unwind of the discount included in this obligation.
The  rst limited partnership interest of the Pension Scheme is included within the UK DB Pension Scheme assets valued at 4 1 2.1 m last year 469.5m.
It is also included as a liability on the Groups statement of  nancial position as it is a transferable  nancial instrument.
The second partnership interest is not a transferable  nancial instrument and therefore is not included as a plan asset in accordance with IAS 1 9.
The associated liability is eliminated on consolidation.
13 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS This year a charge of 10.6m was recognised for sharebased payments last year charge of 1 6.0m.
Of the total sharebased payments charge 10.9m last year 9.5m relates to the Save As You Earn Scheme and a credit of 3.6m last year charge of 1.1 m relates to the Performance Share Plan.
The remaining charge of 3.3m last year 5.4m is spread over the other share plans.
An additional charge of 1.3m was recognised in relation to the Annual Bonus Scheme for 201 61 7 under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan.
Further details of the operation of the Group share plans are provided in the Remuneration Report on pages 66 to 78.
A.
Save As You Earn Scheme The SA YE Scheme was last approved by shareholders in 2007 and shareholder approval is being sought at the 201 7 AGM to renew the scheme for a further ten years.
Under the terms of the scheme the Board may off er options to purchase ordinary shares in the Company once in each  nancial year to those employees who enter into an Her Majestys Revenue and Customs HMRC approved SA YE savings contract.
The Company has chosen to cap the maximum monthly saving amount at 250 which is below the 500 per month allowed under HMRC approved schemes.
The price at which options may be off ered is 80% of the average midmarket price for three consecutive dealing days preceding the off er date.
The options may normally be exercised during the sixmonth period after the completion of the SA YE contract.
2017 2016 Number of options Weighted average exercise price Number of options Weighted average exercise price Outstanding at beginning of the year 30154547 393.3p 29530523 357.6p Granted 28166455 260.0p 10437 2 1 5 432.0p Exercised 1763039 312.8p 6645922 302.6p Forfeited 12881484 391.8p 2967697 382.5p Expired 382385 355.2p 199572 3 1 7 .2p Outstanding at end of year 43294094 310.6p 30154547 393.3p Exercisable at end of year 4928971 403.5p 1936860 3 1 5.3p For SA YE share options exercised during the period the weighted average share price at the date of exercise was 387 .4p last year 443.9p.
The fair values of the options granted during the year have been calculated using the BlackScholes model assuming the inputs shown belowtel 2016 3year plan 3year plan 2016 modi ed 3year plan 2015 modi ed 3year plan Grant date Nov 16 Nov 16 Nov 16 Nov 1 5 Share price at grant date 335p 335p 335p 520p Exercise price 260p 432p 369p 432p Option life in years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years Riskfree rate 0.2% 0.2% 0.2% 0.9% Expected volatility 28.5% 28.5% 28.5% 23.4% Expected dividend yield 5.6% 5.6% 5.6% 3.7% Fair value of option 66p 19p 30p 96p Incremental fair value of option NA 47p 36p In the current year there has been a modi cation to the 201 7 scheme relating to employees cancelling awards from previous years in subsitution for awards granted under the 201 7 scheme.
The fair value of the modi ed awards will be amortised based on the incremental fair value.
The incremental fair value is the diff erence between the fair value of the 201 7 options being 66p and the fair value of repriced previous awards calculated using 201 7 award assumptions keeping the initial exercise price consistent.
The fair value of the modi ed options being 19p for 2016 modi ed options and 30p for 201 5 modi ed options is already recognised in operating pro t.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 13 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED Volatility has been estimated by taking the historic volatility in the Companys share price over a threeyear period.
The resulting fair value is expensed over the service period of three years on the assumption that 10% last year 10% of options will lapse over the service period as employees leave the Group.
Outstanding options granted under the UK Employees SA YE Scheme are as follows Options granted Number of options Weighted average remaining contractual life years Option pricetel 2016 January 201 3  191 7252  0.2 312p January 201 4 4854749 5918608 0.2 1.2 405p January 201 5 6280741 12334645 1.2 2.2 369p January 201 6 4676198 9984042 2.2 3.2 432p January 201 7 27482406  3.2 260p 43294094 30154547 2.5 2.3 31 1p
Performance Share Plan The Performance Share Plan is the primary longterm incentive plan for approximately 1 20 of the most senior managers within the Group.
It was  rst approved by shareholders at the 2005 AGM and again at the 201 5 AGM.
Under the plan annual awards based on a percentage of salary may be off ered.
The extent to which an award vests is measured over a threeyear period against  nancial targets which for 201 61 7 included Adjusted Earnings Per Share Return on Capital Employed and free cash  ow.
The value of any dividends earned on the vested shares during the three years will also be paid on vesting.
Further details are set out in the Remuneration Report on pages 66 to 78.
Awards under this plan have been made in each year since 2005.
During the year 7 569499 shares last year 58501 34 were awarded under the plan.
The weighted average fair value of the shares awarded was 328.0p last year 533.2p.
As at 1 April 201 7  there were 1 48 1 6764 shares last year 1 57 49605 outstanding under the plan.
C.
Deferred Share Bonus Plan The Deferred Share Bonus Plan was introduced in 200506 as part of the Annual Bonus Scheme for approximately 500 of the most senior managers within the Group.
As part of the Scheme the managers are required to defer a proportion of any bonus paid into shares which will be held for three years.
There are no further performance conditions on these shares other than continued employment within the Group and the value of any dividends earned on the vested shares during the deferred period will also be paid on vesting.
During the year 1563439 shares last year 104496 1  have been awarded under the plan in relation to the annual bonus.
The fair value of the shares awarded was 355.8p last year 548.3p.
As at 1 April 201 7  there were 3033709 shares last year 2586096 outstanding under the plan.
D.
Restricted Share Plan The Restricted Share Plan was established in 2000 as part of the reward strategy for retention and recruitment of senior managers who are vital to the success of the business.
The plan operates for senior managers below executive director level.
Awards vest at the end of the restricted period typically between one and three years subject to the participant still being in the employment of the Company on the relevant vesting date.
The value of any dividends earned on the vested shares during the restricted period will also be paid on vesting.
During the year 32 1229 shares last year 22 168 1  have been awarded under the plan.
The weighted average fair value of the shares awarded was 326.6p last year 454.4p.
As at 1 April 201 7  there were 888027 shares last year 1285666 outstanding under the plan.
E.
Republic of Ireland Save As You Earn Scheme Sharesave the Companys SA YE Scheme was introduced in 2009 to all employees in the Republic of Ireland for a tenyear period after approval by shareholders at the 2009 AGM.
The scheme is subject to Irish Revenue rules which limit the maximum monthly saving to 500 per month.
The Company chose in 2009 to set a monthly savings cap of 320 per month to align the maximum savings amount to that allowed within the UK scheme.
The price at which options may be off ered is 80% of the average midmarket price for three consecutive dealing days preceding the off er date.
The options may normally be exercised during the sixmonth period after the completion of the SA YE contract.
During the year 324768 options last year 1 601 1 3 were granted at a fair value of 66.3p last year 95.6p.
As at 1 April 201 7  there were 52 1837 options last year 3 1 2826 outstanding under the scheme.
F.
Marks and Spencer Employee Bene t Trust The Marks and Spencer Employee Bene t Trust the Trust holds 21 73101 last year 4087 837 shares with a book value of 10.7m last year 20.6m and a market value of 7 .3m last year 1 6.6m.
These shares were acquired by the Trust in the market and are shown as a reduction in retained earnings in the consolidated statement of  nancial position.
Awards are granted to employees at the discretion of Marks and Spencer plc and the Trust agrees to satisfy the awards in accordance with the wishes of Marks and Spencer plc under senior executive share plans described above.
Dividends are waived on all of these shares.
G.
ShareBuy
ShareBuy the Companys Share Incentive Plan enables the participants to buy shares directly from their gross salary.
This scheme does not attract an IFRS 2 charge.
Nil cost options.
For the purposes of calculating the number of shares awarded the share price used is the average of the midmarket price for the  ve consecutive dealing days preceding the grant date.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 14 INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Brands
Computer software Computer software under development
At 28 March 2015 Cost or valuation 1 29.7 1 1 2.5 1087 .7 86.6 14 1 6.5 Accumulated amortisation and impairments 34.4 55.8 466.9 1.2 558.3 Net book value 95.3 56.7 620.8 85.4 858.2 Year ended 2 April 2016 Opening net book value 95.3 56.7 620.8 85.4 858.2 Additions 6.2  92.9 93.9 193.0 Transfers   91.2 91.2 Asset impairments 1 9.1  32.5 22.1   73.7 Asset writeoff s  11.9 14.5 26.4 Amortisation charge  5.3 1 43.4  1 48.7 Exchange diff erence 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.4 Closing net book value 82.7 18.7 627.7 73.7 802.8 At 2 April 2016 Cost or valuation 1 36.2 1 1 2.3 1272.0 89.4 1609.9 Accumulated amortisation impairments and writeoff s53.5 93.6 644.3 15.7 807.1 Net book value 82.7 18.7 627.7 73.7 802.8 Year ended 1 April 2017 Opening net book value 82.7 18.7 627.7 73.7 802.8 Additions   0.3 100.8 101.1 Transfers   95.8 107.6 11.8 Asset impairments   6.1 5.1 1.0 Asset writeoff s   9.6 2.9 12.5 Amortisation charge  5.3 162.1  167.4
Exchange diff erence 1.2  0.2 0.1 1.3 Closing net book value 78.4 13.4 558.4 58.8 709.0 At 1 April 2017 Cost or valuation 137.4 112.3 1368.3 82.5 1700.5 Accumulated amortisation impairments and writeoff s 59.0 98.9 809.9 23.7 991.5 Net book value 78.4 13.4 558.4 58.8 709.0 Goodwill relates to the following per una
UK
Total goodwill Net book value at 2 April 201 6 69.5 7.0 6.2 82.7 Exchange diff erence  1.2  1.2
Net book value at 1 April 2017 69.5 8.2 0.7 78.4 Other adjustments relate to the adjustment of provision values for business combinations related to the acquisition of Lima Bradford S. r. in the prior year.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 14 INTANGIBLE ASSETS CONTINUED Impairment testing Goodwill is not amortised but tested annually for impairment with the recoverable amount being determined from value in use calculations.
Goodwill has been allocated for impairment testing purposes to groups of cashgenerating units CGUs which include the combined retail and wholesale businesses for each location.
The costs in relation to the per una brand are 80.0m net book value 1 3.4m.
The per una brand is a de nite life intangible asset amortised on a straightline basis over a period of 1 5 years and is only assessed for impairment where such indicators exist.
The value in use calculations are based on the Groups latest budget and forecast cash  ows covering a threeyear period which have regard to historic performance and knowledge of the current market together with the Groups views on the future achievable growth and the impact of committed cash  ows.
The cash  ows include ongoing capital expenditure required to maintain the store network but exclude any growth capital initiatives not committed.
Cash  ows beyond this threeyear period are extrapolated using a  at longterm growth rate for the UK and with reference to forecast GDP growth for India.
These growth rates do not exceed the longterm growth rates for the Groups retail businesses in these territories.
While management believes the assumptions used are realistic it is possible that a further impairment could be identi ed for per una Bradford or India if any of the above key assumptions were changed signi cantly.
A sensitivity analysis has been performed on each of these key assumptions with other variables held constant.
Management has concluded that there are no reasonably possible changes in any key assumptions that would cause the carrying amount of goodwill or brands to exceed the value in use.
15 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Land and buildings Fixtures  ttings and equipment Assets in the course of construction
At 28 March 2015 Cost 2855.1 7066.4 133.3 10054.8 Accumulated depreciation impairments and writeoff s 339.8 4672.3 11.6 5023.7 Net book value 2515.3 2394.1 121.7 5031.1 Year ended 2 April 2016 Opening net book value 25 1 5.3 2394.1 1 2 1.7 503 1.1 Transfers 1.7 186.8 188.5 Disposals 5.0 0.6  5.6 Asset impairments 30.4 24.3 1.9 56.6 Asset writeoff s 2.9 2.9 Depreciation charge 1 3.3 400.8  4 1 4.1 Exchange diff erence 11.4 5.9 0.2 17.1 Closing net book value 2594.9 2362.8 69.4 5027.1 At 2 April 2016 Cost 2981.6 7476.3 82.9 10540.8 Accumulated depreciation impairments and writeoff s 386.7 5113.5 13.5 5513.7 Net book value 2594.9 2362.8 69.4 5027.1 Year ended 1 April 2017 Opening net book value 2594.9 2362.8 69.4 5027.1 Additions  76.2 209.0 285.2 Disposals 0.6 1.0  1.6 Asset impairments 11.6 68.6 1.9 82.1 Asset writeoff s 6.0 1.8 2.5 10.3 Depreciation charge 16.3 394.5  410.8 Exchange diff erence 10.0 9.2 0.3 19.5 Closing net book value 2587.8 2171.9 78.1 4837.8 At 1 April 2017 Cost 3008.4 7750.3 96.0 10854.7 Accumulated depreciation impairments and writeoff s 420.6 5578.4 17.9 6016.9 Net book value 2587.8 2171.9 78.1 4837.8 The net book value above includes land and buildings of 42.1 m last year 42.6m and equipment of nil last year 0.2m where the Group is a lessee under a  nance lease.
Additions to property plant and equipment during the year amounting to nil last year nil were  nanced by  nance leases.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 15 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT CONTINUED Impairment of property plant and equipment For impairment testing purposes the Group has determined that each store is a separate CGU with the exception of outlet stores which are considered together as one CGU.
Each CGU is tested for impairment at the balance sheet date if any indicators of impairment have been identi ed.
The recoverable value of each CGU is determined to be the higher of value in use and fair value less costs to sell.
The value in use of each CGU is calculated based on the Groups latest budget and forecast cash  ows covering a threeyear period which have regard to historic performance and knowledge of the current market together with the Groups views on the future achievable growth and the impact of committed initiatives.
The cash  ows include ongoing capital expenditure required to maintain the store network but exclude any growth capital initiatives not committed.
Cash  ows beyond this threeyear period are extrapolated using a  at longterm growth rate for UK stores and with reference to forecast GDP growth for other territories.
These growth rates do not exceed the longterm growth rate for the Groups retail businesses in these territories.
The key assumptions in the value in use calculations are the growth rates of sales and gross pro t margins changes in the operating cost base longterm growth rates and the riskadjusted pretax discount rate.
The pretax discount rates are derived from the Groups weighted average cost of capital taking into account the cost of capital and borrowings to which speci c marketrelated premium adjustments are made for each territory.
The pretax discount rates range from 7% to 2 1 % last year 7% to 24%.
Where appropriate fair value less cost to sell is determined with regard to the expected rent and yield for each property and re ect the speci c characteristics relevant to each property and the location in which it is based.
The fair values have been determined with the assistance of independent professional valuers.
During the year the Group has recognised a net impairment charge of 43.4m gross impairment charge of 47 .5m off set by an impairment reversal of 4.1 m as a result of store impairment testing.
The gross impairment charge relates primarily to stores in the UK and Hong Kong with the reversal of impairment relating to stores in Ireland due largely to the movement in the Sterling to Euro currency rate.
These impairments including the reversal have been recognised within adjusted items see Note 5.
The Group has performed a sensitivity analysis on the impairment tests for its UK store portfolio using various reasonably possible scenarios.
An increase of one percentage point in the posttax discount rate would have resulted in an increase to the impairment charge of 6.5m.
Neither a 2% reduction in year one sales growth nor a 20bps reduction in total UK margin would result in a signi cant increase to the impairment charge.
In addition the Group has recognised additional impairment charges of 27 .3m associated with stores approved for closure during the year 1 3.1 m associated with the exit from owned stores in ten international markets and 5.7m associated with the rationalisation of UK Head ces.
Off setting these charges were impairment reversals of 7 .4m following an updated view of the logistics strategy.
These net charges have been recognised within adjusted items see Note 5.
16 OTHER FINANCIAL ASSETS
Unlisted investments 3.0 3.0
Shortterm investments 14.5 19.1 Includes 5.3m last year 3.6m of money market deposit held by Marks and Spencer plc in an escrow account Noncurrent unlisted investments are carried as availableforsale assets.
Other  nancial assets are measured at fair value with changes in their value taken to the income statement.
17 TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
Other receivables 15.1 12.9 Prepayments and accrued income 219.0 221.8
Trade receivables 111.0 11 6.5 Less provision for impairment of receivables 1.7 0.7 Trade receivables  net 109.3 11 5.8 Other receivables 28.5 50.4 Prepayments and accrued income 180.8 154.9 Trade and other receivables that were past due but not impaired amounted to 20.8m last year 1 9.6m and are mainly sterling denominated.
The directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates their fair value.
Included in prepayments and accrued income is 3 1.5m last year 1 9.4m of accrued supplier income relating to rebates which have been earned but not yet invoiced.
Supplier income that has been invoiced but not yet settled against future trade creditor balances is included within trade creditors where there is a right to off set.
The remaining amount is immaterial.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 18 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents are 468.6m last year 247 .6m.
The carrying amount of these assets approximates their fair value.
The eff ective interest rate on shortterm bank deposits is 0.21% last year 0.51%.
These deposits have an average maturity of eight days last year 48 days.
19 TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES
Trade and other payables 967.5 1021.9 Social security and other taxes 55.0 49.8 Accruals and deferred income 531.3 546.0 1553.8 161 7 .7
Other payables  accruals and deferred income 328.5 353.0 20 BORROWINGS AND OTHER FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
Bank loans and overdrafts Finance lease liabilities 0.4 6.250% US500m mediumterm notes 201 7 3and4 Interest accrued on mediumterm notes Revaluation of mediumterm notes
Bank loans  0.2 6.250% US500m mediumterm notes 201 7 3and4 6.1 25% 400m mediumterm notes 201 9 2and5 6.1 25% 300m mediumterm notes 202 1 3.00% 300m mediumterm notes 2023 4.750% 400m mediumterm notes 2025 2and5 7 .1 25% US300m mediumterm notes 2037 3and4 Interest accrued on mediumterm notes Revaluation of mediumterm notes Finance lease liabilities 48.3 1711.7 Total 2229.7 2072.2 Bank loans and overdrafts include a 5.0m last year 5.0m loan from the Hedge End Park Limited joint venture.
These notes are issued under Marks and Spencer plcs 3bn European mediumterm note programme and all pay interest annually.
Interest on these bonds is payable semiannually.
US500m and US300m mediumterm notes exposure swapped to sterling  xedto xed crosscurrency interest rate swaps.
The Group occasionally enters into interest swaps to manage interest rate exposure.
At year end 425m last year 425m was swapped from  xed to  oating rate.
The prior year comparatives have been split to show the interest accrued on mediumterm notes and revaluation of mediumterm notes on individual line items to be in line with the format of the current year note disclosure.
Finance leases The minimum lease payments under  nance leases fall due as shown in the table on the following page.
It is the Groups policy to lease certain properties and equipment under  nance leases.
The weighted average lease term for equipment is three years last year four years and 95 years last year 96 years for property.
Interest rates are  xed at the contract rate.
All leases are on a  xed repayment basis and no arrangements have been entered into for contingent payments.
The Groups obligations under  nance leases are secured by the lessors charges over the leased assets.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Treasury policy The Group operates a centralised treasury function to manage the Groups funding requirements and  nancial risks in line with the Board approved treasury policies and procedures and their delegated authorities.
The Groups  nancial instruments other than derivatives comprise borrowings cash and liquid resources and various items such as trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
The main purpose of these  nancial instruments is to  nance the Groups operations.
The Group treasury function also enters into derivative transactions principally interest rate swaps crosscurrency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The purpose of these transactions is to manage the interest rate and foreign currency risks arising from the Groups operations and  nancing.
It remains the Groups policy not to hold or issue  nancial instruments for trading purposes except where  nancial constraints necessitate the liquidation of any outstanding investments.
The treasury function is managed as a cost centre and does not engage in speculative trading.
Financial risk management The principal  nancial risks faced by the Group are liquidity and funding counterparty foreign currency and interest rate risks.
The policies and strategies for managing these risks are summarised on the following pages a Liquidity and funding risk The risk that the Group could be unable to settle or meet its obligations at a reasonable price as they fall due.
The Groups funding strategy ensures a mix of funding sources off ering suffi cient headroom maturity and  exibility and cost eff ectiveness to match the requirements of the Group.
Marks and Spencer plc is  nanced by a combination of retained pro ts bank borrowings mediumterm notes and committed syndicated bank facilities.
Operating subsidiaries are  nanced by a combination of retained pro ts bank borrowings and intercompany loans.
At the year end the Group had a committed syndicated bank revolving credit facility of 1.1 bn set to mature on 1 5 April 2022.
During the current  nancial year the Group extended the facility by one year.
This facility contains only one  nancial covenant being the ratio of earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and rents payable to interest plus rents payable.
The covenant is measured semi annually.
The Group also has a number of undrawn uncommitted facilities available to it.
At the year end these amounted to 1 50m last year 100m all of which are due to be reviewed within a year.
At the balance sheet date a sterling equivalent of nil last year 205m was drawn under the committed facilities and nil last year 30m was drawn under the uncommitted facilities.
In addition to the existing borrowings the Group has a Euro Medium Term Note programme of 3bn of which 1.4bn last year 1.1bn was in issuance as at the balance sheet date.
A new 300m bond set to mature in 2023 was issued under the Euro Medium Term Note programme during the  nancial year.
The contractual maturity of the Groups nonderivative  nancial liabilities excluding trade and other payables see note 1 9 and derivatives is as follows Bank loans and overdrafts
Mediumterm notes Finance lease liabilities
Marks and Spencer UK pension note 1 2
Derivative assets
Total derivative assets and liabilities Timing of cash  ows Between one and two years   448.1  2.6 71.9 522.6 399.3 362.6 36.7 Between two and  ve years   605.9 7.1 215.6 828.6 61.4 41.2 20.2 More than  ve years   1329.3 176.9 143.7 1649.9 465.6 427.0 38.6 Eff ect of discounting   755.6 1 40.4 47 .4 943.4 At 2 April 2016 92.2 205.1  1726.3 48.6 455.7 2527 .9 Timing of cash  ows Between one and two years   88.0 2.6 71.9 162.5 26.7 14.5 12.2 Between two and  ve years   915.1 7.3 215.6 1138.0 63.9 41.2 22.7 More than  ve years   1309.0 176.0 71.9 1556.9 519.5 413.2 106.3 Eff ect of discounting  715.6 139.7 34.8 890.1 At 1 April 2017 70.3  2110.7 48.7 396.5 2626.2 Derivative cash  ows are disclosed based on actual settlement.
All derivatives are settled net except for currency swaps.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Financial risk management continued a Liquidity and funding risk continued The present value of  nance lease liabilities is as follows Within one year 0.4 0.4 Later than one year and not later than  ve years 1.6 1.6 Later than  ve years 46.7 46.6 Total 48.7 48.6 b Counterparty risk Counterparty risk exists where the Group can suff er  nancial loss through default or nonperformance by  nancial institutions with whom it transacts.
Exposures are managed in accordance with the Groups treasury policy which limits the value that can be placed with each approved counterparty to minimise the risk of loss.
The minimum longterm rating for all counterparties is longterm Standard and Poors AMoodys A3 BBBBaa 1 for committed lending banks.
In the event of a rating by one agency being diff erent to the other reference will be made to Fitch to determine the casting vote of the rating group.
In the absence of a Fitch rating the lower rating will prevail.
Limits are reviewed regularly by senior management.
The credit risk of these  nancial instruments is estimated as the fair value of the assets resulting from the contracts.
The table below analyses the Groups shortterm investments and derivative assets by credit exposure excluding bank balances store cash and cash in transit.
Credit rating of counterparty
AAA
AA
AA
BBB
Total
Short term investments Derivative assets
AAA
AA
AA
BBB
Total
Shortterm investments Derivative assets Includes cash on deposit and money market funds held by Marks and Spencer Scottish Limited Partnership Marks and Spencer plc and Marks and Spencer General Insurance.
Excludes cash at hand and in transit of 1 16.9m last year 98.4m.
Standard and Poors equivalent rating shown as reference to the majority credit rating of the counterparty from either Standard and Poors Moodys or Fitch where applicable.
The Group has very low retail credit risk due to transactions being principally of a high volume low value and short maturity.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the balance sheet date was as follows trade receivables 1 1 1 m last year 1 1 4m other receivables 44m last year 63m cash and cash equivalents 469m last year 248m and derivatives 220m last year 1 46m.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Financial risk management continued c Foreign currency risk Transactional foreign currency exposures arise primarily from the import of goods sourced from overseas suppliers and also from the export of goods from the UK to overseas subsidiaries.
The most signi cant exposure is to the US dollar incurred in the sourcing of clothing and home products from Asia.
Group Treasury hedges these exposures principally using forward foreign exchange contracts progressively based on dynamic forecasts from the business.
Hedging begins around 1 5 months ahead of the start of the season and is between 80% and 100% hedged nine months before the start of the season.
Other exposures from the export of goods to overseas subsidiaries are also hedged progressively over the course of the year before they are incurred.
As at the balance sheet date the gross notional value in sterling terms of forward foreign exchange sell or buy contracts amounted to 2023m last year 1640m with a weighted average maturity date of six months last year  ve months.
Gains and losses in equity on forward foreign exchange contracts designated in cash  ow hedge relationships as at 1 April 201 7 will be released to the income statement at various dates over the following 1 7 months last year 1 5 months from the balance sheet date.
The Group also holds a number of crosscurrency swaps to designate its  xed rate US dollar debt to  xed rate sterling debt.
These are reported as cash  ow hedges.
The Group uses a combination of foreign currency debt and derivatives to hedge balance sheet translation exposures.
As at the balance sheet date 26m last year nil and HK 1 90m last year HK 1245m of derivatives were hedging overseas net assets.
The Group also hedges foreign currency intercompany loans where these exist.
Forward foreign exchange contracts in relation to the hedging of the Groups foreign currency intercompany loans are designated as held for trading with fair value movements being recognised in the income statement.
The corresponding fair value movement of the intercompany loan balance resulted in a 2.3m gain last year nil in the income statement.
As at the balance sheet date the gross notional value of intercompany loan hedges was 367m last year 289m.
After taking into account the hedging derivatives entered into by the Group the currency and interest rate exposure of the Groups  nancial liabilities excluding shortterm payables and the liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme is set out below 2017 2016 Fixed rate Floating rate
Fixed rate Floating rate
Currency
Sterling 1727.8 492.3 2220.1 1343.7 716.7 2060.4 1734.5 495.2 2229.7 1350.0 722.2 2072.2 The  oating rate sterling and euro borrowings are linked to interest rates related to LIBOR.
These rates are for periods between one and six months.
As at the balance sheet date and excluding  nance leases the  xed rate sterling borrowings are at an average rate of 5.0% last year 5.3% and the weighted average time for which the rate is  xed is six years last year seven years.
The Group is exposed to interest rate risk in relation to sterling US dollar and euro variable rate  nancial assets and liabilities.
The Groups policy is to use derivative contracts where necessary to maintain a mix of  xed and  oating rate borrowings to manage this risk.
The structure and maturity of these derivatives correspond to the underlying borrowings and are accounted for as fair value or cash  ow hedges as appropriate.
At the balance sheet date  xed rate borrowings amounted to 1734.5m last year 1350.0m representing the public bond issues and nance leases amounting to 78% last year 65% of the Groups gross borrowings.
The eff ective interest rates at the balance sheet date were as follows % % Committed and uncommitted borrowings 0.3 1.0 Mediumterm notes 5.0 5.3 Finance leases 4.3 4.1 121 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Financial risk management continued d Interest rate risk continued Derivative  nancial instruments 2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Current
Crosscurrency swaps  cash  ow hedges 72.6 Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash  ow hedges 89.1 9.0 69.7 26.7 held for trading 0.7 1.5 1.6 1.8 net investment hedges 0.7  0.8
Crosscurrency swaps  cash  ow hedges 14.0  27 .3 Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash  ow hedges 1.3 0.8 5.4 0.2 Interest rate swaps  fair value hedges 41.5  41.3 The Group holds a number of interest rate swaps to redesignate its sterling  xed debt to  oating debt.
These are reported as fair value hedges.
The ineff ective portion recognised in the pro t or loss that arises from fair value hedges amounts to 0.3m last year 0.2m as the loss on the hedged items was 0.3m last year 3.0m loss and the gain on the hedging instruments was nil last year 2.8m gain.
The Group also holds a number of crosscurrency swaps to redesignate its  xed rate US dollar debt to  xed rate sterling debt.
These are reported as cash  ow hedges.
Sensitivity analysis The table below illustrates the estimated impact on the income statement and equity as a result of market movements in foreign exchange and interest rates in relation to the Groups  nancial instruments.
The directors consider that a 2% last year 2% movement in interest and a 20%  last year 20% weakening in sterling against the relevant currency represents a reasonably possible change.
However this analysis is for illustrative purposes only.
The table excludes  nancial instruments that expose the Group to interest rate and foreign exchange risk where such risk is fully hedged with another  nancial instrument.
Also excluded are trade receivables and payables as these are either sterling denominated or the foreign exchange risk is hedged.
Interest rates the impact in the income statement due to changes in interest rates re ects the eff ect on the Groups  oating rate debt as at the balance sheet date.
The impact in equity re ects the fair value movement in relation to the Groups transactional foreign exchange cash ow hedges and the net investment hedges at the balance sheet date.
The impact in equity re ects the fair value movement in relation to the Groups crosscurrency swaps.
Foreign exchange the impact from foreign exchange movements re ects the change in the fair value of the Groups transactional foreign exchange cash  ow hedges and the net investment hedges at the balance sheet date.
The equity impact shown for foreign exchange sensitivity relates to derivative and nonderivative  nancial instruments hedging net investments.
This value is expected to be fully off set by the retranslation of the hedged foreign currency net assets leaving a net equity impact of zero.
2% decrease in interest rates 2% increase in interest rates 20% weakening in sterling 20% strengthening in sterling At 2 April 2016 Impact on income statement gainloss 9.2 1 1.1 Impact on other comprehensive income lossgain 0.8 1.0 1 36.0 90.7 At 1 April 2017 Impact on income statement gainloss 7.8 2.1 Impact on other comprehensive income lossgain 2.2 0.3 246.4 164.3 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Off setting of  nancial assets and liabilities The following tables set out the  nancial assets and  nancial liabilities which are subject to off setting enforceable master netting arrangements and similar agreements.
Amounts which are set off against  nancial assets and liabilities in the Groups balance sheet are set out below.
For trade and other receivables and trade and other payables amounts not off set in the balance sheet but which could be off set under certain circumstances are also set out.
Gross  nancial assetsliabilities Gross  nancial liabilities assets set off Net  nancial assetsliabilities per statement of nancial position Related amounts not set off in the statement of nancial position
At 2 April 2016 Trade and other receivables 3 1.6 29.5 2.1  2.1 Derivative  nancial assets 146.1  146.1 28.7 1 17.4 Cash and cash equivalents 39.3 39.3 Trade and other payables 259.3 29.5 229.8  229.8 Derivative  nancial liabilities 28.7  28.7 28.7 Bank loans and overdrafts 90.8 39.3 5 1.5  5 1.5 Gross  nancial assetsliabilities Gross  nancial liabilities assets set off Net  nancial assetsliabilities per statement of nancial position Related amounts not set off in the statement of nancial position
At 1 April 2017 Trade and other receivables 25.1 22.8 2.3  2.3 Derivative  nancial assets 219.9  219.9 11.3 208.6 Cash and cash equivalents 42.4 41.6 0.8  0.8 Trade and other payables 279.2 22.8 256.4  256.4 Derivative  nancial liabilities 11.3  11.3 11.3 Bank loans and overdrafts 103.9 41.6 62.3  62.3 The gross  nancial assets and liabilities set off in the balance sheet primarily relate to cash pooling arrangements with banks.
Amounts which do not meet the criteria for off setting on the statement of  nancial position but could be settled net in certain circumstances principally relate to derivative transactions under ISDA International Swaps and Derivatives Association agreements where each party has the option to settle amounts on a net basis in the event of default of the other party.
Fair Value Hierarchy The Group uses the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing the fair value of  nancial instruments by valuation technique Level 1 quoted unadjusted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
Level 2 not traded in an active market but the fair values are based on quoted market prices or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
The Groups Level 2  nancial instruments include interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives.
Fair value is calculated using discounted cash  ow methodology future cash  ows are estimated based on forward exchange rates and interest rates from observable market curves and contract rates discounted at a rate that re ects the credit risk of the various counterparties for those with a long maturity.
Level 3 techniques which use inputs which have a signi cant eff ect on the recorded fair value that are not based on observable market data.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Fair Value Hierarchy continued At the end of the reporting period the Group held the following  nancial instruments at fair value 2017 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets measured at fair value Financial assets at fair value through pro t or loss trading derivatives 0.7 0.7 1.4 1.4 Derivatives used for hedging  219.2  219.2 144.7 144.7 Short term investments  14.5  14.5  19.1  19.1 Liabilities measured at fair value Financial liabilities at fair value through pro t or loss trading derivatives 1.5 1.5  1.8  1.8 Derivatives used for hedging  9.8  9.8 26.9  26.9 The Marks and Spencer DB Pension Schemes holds a number of  nancial instruments which make up the pension asset of 101 35.1 m last year Level 1 and Level 2  nancial assets measured at fair value through other comprehensive income amounted to 8690.2m last year 7 296.2m.
Additionally the pension scheme assets include 1444.9m last year 12 1 9.1 m of Level 3  nancial assets.
See note 1 1 for information on the Groups retirement bene ts.
There were no transfers between the levels of the fair value hierarchy.
In addition to the above the Group has 3.0m last year 3.0m in unlisted equity securities measured at cost see note 1 6.
The following table represents the changes in Level 3 instruments held by the Pension Schemes Opening balance 1219.1 1093.6 Fair value gain recognised in other comprehensive income 100.6 70.3 Additional investmentderecognition 125.2 55.2 Closing balance 1444.9 1219.1 In the prior year the Group purchased Lima Bradford S. r.
This resulted in the derecognition of the embedded derivative as the lease contract was between subsidiaries of the Group.
Gains recognised in the prior year income statement related to the valuation of the embedded derivative in the lease contract up until the acquisition date.
The fair value movement of the embedded derivative of 2.0m loss and subsequent derecognition of the asset 2 1.7m was treated as an adjustment to reported pro t in the prior year see note 5.
Fair value of  nancial instruments With the exception of the Groups  xed rate bond debt and the Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme there were no material diff erences between the carrying value of nonderivative  nancial assets and  nancial liabilities and their fair values as at the balance sheet date.
The carrying value of the Groups  xed rate bond debt Level 1 equivalent was 21 10.7m last year 1726.4m the fair value of this debt was 2236.7m last year 1868.3m.
Capital policy The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard its ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide optimal returns for shareholders and to maintain an effi cient capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
In doing so the Groups strategy is to maintain a capital structure commensurate with an investment grade credit rating and to retain appropriate levels of liquidity headroom to ensure  nancial stability and  exibility.
To achieve this strategy the Group regularly monitors key credit metrics such as the gearing ratio cash  ow to net debt see note 27 and  xed charge cover to maintain this position.
In addition the Group ensures a combination of appropriate committed shortterm liquidity headroom with a diverse and balanced longterm debt maturity pro le.
As at the balance sheet date the Groups average debt maturity pro le was seven years last year eight years.
During the year the Group maintained an investment grade credit rating of Baa3 stable with Moodys and BBB stable with Standard and Poors.
In order to maintain or realign the capital structure the Group may adjust the number of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 22 PROVISIONS
Restructuring
Other
At 2 April 2016 52.4 9.8 3.8 66.0 78.3 Provided in the year 104.5 116.8 24.7 246.0 40.0 Released in the year 19.4 5.8 1.1 26.3 31.5 Utilised during the year 9.4 20.9 0.1 30.2 21.6 Exchange diff erences 0.4 2.9 0.1 3.4 0.4 Discount rate unwind 0.2   0.2 0.4 Reclassi cation from trade and other payables 1.2 2.8 1.6 Analysed as Current 147.2 14.0 Noncurrent 113.5 52.0 Property provisions relate to onerous lease contracts and dilapidations primarily arising as a result of the closure of stores in the UK as part of the UK store estate strategic programme together with the centralisation of the London Head Offi ce functions into one central London location.
These provisions are expected to be utilised over the period to the end of each speci c lease.
Restructuring provisions primarily relate to the estimated costs associated with the International exit strategy which include lease exit costs.
These provisions are expected to be utilised within the next year.
Other provisions include 23.6m of transition payments due following completion of the consultation in respect of pay and premia.
Please see note 5 for further information on these provisions.
23 DEFERRED TAX Deferred tax is provided under the balance sheet liability method using the tax rate at which the balances are expected to unwind of 1 9% and 1 7% last year 20% 1 9% and 1 8% for UK diff erences and local tax rates for overseas diff erences.
Details of the changes to the UK corporation tax rate and the impact on the Group are described in note 7 .
The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities after the off setting of balances within the same jurisdiction as permitted by IAS 1 2 Income Taxes during the year are shown below.
Deferred tax assetsliabilities Land and buildings temporary diff erences Capital allowances in excess of depreciation
Other shortterm temporary diff erences Total UK deferred tax
Total
Creditedcharged to income statement 6.4 25.9 0.7 3.0 36.0 2.5 33.5
Other balance sheet movement 6.2    6.2  6.2
Creditedcharged to equityother comprehensive income   21.6 4.8 26.4 5.2 21.2 Other balance sheet movement    1.6 1.6 0.2 1.8 Other shortterm temporary diff erences relate mainly to employee share options and  nancial instruments.
Other balance sheet movements categorised as other shortterm temporary diff erences include 1.4m in relation to recognition of a deferred tax liability on the acquisition of the remaining 50% stake in Lima Bradford S. r.
The deferred tax liability on land and buildings temporary diff erences is reduced by the bene t of capital losses with a gross value of 254.5m last year 249.5m and a tax value of 48.4m last year 49.9m.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 23 DEFERRED TAX CONTINUED Due to uncertainty over their future use no bene t has been recognised in respect of trading losses carried forward in overseas jurisdictions with a gross value of 1 47 .9m last year 106.6m and a tax value of 34.2m last year 22.3m.
No deferred tax is recognised in respect of undistributed earnings of overseas subsidiaries and joint ventures unless a material liability is expected to arise on an anticipated distribution of these earnings under applicable tax legislation.
Undistributed earnings with a gross value of 38.2m last year 30.6m and a potential tax liability of 9.0m last year 7 .2m have not been recognised on the basis that the distribution can be controlled by the Group.
24 ORDINARY SHARE CAPITAL 2017 2016 Shares m Shares m Issued and fully paid ordinary shares of 25p each At start of year 1622964807 405.8 1647814746 412.0 Shares issued on exercise of share options 1763039 0.4 6797209 1.7 Shares cancelled through share buy back  31647148 7.9 At end of year 1624727846 406.2 1622964807 405.8 Issue of new shares 1763039 last year 6797 209 ordinary shares having a nominal value of 0.4m last year 1.7m were allotted during the year under the terms of the Companys schemes which are described in note 1 3.
The aggregate consideration received was 5.5m last year 20.6m.
Share buy back Last year 3 1647 1 48 ordinary shares having a nominal value of 7 .9m were bought back and subsequently cancelled during the year.
The aggregate consideration paid including directly attributable costs was 1 50.7m.
There was no buyback programme in the current year.
25 CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Capital commitments Commitments in respect of properties in the course of construction 156.4 129.2 Software capital commitments 11.0 17 .1
Other material contracts In the event of a material change in the trading arrangements with certain warehouse operators the Group has a commitment to purchase property plant and equipment which are currently owned and operated by the warehouse operators on the Groups behalf at values ranging from historical net book value to market value.
See note 1 2 for details on the Partnership arrangement with the Marks and Spencer UK DB Pension Scheme.
C.
Commitments under operating leases The Group leases various stores offi ces warehouses and equipment under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have varying terms escalation clauses and renewal rights.
Total future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Within one year 342.0 31 1.3 Later than one year and not later than  ve years 1115.9 1108.4 Later than  ve years and not later than ten years 964.1 1099.4 Later than ten years and not later than 1 5 years 421.9 542.8 Later than 1 5 years and not later than 20 years 285.3 351.9 Later than 20 years and not later than 25 years 166.8 225.8 Later than 25 years 1069.5 970.3 Total 4365.5 4609.9 The total noncancellable future sublease payments to be received are 34.6m last year 36.1 m.
Of the total commitments under operating leases disclosed above 70m are already provided for on the balance sheet with regards to expected lease exit costs arising from the International strategic programme.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 26 ANALYSIS OF CASH FLOWS GIVEN IN THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS Cash  ows from operating activities Pro t on ordinary activities after taxation 115.7 404.4 Income tax expense 60.7 84.4 Finance costs 113.0 11 6.4 Finance income 36.2 21.1 Operating pro t 253.2 584.1 Depreciation amortisation and asset impairments and writeoff s before adjusted items 589.5 576.8 Sharebased payments charge 10.6 16.0 Pension costs charged against operating pro t 100.3 102.0 Adjusted pro t items 437.4 200.8 Decreaseincrease in inventories 53.9 22.5 Increasedecrease in receivables 9.9 3.3 Decreaseincrease in payables 53.1 32.4 Adjusted items cash out ows 36.8 1 2.9 Adjusted items noncash 44.1 50.3 Cash contributions to pension schemes 135.3 1 18.4 Cash generated from operations 1165.7 13 1 1.3 Adjusted items cash out ows relate to the utilisation of the provisions for international store closures strategic programme costs associated with the UK store estate UK organisation and UK logistics and legal settlements.
Adjusted items noncash relate to the reduction in MandS Bank income for the impact of the  nancial product misselling provision.
27 ANALYSIS OF NET DEBT
Reconciliation of movement in net debt At 3 April Cash  ow Exchange and other noncash movements At 1 April Net cash Bank loans overdrafts and syndicated bank facility see note 20 297 .3 237 .2 10.2 70.3 Less amounts treated as  nancing see below 245.7 248.0 10.2 7.9 Cash and cash equivalents see note 1 8 247 .6 2 1 5.4 5.6 468.6 Net cash per statement of cash  ows 196.0 204.6 5.6 406.2 Current  nancial assets see note 16 19.1 4.6  14.5 Debt  nancing Bank loans and overdrafts treated as  nancing see above 245.7 248.0 10.2 7.9 Mediumterm notes see note 20 16 1 3.8 300.0 2.4 1911.4 Finance lease liabilities see note 20 48.6 2.0 2.1  48.7 Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme see note 1 2 445.3 57 .9  387.4 Debt  nancing 2353.4 7.9 9.9 2355.4 Net debt 2138.3 207.9 4.3 1934.7 127 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 27 ANALYSIS OF NET DEBT CONTINUED
Reconciliation of net debt to statement of  nancial position Statement of  nancial position and related notes Cash and cash equivalents see note 1 8 468.6 247 .6 Current  nancial assets see note 1 6 14.5 19.1 Bank loans and overdrafts see note 20 70.3 297 .3 Mediumterm notes  net of hedging derivatives 1957.8 1656.1 Finance lease liabilities see note 20 48.7 48.6 Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme see notes 1 2 and 2 1  396.5 455.7 1990.2 2191.0 Interest payable included within related borrowing and the Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme 55.5 52.7 Total net debt 1934.7 21 38.3 28 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Subsidiaries
Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries are disclosed in the Companys separate  nancial statements.
B.
Hedge End joint venture A loan of 5.0m was received from the joint venture on 9 October 2002.
It is repayable on  ve business days notice and was renewed on 1 January 201 5.
Interest was charged on the loan at 2.0% until 3 1 December 2009 and 0.5% thereafter.
C.
Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme Details of other transactions and balances held with the Marks and Spencer UK Pension Scheme are set out in notes 1 1 and 1 2.
D.
Key management compensation The Group has determined that the key management personnel constitute the Board for the whole year and the members of the Operating Committee with eff ect from November 201 6 when the terms of reference of the Operating Committee were rati ed.
For the whole of the prior year the Group had determined that only members of the Board were key management personnel.
Salaries and shortterm bene ts 8.1 7.5 Sharebased payments  0.3 Total 8.1 7.8
Other related party transactions There were no related party transactions during the year to 1 April 201 7 .
Last year supplier transactions occurred between the Group and a company controlled by Martha Lane Foxs partner.
Martha was a nonexecutive director of the Group retiring from the Board on 2 April 201 6.
These transactions amounted to 2.6m during the year with an outstanding trade payable of 0.2m at 2 April 201 6.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS EQUITY COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
As at 1 April 2017 As at 2 April 2016
Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiary undertakings C6 9249.3 9235.8 Total assets 9249.3 9235.8
Current liabilities Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 2552.2 2559.2 Total liabilities 2552.2 2559.2 Net assets 6697.1 6676.6
Ordinary share capital 406.2 405.8 Share premium account 416.4 41 1.3 Capital redemption reserve 2210.5 2210.5 Merger reserve 1397.3 1397 .3 Retained earnings 2266.7 2251.7 Total equity 6697.1 6676.6 The Companys pro t for the year was 379.0m last year 302.1 m The Company  nancial statements were approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 23 May 201 7 .
The  nancial statements also comprise the notes on pages 1 29 to 1 3 1.
Steve Rowe Chief Executive Offi cer Helen Weir Chief Finance Offi cer
Share premium account Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings
At 29 March 2015 412.0 392.4 2202.6 1397.3 2392.6 6796.9 Pro t for the year     302.1 302.1 Dividends     301.7 301.7 Capital contribution for sharebased payments     9.4 9.4 Shares purchased in buyback 7 .9  7 .9  1 50.7 1 50.7 Shares issued on exercise of employee share options 1.7 18.9    20.6 At 2 April 2016 405.8 411.3 2210.5 1397.3 2251.7 6676.6 At 3 April 2016 405.8 411.3 2210.5 1397.3 2251.7 6676.6 Pro t for the year   379.0 379.0 Dividends   377.5 377.5 Capital contribution for sharebased payments     13.5 13.5 Shares issued on exercise of employee share options 0.4 5.1    5.5 At 1 April 2017 406.2 416.4 2210.5 1397.3 2266.7 6697.1 52 weeks ended 1 April 2017 53 weeks ended 2 April 2016 Cash  ow from investing activities Dividends received 379.0 302.1 Net cash generated from investing activities 379.0 302.1 Cash  ows from  nancing activities Shares issued on exercise of employee share options 5.5 20.6 Shares purchased in buyback  150.7 Repayment of intercompany loan 7.0 129.7 Equity dividends paid 377.5 301.7 Net cash used in  nancing activities 379.0 302.1 Net cash in ow from activities Cash and cash equivalents at beginning and end of year   129 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS C1 ACCOUNTING POLICIES The Companys accounting policies are the same as those set out in note 1 of the Group  nancial statements except as noted below.
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less where appropriate provisions for impairment.
The Company grants sharebased payments to the employees of subsidiary companies.
Each period the fair value of the employee services received by the subsidiary as a capital contribution from the Company is re ected as an addition to investments in subsidiaries.
Loans from other Group undertakings and all other payables are initially recorded at fair value which is generally the proceeds received.
They are then subsequently carried at amortised cost.
The loans are noninterest bearing and repayable on demand.
The Companys  nancial risk is managed as part of the Groups strategy and policies as discussed in note 2 1 of the Group  nancial statements.
In accordance with the exemption allowed by Section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has not presented its own income statement or statement of comprehensive income.
C2 EMPLOYEES The Company had no employees during the current or prior year.
Directors received emoluments in respect of their services to the Company during the year of 936000 last year 956000.
The Company did not operate any pension schemes during the current or preceding year.
C3 AUDITORS REMUNERATION Auditors remuneration in respect of the Companys annual audit has been borne by its subsidiary Marks and Spencer plc and has been disclosed on a consolidated basis in the Companys consolidated  nancial statements as required by Section a of the Companies Act 2006.
C4 DIVIDENDS per share per share Dividends on equity ordinary shares Paid  nal dividend 11.9p 11 .6p 192.7 190.8 Special dividend 4.6p  74.5 Paid interim dividend 6.8p 6.8p 110.3 11 0.9 The directors have proposed a  nal dividend in respect of the year ended 1 April 201 7 of 1 1.9p per share last year 1 1.9p amounting to a dividend of 1 93.3m last year 1 92.7m.
This payment is subject to approval of shareholders at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 11 July 201 7 .
A dividend reinvestment plan DRIP is available to shareholders who would prefer to invest their dividends in the shares of the Company.
The shares will go exdividend on 1 June 201 7 .
For those shareholders electing to receive the DRIP the last date for receipt of a new election is 23 June 201 7 .
C5 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS During the year the Company has received dividends from Marks and Spencer plc of 379.0m last year 302.1 m and decreased its loan from Marks and Spencer plc by 7 .0m last year increased by 1 29.7m.
The outstanding balance was 2552.2m last year 2559.2m and is noninterest bearing.
There were no other related party transactions.
C6 INVESTMENTS
Investments in subsidiary undertakings Beginning of the year 9235.8 9226.4 Additional investment in subsidiary undertakings relating to sharebased payments 13.5 9.4 End of the year 9249.3 9235.8 Shares in subsidiary undertakings represent the Companys investment in Marks and Spencer plc.
The directors believe that the carrying value of the investments is supported by their underlying net assets.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED UK registered subsidiaries exempt from audit The following UK subsidiaries will take advantage of the audit exemption set out within section 479A of the Companies Act 2006 for the year ended 1 April 201 7 .
Unless otherwise stated the undertakings listed below are registered at Waterside House 35 North Wharf Road London W2 1 NW United Kingdom and all have a single class of ordinary share with a nominal value of 1.
Name
Proportion of shares held by the Company %
Company
Number
Amethyst Leasing Properties Limitedtel Busyexport Limitedtel Marks and Spencer Initial LP Limited Registered Offi ce No.
2 Lochrin Square 96 Fountainbridge Edinburgh Midlothian EH3 9QA Marks and Spencer Property Ventures Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Brooklands Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Chester Satellite Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Chester Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Fife Road Kingston Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Glasgow Sauchiehall Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Hedge End Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Kensington Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 KingstononThames Satellite Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 KingstononThames Store Limitedtel
Proportion of shares held by the Company %
Company
Number
Marks and Spencer 2005 Parman House Kingston Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Pudsey Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer 2005 Warrington Gemini Store Limitedtel Marks and Spencer Hungary Limitedtel Marks and Spencer Investmentstel Marks and Spencer Property Holdings Limitedtel Ruby Properties Cumbernauld Limitedtel Ruby Properties Hardwick Limitedtel Ruby Properties Long Eaton Limitedtel Ruby Properties Thorncliff e Limitedtel Ruby Properties Tunbridge Limitedtel Simply Food Property Investmentstel Simply Food Property Ventures Limitedtel C6 INVESTMENTS CONTINUED B Related undertakings In accordance with Section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 a full list of related undertakings the country of incorporation and the eff ective percentage of equity owned as at 1 April 201 7 is disclosed below.
Subsidiary undertakings registered in the UK Name Share Class
Company %
Amethyst Leasing Holdings Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Hedge End Park Limited Registered Offi ce 33 Holborn London EC1N 2HT 1 Ordinary 0 50 MandS Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Manford Textiles Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Company Archive CIC 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Outlet Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Simply Foods Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Sparks Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Northern Ireland Limited Registered Offi ce 8 Laganbank Road Belfast BT1 3LR 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Property Investments Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Chester Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer France Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Guernsey Investments LLP 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer International Holdings Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Name Share Class
Company %
Marks and Spencer Pension Trust Investments Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Pension Trust Limited ii 1 A Ordinary 100 0 1 B Ordinary 0 0 1 C Ordinary 0 0 Marks and Spencer plc 0.25 Ordinary 100 0 Marks and Spencer Property Developments Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Scottish Limited Partnership iii Registered Offi ce 228 St Nicholas Street Aberdeen AB10 1BU Partnership interest 0 100 Marks and Spencer Shared Services Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Minterton Services Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Marks and Spencer Bradford Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100 Ruby Properties En eld Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100
Michael Textiles Limited 1 Ordinary 0 100
Michael Finance plc 1 Ordinary 0 100 The Company will guarantee the debts and liabilities of the above UK subsidiary undertakings at the balance sheet date of 6.3m in accordance with section 479C of the Companies Act 2006.
The Company has assessed the probability of loss under the guarantee as remote. i All companies registered at Waterside House 35 North Wharf Road London W2 1NW United Kingdom unless otherwise stated. ii In accordance with the articles of association of Marks and Spencer Pension Trust Limited the holders of B and C Ordinary shares are both directors of that company. iii Marks and Spencer Initial LP Limited and Marks and Spencer Pension Trust Limited are the limited partners Marks and Spencer plc is the General Partner.
ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED C6 INVESTMENTS CONTINUED B Related undertakings continued International subsidiary undertakings Name Registered Address Country Share Class
Marks and Spencer Australia Pty Limited Aurora Place 88 Phillip Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Australia AUD 2 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer GmbH in Liqu.
Sterngasse 1 3 Vienna Austria Austria 35000 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Belgium SPRL 4th Floor 97 Rue Royale 1000 Brussels Belgium Belgium 1.21 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Canada Incorporated 40 Wellington Row Saint John NB E2L 4S3 Canada Canada CAD 1 Common 100 CAD NPV 100 CAD 1 Pref 100 Marks and Spencer Holdings Canada
40 Wellington Row Saint John NB E2L 4S3 Canada Canada CAD 1 Common 100 CAD 1 Preference Class Marks and Spencer Inc.
40 Wellington Row Saint John NB E2L 4S3 Canada Canada CAD 1 Common 100 Marks and Spencer Shanghai Limited Unit 0304 6F ECO City 1 788 1 788 West Nan Jing Road Shanghai China China Registered
Marks and Spencer
Shanghai Ltd 863 Nanjing Road West Jin An District Shanghai China China Registered
Marks and Spencer Croatia d.
Drakovic eva ul.
82 10000 Zagreb Croatia Croatia HRK Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Czech Republic a.
Praha 4 Michle Vyskocilova 1 4814 Czech Republic Czech Republic CZK 1000
CZK 100000
CZK 1000000
Marks and Spencer Services S.
Vyskocilova 1 4814 1 4000 Praha 4 Michle Czech Republic Czech Republic Registered
O MSF Estonia Paldiski mnt 102 Tallinn 13522 Estonia Estonia Registered capital Andis SARL 48 Rue de la ChaussedAntin 75009 Paris France France 1060 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer
Greece SA 3335 Ermou Street Athens
Greece 3 Ordinary 80 Ignazia Limited Heritage Hall Le Marchant Street St Peter Port GY1 4JH Guernsey Guernsey 1 Ordinary 99.99 Marks and Spencer Alderney Limited Linwood Alles es Fees
Guernsey 1 Ordinary 100 Teranis Limited Heritage Hall Le Marchant Street St Peter Port GY1 4HY Guernsey Guernsey 1 Ordinary 99.99 Marks and Spencer Asia Paci c Limited Suite 1009 10F Tower 6 The Gateway 9 Canton Road Kowloon Hong Kong Hong Kong HKD 1 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Hong Kong Investments Limited Suite 1009 10F Tower 6 The Gateway 9 Canton Road Kowloon Hong Kong Hong Kong HKD1 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Hungary Kft Fehrvri t 5052 Budapest Hungary Hungary HUF280500000
Marks and Spencer India pvt Limited Tower C RMZ Millenia 4th Floor Lake Wing 1 Murphy Road Bangalore  India India INR10 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Reliance India Pvt Ltd 4th Floor Court House Lokmanya Tilak Marg Dhobi Talao Mumbai 400 002 India India INR 10 Class A 51 INR 10 Class B 100 INR 10 Class C ii Supreme Tradelinks Private Limited First Floor Anand Bhawan Sansar Chandra Road Jaipur 302 001 India India INR 10 Ordinary 100 Aprell Limited 2429 Mary Street Dublin 1 Ireland Ireland 1.25 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Ireland Limited 2427 Mary Street Dublin 1 Ireland Ireland 1.25 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Pension Trust Ireland Limited iii 2427 Mary Street Dublin 1 Ireland Ireland Limited by guarantee Name Registered Address Country Share Class
Marks and Spencer Israel Limited 31 Ahad Haam Street TEL AVIV 65202 Israel Israel NIS Ordinary 100 Per Una Italia SRL in liquidation via Giotto 25  59100 Prato Italy Italy  Quota 100 Marks and Spencer Jersey Limited 71 1 Britannia Place Bath Street St Helier Jersey 1 Ordinary 100 MSF Latvia SIA in liquidation Ieriku iela 3 Riga LV1084 Latvia Latvia 1 42 Ordinary 100 UAB MSF Lithuania Gedimino pr.
20 Vilnius
Lithuania 28.96 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Montenegro DOO
CO Eurofast Global Limited 1 1 2 Bul Svetog Petra Cetinjskog 8100 Podgorica
Montenegro  Ordinary 100 M and S Mode International B.
Prins Bernhardplein 200 1097 JB Amsterdam
Netherlands 100 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Nederland B.
Prins Bernhardplein 200 1097 JB  Amsterdam Netherlands Netherlands 450 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer BV Prins Bernhardplein 1097 JB Amsterdam Netherlands Netherlands 100 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Nederland Retail B.
Muntplein 10C 101 2 WR Amsterdam Netherlands Netherlands 100.00 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Stores B.
Prins Bernhardplein 200 1097 JB Amsterdam Netherlands Netherlands 450 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Poland Sp z o.
Ul.
Marszakowska 1041 22 0001 7 Warszawa Poland Poland PLN 50.00
Marks and Spencer Portugal Lda.
Avenida da Liberdade 249 1 2501 43 Lisbon Portugal Portugal 1 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Romania SA
262 Timisoara Boulevard Anchor Plaza 3rd Floor premises 3B1 6th District Bucharest Romania Romania RON 18.30
Marks and Spencer Doo Beograd in liquidation Patrisa Lumumbe no.
1 1000 Belgrade Serbia RSD Quotas 100 Marks and Spencer Singapore Investments
Ltd.
77 Robinson Road 1 300 Robinson 77 Singapore
Singapore No Par Value
No Par Value
MSF Slovakia S.
Ivansk cesta 16  Bratislava 821 04  Slovakia Slovakia Registered capital Marks and Spencer SA Pty Limited Woolworths House 93 Longmarket Street Cape Town 8001 South Africa South Africa ZAR 2 Ordinary 100 MandS Spain S.
Calle Fuencarral No.
28010 Madrid Spain Spain 1 Ordinary 100 Marks and Spencer Thailand Limited 101 1 Supalai Grand Tower 24th Floor Rama 3 Road Kwaeng Chongnonsi Khet Yannawa Bangkok 101 20 Thailand Thailand THB 100.00
Marks and Spencer Clothing Textile Trading L.
Havalani Karsisi istanbul Dunya Ticaret Merkezi A3 Blok Kat1 1 Yesilkoy Bakirkoy Istanbul Turkey Turkey TRL 25.00
Marks and Spencer Services Inc.
271 1 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington DE 19808 United States United States USD 1 Common 100 Marks and Spencer Ventures Finance LLC 271 1 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington DE 19808 United States United States USD 1 Common 100 NOTE A number of the companies listed are legacy companies which no longer serve any operational purpose. i The shares of all international subsidiary undertakings are held by companies within the Group other than the Company Marks and Spencer Group plc. ii INR 10 Class C shares 100% owned by JV partner. iii No share capital as the company is limited by guarantee.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC 52 weeks 53 weeks 52 weeks 52 weeks 52 weeks Income statement
UK 9441.7 9470.8 9223.1 9155.7 8951.4 International 1180.3 1084.6 1088.3 1154.0 1075.4 10622.0 10555.4 103 1 1.4 10309.7 10026.8 Operating pro tloss International 74.4 43.2 60.7 94.2 1 20.2 Total operating pro t253.2 584.1 701.3 694.5 753.0 Net interest payable 106.1 1 1 0.6 1 1 1.8 125.8 2 12.9 Pension  nance income 29.3 15.3 10.5 1 1.7 7 .1 Pro t on ordinary activities before taxation 176.4 488.8 600.0 580.4 547.2 Analysed between Pro t before tax and adjusted items 613.8 689.6 661.2 622.9 648.1 Adjustments to reported pro t 437.4 200.8 61.2 42.5 100.9 Income tax expense 60.7 84.4 1 18.3 74.4 102.4 Pro t after taxation 115.7 404.4 481.7 506.0 444.8 52 weeks 53 weeks 52 weeks 52 weeks 52 weeks Basic earnings per share Pro t after tax Weighted average ordinary shares in issue 7.2p 24.9p 29.7p 32.5p 28.3p Adjusted basic earnings per share Adjusted pro t after tax Weighted average ordinary shares in issue 30.4p 35.0p 33.1p 32.2p 31.9p Dividend per share declared in respect of the year Dividend cover Adjusted basic earnings per shareDividend per share 1.6x 1.9x 1.8x 1.9x 1.9x Retail  xed charge cover Operating pro t before depreciation and operating lease chargesFixed charges 3.4x 3.7x 3.6x 3.4x 3.5x Statement of  nancial position Net assets m 3150.4 3443.4 3198.8 2706.7 2519.5 Net debt m 1934.7 2138.3 2223.2 2463.6 2614.3 Capital expenditure m 331.2 525.1 526.6 710.0 821.3 Stores and space UK stores 979 91 telUK selling space m sq ft 1 7 .0 1 6.8 1 6.6 1 6.4 International stores 45tel418 International selling space m sq ft 5.9 6.1 6.0 5.8 5.4
UK 53562 52388 52247 54678 51835 International 6202 6507 6849 6498 5683 Based on continuing operations.
Excludes accrued interest.
Excludes special dividend.
GROUP FINANCIAL RECORD 133 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APM
Closest equivalent statutory measure
Income Statement Measures
Movement in revenue per the Income Statement Sales from non like forlike stores The period on period change in revenue excluding VAT from stores which have been trading and where there has been no signi cant change in footage for at least 52 weeks and online sales.
The measure is used widely in the retail industry as an indicator of sales performance.
It excludes the impact of new stores closed stores or stores with signi cant footage change.
FY 1617 FY 1516 m % UK Revenue Likeforlike 9039.2 9213.0 1.9% Net space change 402.5 1 1 1.7 Total 9441.7 9324.7 1.3% Week 53  1 46.1 Statutory 9441.7 9470.8 0.3%site revenue Online revenue None Not applicable Total revenue through the Groups online platforms.
These revenues are reported within the relevant UK and International segment results.
The growth in revenues on a yearonyear basis is a good indicator of the performance of the online channel and is a measure used within the Groups incentive plans.
Refer to the Remuneration Report for explanation of why this measure is used within incentive plans.
Revenue growth at constant currency None Not applicable The period on period change in revenue retranslating the previous year revenue at the average actual periodic exchange rates used in the current nancial year.
This measure is presented as a means of eliminating the eff ects of exchange rate  uctuations on the periodonperiod reported results.
FY 1617 FY 1516 m % International Revenue At reported currency 11 80.3 1066.3 10.7% Impact of FX translation  1 1 5.2 At constant currency 11 80.3 11 8 1.5 0.1 % Gross margin Gross pro t margin
Where referred to throughout the Annual Report gross margin is calculated as gross pro t before adjusted items on a management basis divided by revenue.
The gross pro t used in this calculation is based on an internal measure of margin rather than the statutory margin which excludes certain downstream logistics costs.
This is a key internal management metric for assessing category performance.
Adjusted items None Not applicable Those items which the Group excludes from its adjusted pro t metrics in order to present a further measure of the Groups performance.
Each of these items costs or incomes is considered to be signi cant in nature andor value.
Excluding these items from pro t metrics provides readers with helpful additional information on the performance of the business across periods because it is consistent with how the business performance is reported to the Board and the Operating Committee.
EBIT before adjusted items
Adjusted items See Note 5 Calculated as pro t before the impact of adjusted items net  nance costs and tax.
This measure is used in calculating the Return on Capital Employed for the Group.
Pro t before tax and adjusted items Pro t before tax Adjusted items see Note 5 Pro t before the impact of adjusted items and tax.
The Group considers this to be an important measure of Group performance and is consistent with how the business performance is reported to and assessed by the Board and the Operating Committee.
This is a measure used within the Groups incentive plans.
Refer to the Remuneration Report for explanation of why this measure is used within incentive plans.
Adjusted earnings per share Earnings per share Adjusted items see Note 5 Pro t after tax attributable to owners of the parent and before the impact of adjusted items divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the  nancial year.
This is a measure used within the Groups incentive plans.
Refer to the Remuneration Report for explanation of why this measure is used within incentive plans.
MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC GLOSSARY CONTINUED
Closest equivalent statutory measure
Income Statement Measures continued Adjusted diluted earnings per share Diluted earnings per share Adjusted items See Note 5 Pro t after tax attributable to owners of the parent and before the impact of adjusted items divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the  nancial year adjusted for the eff ects of any potentially dilutive options.
Eff ective tax rate before adjusted items Eff ective tax rate Adjusted items and their tax impact See Note 5 Total income tax charge for the Group excluding the tax impact of adjusted items divided by the pro t before tax and adjusted items.
This measure is an indicator of the ongoing tax rate for the Group.
52week period ended 26 March 201 6 53week period ended 2 April 201 6 Results for the 53rd week in the statutory reporting period ended 2 April 201 6 Every 6 years an additional week is included within the statutory period to ensure that the year end date stays in line with the end of March.
The prior year statutory  nancial measures were based on such a 53 week reporting period.
In order to provide a meaningful comparison with this years 52 week period all  nancial movements in commentary relative to the prior year are provided on a 52 week basis and exclude the 53rd week unless otherwise noted.
The
Group considers that presentation of comparatives on this basis enables stakeholders to more appropriately compare the performance of the business year on year.
The 52 week period for the prior year has been used for management incentive purposes.
Balance Sheet Measures Net debt None Reconciliation of net debt see note 27 Net debt comprises total borrowings bank bonds and  nance lease liabilities net of accrued interest net derivative  nancial instruments that hedge the borrowings and the Scottish Limited Partnership liability to the UK pension scheme less cash cash equivalents and unlisted and shortterm investments.
This measure is a good indication of the strength of the Groups balance sheet position and is widely used by credit rating agencies.
Capital employed Net assets Refer to de nition The net total of assets and liabilities as reported in the annual  nancial statement excluding assets and liabilities in relation to investment property net retirement bene t position derivatives current and deferred tax liabilities Scottish Limited Partnership liability noncurrent borrowings and provisions in respect of adjusted items.
This measure is used in the calculation of Return on Capital Employed.
Cash Flow Measures Free cash  ow Net cash in ow from operating activities See Financial
The cash generated from the Groups operating activities less capital expenditure and interest paid.
This measure shows the cash retained by the Group in the year.
Free cash  ow preshareholder returns Net cash in ow from operating activities See Financial
Calculated as the cash generated from the Groups operating activities less capital expenditure and interest paid excluding returns to shareholders dividends and share buyback.
This measure shows the cash generated by the Group during the year that is available for returning to shareholders and is used within the Groups incentive plans.
Other Measures Capital expenditure None Refer to de nition Calculated as the purchase of property plant and equipment investment property and intangible assets during the year less proceeds of asset disposals excluding any assets acquired as part of a business combination.
Return on Capital
None Not applicable Calculated as EBIT before adjusted items divided by the average of opening and closing capital employed.
This measure is used within the Groups incentive plans.
Refer to the Remuneration Report for explanation of why this measure is used within incentive plans.
Gross pro t margin is not de ned within IFRS but is a widely accepted pro t measure being derived from revenue less cost of sales divided by revenue.
EBIT is not de ned within IFRS but is a widely accepted pro t measure being earnings before interest and tax.
OUR BUSINESS OUR PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 ANALYSIS OF SHARE REGISTER Ordinary shares As at 1 April 201 7  the Company had 1 66083 registered holders of ordinary shares.
Their shareholdings are analysed below.
It should be noted that many of our private investors hold their shares through nominee companies therefore the actual number of shares held privately is estimated to be around 30% higher than indicated.
Range of shareholding Number of holdings % Balance as at 1 April 201 7 % 501  1000 31960 1 9.24 23920896 1.47 1001  2000 24254 1 4.60 34835196 2.1 4 2001  5000 161 32 9.71 49329942 3.04 5001  10000 41 19 2.48 28449793 1.75 10001  100000 194 1 1.1 7 4536971 1 2.79 1000001  Highest 1 57 0.10 12847021 46 79.07 Total 166083 100.00 1624727846 100.00 Category of shareholder Number of shareholders
Number of ordinary shares
Private 161053 96.97 185490855 1 1.42 Institutional and corporate 5030 3.03 143923699 1 88.58 Total 166083 100.00 1624727846 100.00 201718 FINANCIAL CALENDAR AND KEY DATES 1 June 201 7 Exdividend date  Final dividend 2 June 201 7 Record date to be eligible for the  nal dividend 1 1 July 201 7 Results  Quarter 1 Trading update 1 1 July 201 7 Annual General Meeting 1 1am 1 4 July 201 7 Final dividend payment date for the year to 1 April 201 7 8 November 201 7 Results  Half Year 1 6 November 201 7 Exdividend date  Interim dividend 1 7 November 201 7 Record date to be eligible for the interim dividend January 201 8 Results  Quarter 3 Trading update 1 2 January 201 8 Interim dividend payment date sitethecompany will receive noti cation by email when this is available.
Provisional dates.
MANAGING YOUR SHARES ONLINE Shareholders can manage their holdings online by registering with Shareview the internetbased platform provided by
Registration is a straightforward process and allows shareholders to Sign up for electronic shareholder communication.
Receive trading updates by email.
View all of their shareholdings in one place.
Update their records following a change of address.
Have dividends paid into their bank account.
Vote in advance of Company general meetings.
MandS encourages shareholders to sign up for electronic communication as the reduction in printing costs and paper usage makes a valuable contribution to our Plan A commitments.
It is also bene cial to shareholders who can be noti ed by email whenever we release trading updates to the London Stock Exchange which are not mailed to shareholders.
For more information about the services off ered by Shareview and to registersite
Dividends are paid in January and July each year subject to the relevant Board and shareholder approvals.
These can be paid quickly and securely directly into your bank account.
You may also choose to have your dividends invested in further MandS shares through our dividend reinvestment plan DRIP terms and conditions apply.
To arrange either of these options simply call Equiniti on the numbers provided on the following page.
Alternativelysite
SHAREHOLDER
INFORMATION 136 MARKS AND SPENCER GROUP PLC DIRECTORS REPORT ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 2017 This years AGM will be held at Wembley Stadium Wembley London HA9 0WS on Tuesday 1 1 July 201 7 .
The meeting will start at 1 1am and registration will be open from 9.30am.
DUPLICATE DOCUMENTS Many shareholders have more than one account on the share register and receive duplicate documentation from us as a result.
If you fall into this group please contact Equiniti to combine your accounts. itethecompany.
The MandS corporate website provides a wealth of useful information for shareholders and should be your  rst port of call for general queries relating to the Company and its shares.
Through the website you can also register to receive news alerts by email simply click on alerts in the top right corner and enter your details.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the  nancial information on our website.
This information has been prepared under the relevant accounting standards and legislation.
CHANGING YOUR ADDRESS You should inform Equiniti of your new address as soon as possible to avoid missing important correspondence relating to your shareholding.
If you hold 2500 shares or fewer and reside in the UK this can be done quickly over the telephone.
Holdings of more than 2500 shares will require a written instruction quoting your full name 1 1digit shareholder reference number if known and both your previous and new addresses.
SHAREGIFT
If you have a very small shareholding that is uneconomical to sell you may want to consider donating it to ShareGift registered charity no. unwanted shareholdings to good causes.
Find out more by visiting sharegift. or by calling 44 0tel .
CAPITAL GAINS TAX For the purpose of Capital Gains Tax CGT the price of an ordinary share on 3 1 March 1 982 was 1 53.5p which when adjusted for the 1 for 1 scrip issue in 1 984 gives a  gure of Following the capital reorganisation in March 2002 HMRC has con rmed that the base cost for CGT purposes was 372.35p 8 1.43% for an ordinary share and 68.75p 1 8.75% for a B share.
SHAREHOLDER QUERIES The Companys share register is maintained by our registrar Equiniti.
Shareholders with queries relating to their shareholding should contact Equiniti directly using one of the methods listed below.
For more general queries shareholders should consult the Investors section of our corporate website.
AMERICAN DEPOSITARY RECEIPTS ADRS The Company has a sponsored Level 1 ADR programme with Deutsche Bank.
This enables US investors to purchase Marks and Spencer American Depositary Shares ADS in US dollars over the counter.
The Company has chosen to have the ADRs quoted on the OTC markets highest tier International PremierQX.
For Deutsche Bank email emailsite ADR website adr.
Tollfree callers within the US 1tel For those calling outside the US SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION CONTINUED An increasing number of shareholders have been contacting us to report unsolicited and suspicious phone calls received from purported brokers who off er to buy their shares at a price far in excess of their market value.
It is unlikely that rms authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA will contact you with off ers like this.
As such we believe these calls are part of a scam commonly referred to as a boiler room.
The callers obtain your details from publicly available sources of information including the Companys share register and can be extremely persistent and persuasive.
Shareholders are cautioned to be very wary of any unsolicited advice off ers to buy shares at a discount sell your shares at a premium or requests to complete con dentiality agreements with the callers.
Remember if it sounds too good to be true it probably is More detailed information and guidance is available on the shareholder information pages of our corporate website.
We also encourage shareholders to read the FCAs guidance on how to avoid scams at fca. itensumersscams.
An overview of current common scams can be found on the Action Fraud website actionfraud.
MandS Registered Offi ce Waterside House 35 North Wharf Road London W2 1 NW United Kingdom TelephonetelRegistered in England and Wales no.
General queries Customer queries Alternatively email us at email RegistrarShareholder queries Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom Telephone If calling from outside the UK Online help. with your enquiry.
Students
Please note students are advised to source information from our website.
Additional documents An interactive version of our 201 6site annualreport2017.
Additionallysitethecompany.
Alternatively call .
Group Secretary and Head of Corporate Governance Amanda Mellor USEFUL CONTACTS SHAREHOLDER SECURITY A Page Accounting policies 96 Adjusted items 103 Appointment and retirement of directors 79 Audit Committee Report 48 Auditor 51 Auditors remuneration 102 Auditors report 84 Annual General Meeting 83 Board 36 Borrowing facilities 1 1 7 Business model 1 2 Capital commitments 1 25 Capital expenditure 29 Con icts of interest 79 Corporate governance 34 Cost of sales 102 Critical accounting judgements 100 Deadlines for exercising voting rights 80 Deferred tax 1 24 Depreciation 98 100 1 1 5 Derivatives 99 Diluted earnings per share 92 Directors indemnities 79 Directors interests 73 Directors responsibilities 83 Directors single  gure of remuneration 57 66 Disclosure of information to auditor 83 Dividend cover 1 32 Dividend per share 107 E Page Earnings per share 107 Employees 108 Employee involvement 8 1 Employees with disabilities 82 Equal opportunities 82 Finance costsincome 104 Finance leases 1 1 7 Financial assets 1 1 6 Financial instruments 1 1 8 Financial liabilities 1 1 7 Financial review 26 Fixed charge cover 1 32 Glossary of alternative performance measures 1 33 Going concern 83 Goodwill 98 Groceries Supply Code of Practice 82 Hedging reserve 94 Income statement 92 Intangible assets 1 1 4 Interests in voting rights 80 International Financial Reporting Standards 96 Inventories 98 Investment property 93 Key performance indicators 1 8 Market and customer insights 06 N Page Nomination Committee 46 Operating Committee 1 1 Plan A 03 Principal risks and uncertainties 32 Pro t and dividends 80 Power to issue shares 80 Political donations 83 Risk management 3033 Remuneration policy 58 Remuneration Committee 77
Remuneration Report 66
Segmental information 101 Shareholder information 1 35 Share capital 80 1 25 Share schemes 72 1 1 2 Signi cant agreements 81 Statement of cash  ows 95 Statement of comprehensive income 92 Statement of  nancial position 93 Subsidiary undertakings 1 29 Taxation 28 Total shareholder return 7 4 Trade and other payables 97 Trade and other receivables 97 Transfer of securities 80 Variation of rights 80 Viability statement FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Page Consolidated income statement 92 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 92 Consolidated statement of nancial position 93 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 94 Consolidated cash  ow statement 95
1 Accounting policies 96 2 Segmental information 101 3 Expense analysis 102 4 Pro t before taxation 102 5 Adjusted items 103 6 Finance incomecosts 104 7 Income tax expense 105 8 Earnings per share 107 9 Dividends 107 10 Employees 108 11 Retirement bene ts 108 Marks and Spencer Scottish Limited Partnership Sharebased payments 112 Intangible assets 114 Property plant and equipment Other  nancial assets 1 16 Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Trade and other payables Borrowings and other nancial liabilities 1 17 Financial instruments 118 Provisions 124 Deferred tax 124 Ordinary share capital 1 25 Contingencies and commitments 1 25 Analysis of cash  ows given in the statement of cash  ows 126 Analysis of net debt 1 26 Related party transactions 1 27 Company  nancial statements 128 Notes to the company nancial statements 129 This report is printed on Cocoon preprint 100 off set a 100% recycled paper made from postconsumer waste.
Cocoon is manufactured to the certi ed environmental management system ISO 14001.
Designed and produced by Friend site Printed by CPI Colour.
CPI Colour are ISO 14001 certi ed CarbonNeutral Alcohol Free.
INDEX
