Building momentum and driving growth Pennon Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Find out more about Pennon Corporate website site Annual Report siteAR2017 Siblyback Reservoir Cornwall Cover Alan Hawkins and Zak Morrill at Ardley ERF Integrated reporting Our business touches the lives of many stakeholders from customers employees investors and suppliers to our communities the environment and regulators.
Reflecting the integrated nature of our business we seek to integrate our reporting on financial economic social and environmental aspects of our performance and how they contribute to longterm value creation.
To support this ambition this report has been prepared with reference to the principles of the International Integrated Reporting Councils International IR Framework.
Strategic report
04 Group financial highlights 06 Group operational highlights 08 Chairmans statement 12 Market overview 14 Business model 16 Strategic priorities 18 Our people Group performance
20 Review of the Chief Executive Officer
26 Our operations 26 Water and wastewater 32 Waste management 38 Report of the Chief Financial Officer 46 Risk report
54 Chairmans letter to shareholders 56 Board of Directors 63 Board Committees reports 74 Directors remuneration report 100 Directors report  other statutory disclosures Financial statements and shareholder information 106 Independent auditors report 114 Financial statements 173 Fiveyear financial summary 174 Shareholder information As one of the largest environmental infrastructure groups in the UK Pennon is at the top end of the FTSE 250 has assets of around 5.9 billion and a workforce of around 5000 people.
Our mission Together we will build the most trusted environmental solutions company in the UK providing infrastructure and services that enhance our customers lives protect the environment and deliver growth for our shareholders.
Our pillars Our six pillars form the foundations of our culture and the way we work.
Safety first The safety of our employees customers and communities comes first.
We will do everything safely and responsibly or not at all.
Our people Our success comes from our talented people doing great things for our customers and each other.
Service and value We are committed to delivering exceptional service and value for our customers and communities.
Efficiency in everything we do We work smart keep things simple and invest money wisely.
Progress through innovation From the technology and science we use through to the way we approach what we do  innovation drives us forward.
Sustainability matters We take our responsibilities towards the environment seriously and aim to be sustainable in everything we do.
Our businesses The merged water company of South West Water and Bournemouth Water provides water and wastewater services to a population of c.1.7 million in Cornwall Devon and parts of Dorset and Somerset and water only services to c.0.5 million in parts of Dorset Hampshire and Wiltshire.
South West Water was awarded enhanced status for its 20152020 Business Plan and has the highest potential returns in the water sector.
Viridor is a leading UK recycling energy recovery and waste management company providing services to more than 150 local authorities and major corporate clients as well as over 32000 customers across the UK.
Water and wastewater
Strategic report The performance of the Group against our strategy underpins our confidence in delivering our longestablished sectorleading dividend policy.
Pennons longestablished 10year dividend policy of 4% yearonyear growth above RPI inflation to 2020 results in a doubling of dividend over 10 years 20102020 This reflects the Boards confidence in the continued outperformance of our water business and our significant investment in our waste business which is successfully delivering on its targeted contribution to Group earnings.
Read more page 42 1 Future dividends growth based on policy of 4%  RPI forecast to 2020.
7.1% dividend increase over 201516 Jess Dunn at Ardley ERF Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 02 Strong performance underpinning longestablished sectorleading dividend growth
04 Group financial highlights 06 Group operational highlights 08 Chairmans statement 12 Market overview 14 Business model 16 Strategic priorities 18 Our people Strategic report 03 Group financial
highlights
Highlights of the year Strong earnings growth across the Group Delivered 107 million of EBITDA from energy recovery facilities ERFs ahead of c.
100 million target Continued sectorleading return on regulated equity at 12.6% Continued delivery of longestablished 10year sectorleading dividend policy supported by earnings growth Good performance in cost base efficiency South West Water total expenditure totex efficiency K6 to date 129 million Bournemouth Water successfully integrated on track to deliver cumulative synergies of c.
27 million by 2020 17 million per annum of efficiencies across the Group by 2019 with 9 million per annum secured to date 385 million of capital investment in sustainable growth projects Group remains well funded with low cost efficient longterm financing.
Read more page 38
1353m 0.1%
Statutory
8.5% Profit before tax
2.0% Cash and committed facilities 1.4bn Dividend Assets 7.1% 3.5%
Underlying
EBITDA
Adjusted
8.4% 7.4% Profit before tax
Capital investment 18.3% 21.4% Shareholder profits Profit before tax and nonunderlying items 250 Nonunderlying items before tax 39 Statutory profit before tax 211 Tax charge 31 Profit attributable to perpetual capital holders 16 Profit after tax attributable to shareholders 164 Underlying earnings are presented alongside statutory results as the Directors believe they provide a more useful comparison on business trends and performance.
Note 6 to the financial statements provides more detail on nonunderlying items.
2 Earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation EBITDA and nonunderlying items adjusted to include IFRIC 12 interest receivable and share of joint venture EBITDA better reflects all the earnings arising from our ERFs see reconciliation on page 40.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Key performance indicators Revenue m 1201.2 1321.2 1357.2 1352.3 1353.1 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 0.1% Dividend per share pence 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 7.1% EBITDA m 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 7.4% Interest rate on average net debt % 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 0.1% Profit before tax m 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 18.3% Regulatory capital value as at 31 March m 3teltel 4.5% Earnings per share pence 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 19.0% Group assets as at 31 March bn 5.9tel 2014 2013 3.5%
Underlying
Adjusted
Statutory
Before nonunderlying items and deferred tax
Underlying
Strategic report Group operational
highlights
Highlights of the year Water business delivered net ODI rewards and improved performance in a number of areas No water restrictions Exceeded leakage target resulting in ODI reward Highest level of wastewater treatment compliance 98.6% of bathing waters achieving the more stringent bathing water standards that were introduced in 2015 Energy Recovery Facilities ERFs continued to drive growth eight operational sites performing well with average availability at greater than 90% for 201617 Construction of four further ERFs is ongoing Dunbar and South London Beddington progressing to budget Glasgows Recycling and Renewable Energy Centre is receiving waste and generating energy.
New construction contracts are progressing well with ERF commissioning expected in 2017 Avonmouth ERF investment now underway with key construction and operational contracts in place.
Completion expected in 202021 Recycling selfhelp measures delivering increased margins and increased EBITDA Negotiations with Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority GMWDA continue to ensure a well managed transition for the contract New retail venture for business customers established by Pennon Water Services and South Staffordshire Plc incorporating South Staffs and Cambridge Water Driving value through efficiency  integrating sharing best practice reducing costs through a Shared Service Review.
Read more pages 26 to 37 Total renewable energy generation Bathing water compliance sufficient quality or higher Total waste material inputs tonnes 1549GWh 98.6% 7.6m Drinking water quality mean zonal compliance Riddor incidence rate per 100000 employees South West Water Bournemouth Water 99.96% 99.98% 683 Average ERF availability Recycling volumes traded tonnes 90% 1.6m 1 As measured by Numeric Compliance.
2 Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Sufficient quality Excellent quality Recycling and other
Landfill
1 These are the key performance indicators KPIs we use to measure the performance of our businesses as described in our business model on page 14.
2 Incidents involving employees under the Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations.
See page 18 for further details of our health and safety performance.
3 Average availability for the year.
Includes 100% capacity of joint ventures at Lakeside and Runcorn 1.
4 New standards introduced in 2015 under the EUs revised Bathing Water Directive.
The classifications are poor quality sufficient quality the new minimum standard good quality and excellent quality the new guideline standard.
Key performance indicators RIDDOR incidents 42teltel 17% Customer satisfaction with overall service % 201617 201617 201516 201314 201213 South West Water Viridor
Water
T otal renewable energy generation
201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 3.9% Drinking water quality mean zonal compliance % el 2013 2012 el South West Water Bournemouth Water ERF availability % 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 5.9% T otal waste material inputs million tonnes 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 Bathing water compliance % 2016 2015 Recycling volumes traded million tonnes 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 8.0% Strategic report Chairmans statement Sir John Parker
Pennon Group performed well in the year delivering on its strategy of marketleading performance across its businesses.
Dear Shareholder Pennon Group performed well in the year delivering on its strategy of marketleading performance efficiency and investing for growth.
The Group has the UKs top two water businesses as measured by return on regulated equity RoRE while Viridors expanding portfolio of Energy Recovery Facilities ERFs is on track to generate further growth in earnings over the next few years.
The Groups Shared Services Review addressed a key strategic objective to drive value through increased efficiency during the year.
The Groups final dividend of 24.87 pence per share reflects an increase of 7.1% and maintains our longstanding sectorleading dividend policy of RPI plus 4% yearonyear growth.
This should see dividends per share almost doubling over 10 years to 2020.
Pennon is committed to providing a safe place for our people to work where health and wellbeing comes first.
Since my previous report we have continued to make good progress in establishing an effective Group structure by drawing together all aspects of the Group under the Pennon umbrella.
Our CEO with the support of a highcalibre executive team is pulling together support functions at Group level that were previously held within each subsidiary.
The two Managing Directors who are running the water and waste businesses as operational divisions report directly to the CEO.
Pennons NonExecutive Directors are now also members of the South West Water board along with three dedicated South West Water nonexecutive directors one of which is currently a vacancy.
Safety
The position of health and safety as the first item on the agenda for every Board meeting reflects the importance I and my colleagues attach to this crucial area.
It also underlines our determination to increase employee engagement address the culture and behaviours that lead to accidents and learn all relevant lessons for the future from any incident.
Regrettably a tragic incident occurred in August 2016 resulting in the death of a Viridor employee whilst at work.
Our thoughts are with his family friends and colleagues as we work with the Health and Safety Executive in relation to this incident.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 We strive for the highest standards of health and safety to achieve our objective of a harm free environment.
Pennon is committed to providing a safe place for our people to work where health and wellbeing comes first.
The Board has supported the appointment of a Group director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability who will devise and implement a strategy to raise the Groups health and safety performance.
Employees and culture Throughout the Group there is a spirit of pride and professionalism and these are key qualities at a time of change.
We have no shortage of new talent joining the company too through graduate recruitment and our awardwinning apprenticeship programmes.
We are determined to recognise talent in both the Groups businesses and to support development of people from early on in their careers not just in toplevel succession planning.
As many aspects of the Groups structure are still relatively new we intend to provide more information about Pennons culture and values in next years annual report.
Our subsidiary companies each have a strong sense of purpose supported by their own set of corporate values and this provides a sound foundation on which to build.
I firmly believe that by getting the structure and governance of the Group right and by attracting and developing the right people the right culture and values will follow.
We are developing a culture that can be lived throughout the Group.
Meanwhile on behalf of the Board I would like to take this opportunity to thank all our employees for their professional approach and their dedication to the many communities and stakeholders we serve daily.
Shared services and other Group synergies Efforts to centralise key corporate services and operational functions following the Shared Services Review reflecting our more unified Group are progressing well.
This is part of an efficiency programme that is increasing integration encouraging the sharing of best practice and creating shareholder value.
This work has been facilitated by the creation of the role of Group Chief Executive Officer which has now been in existence for over a year and is binding the Pennon Group more closely together.
Sustainability
As a leading environmental infrastructure company the Group actively contributes to the UKs longterm needs for water energy and waste management and we aim to ensure that all our business activities have a positive economic social and environmental impact.
Our evaluation of risk consistently addresses sustainability requirements.
The Boards Sustainability Committee oversaw the Groups performance during the year in maintaining a responsible approach to business operations.
7.1% increase in dividend per share 78% of employees completed an annual engagement survey
Key achievements during the year The NonExecutive Directors have quickly adapted to their expanded roles in respect of the subsidiary businesses We have created new senior executive roles at Group level and have brought in subject matter specialists of a high calibre who will drive a consistent and effective approach in safety health and environmental impact The new Group executive meeting arrangements have allowed the senior executives from Pennon South West Water and Viridor to operate collaboratively in one forum when dealing with Groupwide issues The change is also facilitating holistic discussion and has improved communications across the Group with clear lines of sight into the subsidiary companies The administration required to support the Board has come together quickly.
Read more pages 54 to 62 Culture and values We are working with employees to bring together a core set of organisational values and build a culture that can be lived throughout the Group This process is drawing on the heritage and strengths of our principal operations Six pillars set out on pages 1415 underpin our values that will be shaped by employees during the year ahead Our customerfacing businesses Viridor South West Water and Bournemouth Water are established brands that are recognised and valued by the public We are already bringing our businesses closer together under new and modern branding.
Strategic report Governance The Groups revised framework for governance and decisionmaking introduced in April 2016 is operating well and allowing us to pursue synergies across the
Further details are provided on pages 58 to Our Senior Independent Director Gill Rider completed an assessment during the year of the new approach.
This was conducted alongside an independent external evaluation of the Boards structure operation and performance.
Based on these appraisals and on my own experience I believe the Group has a robust governance structure that is delivering efficient and transparent decisionmaking while preserving the degree of regulatory independence that Ofwat requires for the water business.
I commend the Groups commitment to the new governance framework.
The Group has a robust governance structure that is delivering efficient and transparent decisionmaking.
Board changes Ian McAulay stepped down as the Chief Executive Officer of Viridor during the year and we thank him for his contribution and wish him well in the future.
Phil Piddington was appointed to the new role of Managing Director of Viridor in September 2016.
The change in the management team and structure at Viridor which mirrors the arrangements in place at South West Water better reflects the objectives of the Group and will drive stronger accountability.
Moreover the appointment of Phil Piddington demonstrates that the Group is adding new skills and executing succession planning well.
Steve Johnson stepped down as a nonexecutive director of South West Water in April 2016 following his appointment to a new external executive position.
Rigorous testing is a key part of ensuring a high quality water supply for customers
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 10 Diversity We actively promote equality and diversity across the Group and hold a strong belief that we will be a better business if we can understand the views opinions and backgrounds of our customers communities shareholders and employees.
Currently a third of our Board members are women exceeding our target of at least 25% female representation.
Additionally the Board continues to pursue a progressive diversity agenda.
You will find further information on our Diversity Policy in our Nomination Committee Report on page 71.
We will be a better business if we can understand the views opinions and backgrounds of our customers communities shareholders and employees.
Looking to the future The Group has strong financial control sound administration and our governance is robust and transparent.
Moreover we are building the assets and the teams to secure further growth.
With the commitment of everybody working at Pennon Group under the direction of a strong leadership we have every reason to be confident about the future.
Sir John Parker
Pennon Group plc 23 May 2017 Boardroom diversity Our Board is made up of 2 women and 4 men.
Read more page 71 Pennon Board visits Ardley ERF Board members regularly visit operational sites and take the opportunity to meet employees and see a plant at work.
In April 2016 the Board visited Bournemouth Waters headquarters and received a tour of the water treatment works.
The Board meeting in February 2017 was held at Ardley ERF and included a tour of the plant and its awardwinning Visitor Centre which received 3483 visitors this year.
Board members also met the Ardleybased Energy trading team that implements the Groups energy risk management strategy and has aligned energy contracts to optimise cost and carbon benefits.
This same team also manages the energy trading for both output and usage which has helped the Group achieve greater energy efficiency.
Strategic report Market overview With clear market opportunities for both the water and waste businesses the Group is well prepared to capitalise on the changing regulatory water markets and is in a strong position to deliver growth through its increasing market share of the UKs energy recovery operations.
UK water sector UK water industry operators in the UK The water industry serves 50 million household and business customers in England and Wales who are supplied with drinking water and have their wastewater taken away and treated.
These services are provided by 16 privatelyowned regional companies of which 10 are providers of both water and wastewater services.
The UK water industry supplies clean water to properties through a mains network that is 420000km long source Water UK.
It manages more than 16 billion litres of wastewater a day through 624200km of sewers and 9000 wastewater treatment plants.
1 There are six regional companies.
In addition there are nine other small water providers.
Water regulators DEFRA sets the overall water and sewerage policy framework in England.
Ofwat is the economic regulator for the water sector in England and Wales.
Every five years companies submit business plans as part of a Price Review process.
South West Waters 201520 plan was awarded enhanced status as part of the 2014 Price Review.
The Environment Agency EA is the principal environmental regulator of the water and sewerage sector.
The Drinking Water Inspectorate DWI is the drinking water quality regulator.
They check companies supply safe drinking water and meet Water Quality Regulations.
The Consumer Council for Water CCWater represents consumers and takes up unresolved complaints.
Nonhousehold retail market On 1 April 2017 the nonhousehold retail market was opened allowing up to 1.2 million businesses and other nonhousehold customers across the country to choose which retailer they buy water and wastewater services from.
The nonhousehold market operates through a controlled portal operated by the Market Operator Services Limited MOSL.
It has required the separation of the wholesale and retail arms of water businesses.
Pennon Water Services PWS was established to manage the nonhousehold retail business for Pennon and has formed a retail venture with South Staffordshire plc.
1 Water only companies 2 Water and waste companies 10 businesses and other nonhousehold customers can choose who they buy water and wastewater services from Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 4 Waste inputs to Energy Recovery
UK combustible waste tonnes We estimate that in the UK 26 million tonnes of waste were suitable for combustion in Energy Recovery Facilities ERFs in 2016 comprising an estimated 15 million tonnes of municipal household waste and 11 million tonnes of commercial and industrial waste.
All the ERFs in the UK processed a combined 12 million tonnes of this waste in 2016.
Our facilities processed two million tonnes in 2016.
We expect that new ERFs being constructed will increase the UKs energy from waste capacity to c.1516 million tonnes by 2020.
During the same period Viridor will bring into operation ERFs at Glasgow Beddington Dunbar and Avonmouth providing a total capacity for Viridor ERFs of 3.2 million tonnes of waste.
Recycled waste materials 4m tonnes of recyclable waste materials processed in the UK in 2016 Viridor is a market leader in processing comingled waste streams where recyclables are mixed in the same bin collected by councils and their contractors.
In 2016 we processed c.0.7 million tonnes of comingled mixed recyclable waste out of an estimated total of four million tonnes indicating a 18% market share in comingled recyclate.
The volume of waste for recycling is expected to increase marginally reflecting population growth and possibly more so if national and local government policies especially in England align to encourage further recycling.
45% of household waste is currently recycled against the existing national target to recycle 50% of household waste by 2020.
Waste to landfill The UK mainland disposed of 12.5 million tonnes of active waste i. tonnes in 2015.
In 2016 our landfill sites received 1.7 million tonnes of active waste which comprised 14% market share.
In addition to this we received 0.7 million tonnes of inert inactive waste for daily cover and restoration purposes.
We expect the volume of waste being sent to landfill to continue to reduce as the availability of ERFs increase with an ongoing baseline requirement for landfill disposal of waste that is not suitable for recycling or recovery.
1 Municipal household waste 15m tn 2 Commercial and industrial waste 11m tn tonnes of waste to landfill in 2016 tonnes of waste to landfill in 2015 Control room at Exeter ERF Strategic report 13 Business model Through our business model we fulfil our vision to deliver sustainable shareholder value by providing high quality environmental infrastructure and customer services.
Our strategy is to lead in the UKs water and waste sectors invest for sustainable growth and drive value through efficiency.
Our strengths The best people The talent commitment and hard work of our people is the foundation of our success.
As a responsible employer we are focused on employee wellbeing retention training and development productivity and above all an unwavering commitment to health and safety.
Effective governance Strong governance framework provides oversight and support to Group businesses including robust decisionmaking and performance management processes.
High quality assets We invest in the construction of world class facilities and plants that use state ofthe art technology.
We engage the best people to maintain and operate our fleet of assets to ensure we always maximise returns.
Strong relationships with our suppliers We work closely with our suppliers and take the steps necessary to ensure their performance meets our expectations.
We expect them to uphold our standards align with our policies protect human rights and promote good working conditions.
Efficient financing The strength of our proposition and investor confidence in our performance and reputation means that we are well funded with efficient longterm financing.
Well managed risk Comprehensive and fully embedded risk management processes assist us in identifying and managing risks and opportunities to deliver the Groups strategy and objectives.
Our pillars Safety first The safety of our employees customers and communities comes first.
We will do everything safely and responsibly or not at all.
Our people Our success comes from our talented people doing great things for our customers and each other.
Service and value We are committed to delivering exceptional service and value for our customers and communities.
We provide water and wastewater services in the most efficient and sustainable way possible Read more page 26 We transform waste into energy high quality recyclates and raw materials Read more page 32 What we do  the strengths we rely on Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 14 Under the dam at Roadford Reservoir Devon Longterm priorities Leadership in UK water and waste We aim to lead in the water and waste sectors by capitalising on Group strengths capabilities best practice and synergies and achieving the right balance between risk and reward.
Read more page 22 Leadership in cost base efficiency We are focused on driving down overheads and operating in the most efficient way to minimise costs.
Read more page 23 Driving sustainable growth We actively seek opportunities to invest for growth whether through investment to increase our asset portfolio initiatives to expand our customer base or partnerships with other organisations.
Read more page 23 Value created for our stakeholders
Best ever customer service score for South West Water
19% Earnings per share increased to 47.0p
Number of apprentices trained within the Group since 2011
98.6% 141 bathing waters out of 143 classified as sufficient or better
Tonnes of waste materials recycled and our strategy to create value Our pillars Efficiency in everything we do We work smart keep things simple and invest money wisely.
Progress through innovation From the technology and science we use through to the way we approach what we do  innovation drives us forward.
Sustainability matters We take our responsibilities towards the environment seriously and aim to be sustainable in everything we do.
1 As measured by the service incentive mechanism SIM.
See page 30 for details.
2 Before nonunderlying items and deferred tax.
3 116 beaches 81.1% classified as excellent.
Strategic report 15 Strategic priorities Our strategic objectives are set and monitored through a rolling longterm strategic planning process.
This takes into account potential risks and our sustainability framework.
Longterm priorities Nearterm objectives Progress in 201617 KPIs Sustainability drivers Risks and uncertainties Leadership in UK water and waste Develop and fully maximise value from our infrastructure business through longterm predictable assetbacked indexlinked revenues Build on the strong track record of our water business by delivering and outperforming the K6 regulatory contract 20152020 Optimise our portfolio of Energy Recovery Facilities ERFs to ensure a high level of performance and availability is maintained Achieve the right balance between risk and reward by mitigating volatility through securing longterm cash flows Continue to drive returns from recycling selfhelp measures that reduce the cost base and improve the utilisation of our assets Continue to develop a new model for proactive customer service that puts our customers at the heart of everything we do.
Outperformance by South West Water against the K6 regulatory contract 20152020 continued in 201617 securing a net cumulative reward of 3.6 million South West Waters return on regulated equity RoRE continues to be sectorleading Innovative investment in new Mayflower Water Treatment Works in Plymouth  the first of its kind in the UK Delivery by Viridor of 107 million EBITDA from its ERF business exceeding the target of c.
100 million Improved performance of Viridors recycling business resulting from selfhelp initiatives to reduce costs and improve asset utilisation Dividend per share increased by 7.1% reflecting strong performance of Pennons water and waste management businesses.
90% average ERF availability 85% customer satisfaction with overall service 1 Average of the customer satisfaction scores achieved by South West Water Bournemouth Water and Viridor for the year.
Investing in people  protecting the health safety and wellbeing of our people to ensure we have a skilled diverse engaged and motivated workforce to deliver our strategy Environmental protection  integral to our water businesss regulatory contract and the promotion of the circular economy by our waste management business Waste prevention and resource efficiency delivering solutions for society is core to our strategy and helps to address the challenge of depleting natural resources.
Our aspiration to be a leader in the sectors in which we operate could be affected by the occurrence of certain events many of which have reputational consequences An avoidable health and safety incident Legal regulatory or tax noncompliance Poor customer service Failure to recruit retain and develop people with the appropriate skills Business interruption for example as a result of a failure of our information technology systems or operational failure Failure of a capital project Loss or corruption of data as a result of a cyber attack.
Leadership in cost base efficiency Complete the organisation change programme coming out of our Shared Services Review and finalise the centralisation of key corporate and operational services Continue to maximise the benefits of the integration of Bournemouth Water operations into South West Waters business Ongoing initiatives to reduce central overheads share best practice and deliver synergies.
Good progress towards delivering K6 cost savings of 27 million from the Bournemouth Water integration South West Water cumulative totex efficiency of 129 million driven by continuing advantages from our strategic alliances 17 million per annum of cost savings to be delivered across the Group by 2019 9 million per annum secured to date Cost efficient longterm financing in place 3.4% interest rate on annual net debt.
Minimising disruption and inconvenience for our communities  means that we also minimise the cost to the business Energy efficiency  the use of solar photovoltaics to power our facilities and other energy saving initiatives help us to reduce our own demand for electricity from the grid whilst maximising the energy generated from our core operations Responsible sourcing  value for money secured through robust procurement practices and sustainable supply chains.
Risks that could impact our ability to deliver efficiencies include Operational failures that result in rectification costs Changes in law or regulation that require additional expenditure to fund implementation and ongoing compliance An increase in customer bad debt resulting in additional debt collection costs Failure to recruit and retain people with the right skills mindset and motivation to share best practice deliver synergies and move the Group forward in the new shared services structure.
Driving sustainable growth Continue to grow the ERF business including the successful completion of construction projects at Glasgow South London Dunbar and Avonmouth ERFs Exploit the introduction of competition in the nonhousehold retail market by building scale and efficiency through Pennons water retail business Pennon Water Services Identify and consider opportunities for further growth.
385 million invested in key infrastructure during the year Four ERFs now under construction New retail venture for business customers between Pennon Water Services South Staffs and Cambridge Water  combined revenue of c.
170 million and entering the market with the fourth largest customer base Well positioned for regulatory and market developments  ongoing engagement with Ofwat reforms and prepared for the 2019 price review.
Group assets as at 31 March bn 5.9tel 2014 2013 3.5% Customer service and engagement increased focus to improve the customer experience and help expand our customer base whilst retaining existing customers High standards of business conduct  ensure that our people are incentivised appropriately and exhibit the right behaviours to enable us to achieve longterm and sustainable growth.
Our ability to deliver sustainable growth could be impacted by Unfavourable economic conditions Local authority austerity Poor customer service Loss of market share as a result of regulatory reform and increased competition Difficulties in recruiting retaining and developing people with the necessary commercial acumen to help our businesses grow and prosper.
Strategic priorities linked to annual bonus targets see pages 90 and 91 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 16 Longterm priorities Nearterm objectives Progress in 201617 KPIs Sustainability drivers Risks and uncertainties Colliford Reservoir Cornwall Leadership in UK water and waste Develop and fully maximise value from our infrastructure business through longterm predictable assetbacked indexlinked revenues Build on the strong track record of our water business by delivering and outperforming the K6 regulatory contract 20152020 Optimise our portfolio of Energy Recovery Facilities ERFs to ensure a high level of performance and availability is maintained Achieve the right balance between risk and reward by mitigating volatility through securing longterm cash flows Continue to drive returns from recycling selfhelp measures that reduce the cost base and improve the utilisation of our assets Continue to develop a new model for proactive customer service that puts our customers at the heart of everything we do.
Outperformance by South West Water against the K6 regulatory contract 20152020 continued in 201617 securing a net cumulative reward of 3.6 million South West Waters return on regulated equity RoRE continues to be sectorleading Innovative investment in new Mayflower Water Treatment Works in Plymouth  the first of its kind in the UK Delivery by Viridor of 107 million EBITDA from its ERF business exceeding the target of c.
100 million Improved performance of Viridors recycling business resulting from selfhelp initiatives to reduce costs and improve asset utilisation Dividend per share increased by 7.1% reflecting strong performance of Pennons water and waste management businesses.
90% average ERF availability 85% customer satisfaction with overall service 1 Average of the customer satisfaction scores achieved by South West Water Bournemouth Water and Viridor for the year.
Investing in people  protecting the health safety and wellbeing of our people to ensure we have a skilled diverse engaged and motivated workforce to deliver our strategy Environmental protection  integral to our water businesss regulatory contract and the promotion of the circular economy by our waste management business Waste prevention and resource efficiency delivering solutions for society is core to our strategy and helps to address the challenge of depleting natural resources.
Our aspiration to be a leader in the sectors in which we operate could be affected by the occurrence of certain events many of which have reputational consequences An avoidable health and safety incident Legal regulatory or tax noncompliance Poor customer service Failure to recruit retain and develop people with the appropriate skills Business interruption for example as a result of a failure of our information technology systems or operational failure Failure of a capital project Loss or corruption of data as a result of a cyber attack.
Leadership in cost base efficiency Complete the organisation change programme coming out of our Shared Services Review and finalise the centralisation of key corporate and operational services Continue to maximise the benefits of the integration of Bournemouth Water operations into South West Waters business Ongoing initiatives to reduce central overheads share best practice and deliver synergies.
Good progress towards delivering K6 cost savings of 27 million from the Bournemouth Water integration South West Water cumulative totex efficiency of 129 million driven by continuing advantages from our strategic alliances 17 million per annum of cost savings to be delivered across the Group by 2019 9 million per annum secured to date Cost efficient longterm financing in place 3.4% interest rate on annual net debt.
Minimising disruption and inconvenience for our communities  means that we also minimise the cost to the business Energy efficiency  the use of solar photovoltaics to power our facilities and other energy saving initiatives help us to reduce our own demand for electricity from the grid whilst maximising the energy generated from our core operations Responsible sourcing  value for money secured through robust procurement practices and sustainable supply chains.
Risks that could impact our ability to deliver efficiencies include Operational failures that result in rectification costs Changes in law or regulation that require additional expenditure to fund implementation and ongoing compliance An increase in customer bad debt resulting in additional debt collection costs Failure to recruit and retain people with the right skills mindset and motivation to share best practice deliver synergies and move the Group forward in the new shared services structure.
Driving sustainable growth Continue to grow the ERF business including the successful completion of construction projects at Glasgow South London Dunbar and Avonmouth ERFs Exploit the introduction of competition in the nonhousehold retail market by building scale and efficiency through Pennons water retail business Pennon Water Services Identify and consider opportunities for further growth.
385 million invested in key infrastructure during the year Four ERFs now under construction New retail venture for business customers between Pennon Water Services South Staffs and Cambridge Water  combined revenue of c.
170 million and entering the market with the fourth largest customer base Well positioned for regulatory and market developments  ongoing engagement with Ofwat reforms and prepared for the 2019 price review.
Group assets as at 31 March bn 5.9tel 2014 2013 3.5% Customer service and engagement increased focus to improve the customer experience and help expand our customer base whilst retaining existing customers High standards of business conduct  ensure that our people are incentivised appropriately and exhibit the right behaviours to enable us to achieve longterm and sustainable growth.
Our ability to deliver sustainable growth could be impacted by Unfavourable economic conditions Local authority austerity Poor customer service Loss of market share as a result of regulatory reform and increased competition Difficulties in recruiting retaining and developing people with the necessary commercial acumen to help our businesses grow and prosper.
Strategic report 17 Our people The talent professionalism and commitment of our people is key to the delivery of our strategic objectives.
We continue to invest in the skills and career progression of our staff.
Workplace strategy Our goal is to attract and retain talented people with the knowledge skills values and behaviours required to deliver the Groups long term goals and objectives.
Underpinning this and in line with human rights principles we have a range of policies covering health and safety equal opportunities diversity ethics and employee relations.
All elements of our workplace strategy apply to both our permanent and temporary workers and we expect suppliers and contractors to comply with relevant legislation and to hold similar principles.
Abdul Warsame carrying out maintenance at Ardley ERF Our continued investment in our people is a cornerstone of the Groups ability to create shareholder value.
In support of this Pennon has started work on a new Groupwide people strategy and will roll this out before the end of the 201718 reporting year.
Health and safety Our policy is to provide and maintain a safe working environment while preventing injury and ill health wherever possible.
We continue to target improvement through training programmes focusing on behaviours and attitudes as well as risk awareness and risk control and the ability to learn from accidents or near misses.
As the reporting of near misses has increased RIDDOR injury incidence rates have dropped across the Group.
Viridor reported an improvement for 2016 and South West Water achieved a better performance on a likefor like basis excluding Bournemouth Water.
Earlier this year Pennon announced a new vision and strategy for health and safety designed to raise standards prevent harm and create a culture of safety across its businesses.
We call our new health and safety programme HomeSafe and it represents a wideranging agenda of consolidation and improvement which focuses on people process and the physical environment.
Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 18 Code of Conduct Our Code of Conduct sets out the principles we believe should guide our actions.
These principles apply equally to permanent and temporary employees and we expect our suppliers and contractors to comply with equivalent guidance.
Employee training courses have been developed around the Code of Conduct that focus on specific aspects relating to legal and ethical behaviour.
Employee engagement We believe motivated and engaged people value their own health and safety and that of their colleagues drive greater productivity and aspire to deliver higher levels of customer satisfaction.
Across the Group over 3800 of our people 78% completed annual employment engagement surveys in line with previous years.
Importantly for the first time we brought together all of the leaders across the Group to discuss the results and agree key actions.
These actions are focused on engaging our people in our strategy supporting our people better as we evolve as an organisation and providing more opportunities to engage in twoway communication.
Employee development We continue to invest in the skills and career progression of our staff through a range of schemes and training opportunities ranging from operational upskilling programmes to management training.
In the water business this included specialist training for our call handlers in a range of skills including a programme with the mental health charity MIND designed to help call handlers recognise if a customer is struggling to pay their bills owing to stress or depression.
This has helped to improve our management of income recovery which during 201617 was our bestever.
In Viridor we have continued to support 24 individuals undertaking a foundation degree specifically designed for the business and launched a management development programme which 76 of our senior leaders completed during the year.
Community initiatives Our employees are enthusiastic participants in the Groups volunteering programmes.
Viridor employees volunteered 99 days including activities with Somerset Wildlife Trust to transform a neglected area close to the River Tone in Taunton Somerset.
Throughout December Viridors Manchester Trafford Park team helped out Key 103s Cash for Kids Mission Christmas appeal collecting donated toys from Greater Manchester residents.
South West Water staff took part in educational outreach programmes alongside the regions Wildlife Trusts and participated in Keep Britain Tidys BeachCare programme.
Since 2010 South West Water has supported 830 beach cleans which have collected more than 120 tonnes of rubbish.
Diversity and equal opportunities The Board continues to promote equality of opportunity and diversity across the Group in all areas including gender and ethnicity.
Although some progress has been made on diversity in certain areas across the Group this still remains a key area of focus and diversity specific actions are being reviewed as part of the wider sustainability agenda.
Gender diversity In South West Water 27% of the workforce is female an increase of 2% from last year.
We do have some areas of underrepresentation for example in our craft and industrial group where the proportion of women is less than 1%.
We are committed to focusing on this as an area for improvement in line with the industry.
The majority of Viridor s employees are male 85% reflecting a traditionally maledominated industry.
The ratio is similar across senior management with 16% female.
Of those employed directly by Pennon 45% are women.
We are committed to improving senior management gender ratios in time across the Group through initiatives such as informal mentoring programmes and family friendly policies.
A working group is ensuring Pennon complies with new legislation on gender pay equality that requires certain companies to publish information on their gender pay gap and report this data to the UK Government.
We believe fully engaged staff facilitate better safety greater productivity and higher customer satisfaction.
Employees
79.9% 20.1% 79.6% 20.4% 1054 4tel
Men
Senior Management 77.4% 22.6% 78.1% 21.9% 21 26tel
66.7% 33.3% 71.4% 28.6% Gender diversity as at 31 March Strategic report 70 drinking water and wastewater sites using UV treatment processes The use of new technologies helps to improve both the performance and efficiency of our operational assets.
Technician Gary Hellier at Restormel Water Treatment Works South West Water continues to invest in processes such as Granular Activated Carbon GAC and Ultraviolet Disinfection UV which is now used at 70 of our drinking water and wastewater treatment sites.
In the drinking water side of the business these processes are designed to improve the taste and odour of customer supplies while securing longterm compliance with water quality standards.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Group performance
22 Review of the Chief Executive Officer
26 Our operations 26 Water and wastewater 32 Waste management 38 Report of the Chief Financial Officer 46 Risk report Improving the performance and efficiency of our assets Strategic report Review of the Chief Executive Officer Chris Loughlin
Chief Executive Officer
Our strategy is to lead in the UKs water and waste sectors drive value through efficiency and invest for sustainable growth.
Pennon Group achieved a strong performance in 201617.
Our strategy is to lead in the UKs water and waste sectors invest for growth and drive value through efficiency.
I am pleased to say the Group is delivering against each of its strategic objectives while achieving a return for shareholders in a responsible and sustainable way.
Health and safety During the year we were shocked and saddened by the death of Viridor worker Rafal Swiadek at the Materials Recycling Facility in Milton Keynes.
No fatality is acceptable and I want to underline the Groups commitment to health and safety.
In January 2017 we created the new role of director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability SHQS and appointed Steve Holmes who previously held the role of Health Safety Security and Environment director for Amec Foster Wheeler.
He brings many years of senior experience in operations health and safety from industries including oil and gas nuclear power and rail.
This appointment is an important development for Pennon because it reflects our commitment at the highest level to improve health and safety by utilising concepts and learnings from other high hazard industries.
Steve has a mandate from the Board to implement an enhanced strategy that will raise the Groups performance and reinforce health and safety as core to Pennons way of working.
Our ambition is to be the health and safety leader in the UK water and waste sectors and to that end we have launched our HomeSafe programme see page 18.
As we pursue our ambition we can expect to see changes to how we evaluate and control risk how we engage with our employees and how we build greater leadership and accountability for health and safety.
Leadership in water and waste We remain committed to delivering high quality services for the benefit of our customers proactively seeking to understand their needs and priorities and making the most of new technologies and innovation to deliver appropriate improvements.
South West Water once again outperformed its regulatory contract to achieve a sectorleading RoRE return on regulated equity of 12.6%.
In addition South West Water once again achieved ODI outperformance which has secured a net reward of 3.6 million in the year.
In our waste operations Viridor continues to be a leader following its significant investments in Energy Recovery Facilities ERFs in recent years.
We delivered 107 million EBITDA which is in excess of our target of c.
100 million and now have a clear track record of constructing and commissioning ERFs and delivering the operational and financial results.
We continued to drive returns from recycling through broader selfhelp measures that are reducing the cost base and improving utilisation of assets.
It is Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 encouraging to see these initiatives supporting an increasing EBITDA.
We are also making progress in commodity risk sharing with our recycling clients.
Investing for sustainable growth Our decision in November 2016 to commit to a 252 million ERF at Avonmouth near Bristol has expanded our future portfolio to 12 plants.
We expect demand for ERFs to continue to exceed capacity into the long term.
The Group is actively addressing opportunities arising from water industry deregulation.
In preparation for the new nonhousehold retail water market which commenced 1 April 2017 we set up Pennon Water Services as a Pennon Group plc subsidiary ringfenced from South West Waters business to provide retail services to business customers.
To achieve scale Pennon Water Services formed a nonhousehold retail venture with South Staffordshire Plc incorporating South Staffs and Cambridge Water.
Pennon Water Services entered the market with the fourth largest customer base in the deregulated market.
Driving value through efficiency South West Water maintained its strong momentum in controlling total expenditure Totex with cumulative savings of 129 million and financing outperformance of 67 million in the first two years of K6 20152020.
South West Water is targeting to remain at the forefront of cost efficiency for the water sector.
During the year we completed our Shared Services Review to drive value through efficiency synergy and best practice.
Reflecting the more integrated nature of our Group we are taking advantage of the expertise our combined water and waste businesses have in terms of managing large asset bases and in engineering technology and innovation.
The review resulted in a plan to centralise key corporate services and operational functions including the introduction of a shared IT platform.
This will achieve estimated savings of 17 million per year from 2019 up from the 11 million per year that we announced last year of which c.
9 million per annum has been secured to date.
Other efficiency successes include the Groups energy trading team which has developed a portfolio management strategy.
This addresses the energy demands of the Group and ensures Pennon is buying energy at the right price while enhancing profitability from the energy we generate.
With South West Water a net user of electricity the Group has a natural energy hedging opportunity representing one third of Viridors energy generation.
We can now hedge our market position for up to five years ahead further helping to protect revenues.
Balanced riskreward profile across the Group Part of our strategy as we build our ERFs and in our recycling operations is to ensure there is a balanced riskreward profile that complements our water operations as closely as possible.
As a longterm infrastructure provider we manage our risk profile by mitigating volatility through secure longterm cash flows.
We have made significant progress over the past two years in reducing risk and unpredictability across the Group by overlaying our longterm assets with longterm commercial arrangements and supporting these with longterm financing.
At Viridor for example we have increased contracted volumes better aligning with the life cycle of our assets.
By negotiating longterm 25year indexlinked contracts with stated volumes and prices Viridor is building a similar riskreward profile to the water side of the business.
Prior to committing to Avonmouth approximately 80% of our ERF portfolio volumes and associated prices were contracted long term.
Striking an appropriate balance between operational risk and reward is a key part of our strategy.
This applies to any aspect of the Groups operations developing our recycling business our decision to build the Avonmouth ERF or our entry into the nonhousehold retail market.
The starting point for achieving the right riskreward balance is to ensure the Group fully understands the differences between its water and waste operations.
This has given us a strong and effective framework for identifying risk.
Innovation and investment in Plymouth South West Waters largest investment in its current fiveyear plan is the new 60 million state of the art Mayflower Water Treatment Works in North Plymouth.
Due for completion by March 2018 Mayflower uses the innovative treatment processes of suspended ion exchange inline coagulation and ceramic membrane filtration.
This is the first time that this combined technology has been used in the UK.
Mayflower will provide a secure high quality drinking water supply for the Plymouth area for generations to come.
Cumulative totex outperformance 90% Average ERF availability Strategic report We also ensure senior management are fully aware of how we are managing risk and how we can mitigate adverse impacts.
At the same time we identify appropriate business opportunities especially as our strategy is to invest for growth in both water and waste over the longer term.
Sustainability is core to our business Sustainability is core to the Group both in terms of ensuring its longterm commercial viability and of operating in an environmentally and socially responsible manner.
The Group has a long track record in partnership and innovation across a range of sustainability issues.
Our operations are deeply embedded into local communities and we believe this is one of the reasons Ofwat responded so positively to South West Waters latest business plan.
Sustainability is carefully integrated into our strategic thinking given the nature of our business as a provider of key water and waste services and the close relationship our operations have with environmental issues.
Furthermore we recognise that making responsible and sustainable business decisions is critical to achieving longterm investor confidence.
Our decisionmaking on capital investment integrates many sustainability factors including social community and environmental impacts.
We use a range of tools to ensure we make decisions that involve more than purely economic or financial criteria.
In the case of capital expenditure on our network infrastructure for example an ideal solution is always one that combines not just the lowest cost base but also a favourable sustainability score.
There was clear evidence of the importance of sustainability within the Group during the year.
In early 2017 Pennon completed its first Group submission to Business in the Communitys Corporate Responsibility Index and received a score of 90% a threestar rating.
Pennon is also included in the FTSE4Good Index.
In addition we achieved a score of B Management for the annual CDP submission formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project for Climate Change and Water and we continue to take steps to effectively reduce our impacts.
Our gross greenhouse gas emissions increased by 14% primarily as a result of Viridors newly commissioned ERFs reaching full operating capacity.
The ERFs burn waste that would otherwise have gone to landfill.
This has the double benefit of extracting more of the energy embedded in the waste and substituting energy generated from other predominantly fossil fuel sources.
Our environmental performance is an area of focus and further progress is needed in aspects such as reducing the risk of pollutions and flooding.
In recognition of the shared importance of our environmental responsibilities across the Group we have created the new role of director of Environment and in April 2017 appointed Ed Mitchell to the role.
Ed brings with him a wealth of experience having spent eight years at the Environment Agency.
Prior to this Ed held senior positions at Thames Water and the Department of Environment Food and Rural Affairs.
Our people Across the Group we look to attract develop and retain a highly skilled and customercentric workforce.
At the end of the year Pennon had a workforce of around 5000 people and we continue to be a large employer in the south west of England.
Our multiaward winning apprenticeship programme which started in 2011 continues to go from strength to strength.
This year South West Water recruited its 100th apprentice since the programme began.
Viridor is actively committed to expanding the number of apprentices it employs.
The Group also contributes to local efforts to develop skills for the future an example being South West Waters role as a leading partner in a University Technical College for South Devon which places a unique focus on engineering water and the environment.
Our employees supported communities through 359 days of volunteering during the year and both South West Water and Viridor continue with a broad community education programme.
Viridor has been shortlisted for The UBS Award for Education as part of Business in the Communitys Responsible Business Awards 2017.
At executive level the creation of the position of Group director of Human Resources is an important step in the Groups evolution.
The responsibilities of the role include developing and implementing the Groups people strategy and assessing how we evolve the human resources model across the Group.
The success we achieved in 201617 owes much to our employees and I would like to thank all of them for their hard work loyalty and dedication.
Outlook
The Groups outlook is encouraging.
In our waste business our ERF portfolio is a significant investment in the UKs environmental infrastructure and key to Pennons growth agenda.
Construction of our ERFs at Dunbar and South London is progressing well and construction on Avonmouth is now underway.
In November 2016 we announced that we had taken positive action to terminate Interserve Construction Limited as EPC contractor for our ERF in Glasgow following their continued underperformance on the project.
Good progress has been made since this date in engaging subcontractors and progressing construction which is expected to be complete within a revised timetable agreed with our customer Glasgow City Council.
Once all facilities are fully operational we are confident they will add to the already strong contribution these assets are making to the Groups financial performance.
We continue to work hard to create a balanced risk profile across our waste and recovery operations.
New branding As we begin to work more closely as an integrated business it is important that the Pennon South West Water and Viridor brands also work together visually.
The new branding underlines our commitment to environmental infrastructure unifying us as a group but still reflecting the strengths of each business.
A cost effective threeyear programme for rollout of the new branding for vehicles sites and uniforms was in progress by year end.
Review of the Chief Executive Officer continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 We remain well positioned to play our part in the development of future regulatory reform The Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority GMWDA has confirmed that it is seeking to exit and renegotiate the Greater Manchester Waste private finance initiative PFI contract with Viridor Laing Greater Manchester.
The PFI contract which was entered into in 2009 was the UKs largest waste and energy project.
Diversion of waste from landfill remains ahead of contractual commitments and we are keen to ensure this progress is able to continue.
Viridor and its joint venture partner John Laing have been actively engaging with GMWDA as they consider their options.
There are provisions in the PFI contract for compensation to be paid to Viridor and John Laing on termination.
Our water business is well prepared for the future.
South West Water is fully engaged in Ofwats programme for future water and wastewater services regulation as the Group prepares for the PR19 fiveyear review of pricing and investment requirements.
We remain well positioned to play our part in the development of future regulatory reform and are working to ensure our voice is heard in shaping the industrys future.
South West Water will publish its 25year strategic plan during 201718 setting out our evolving strategic priorities and our path to continued strong operational performance.
We will make every effort to maintain a firstclass innovative and efficient service that is characterised by reliability responsiveness and resilience.
At the same time we will ensure our operations and investments enhance the communities we serve and that we continue our commitment to understanding the needs of vulnerable customers and offering appropriate support.
Looking ahead our strong operational and financial performance shows we are delivering on our strategy and providing a firm foundation for further growth.
Our immediate priority is to optimise our current assets and operations so that we can continue fulfilling our strategic objectives.
In the longer term we believe there is additional opportunity for consolidation in wholesale water.
Meanwhile we have a clearly articulated core strategy focusing on water and waste operations in the UK and we believe both business streams provide excellent opportunities.
With our sectorleading dividend policy our growth profile and our strong balance sheet Pennon Group is well positioned to deliver further value to customers communities and shareholders.
Chris Loughlin
Chief Executive Officer
Pennon Group plc Avonmouth ERF investing for growth Viridor with its joint venture partners is already one of the largest independent power generators from waste.
When Avonmouth begins operation early in the next decade it will place us in the leading position in UK energy recovery with 20% market share.
Avonmouth will serve around 3.5 million people in the West of England and supply the national grid with enough electricity to power over 30000 homes.
The waste supply in the Avonmouth ERF catchment area substantially exceeds the plants own capacity as well as available capacity nearby.
Supporting contracts we already have an additional volume of some 800000 tonnes is available from local municipal commercial and industrial sources.
Combustible waste market under capacity in the west of England extends to 2030 and beyond matching the UK trend.
Viridors market projections are supported by independent third party analysis.
Strategic report Our operations Water and wastewater In our water and wastewater business we are focused on providing services in the most efficient way possible.
Innovation new technologies and the pioneering of a holistic approach to water and wastewater management are playing a key role in delivering service improvements and longterm value.
66 ultraviolet UV treatment facilities km wastewater mains network wastewater pumping stations bathing waters and 24 shellfish waters South West Water
Key water mains Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 0.5 million total population served million customers raw water reservoirs km of drinking water mains network treatment works with 4 ultraviolet UV treatment facilities Bournemouth Water Stephen Bird Managing Director South West Water We continued to deliver strong performance in 201617 providing high quality drinking water achieving our best result to date in leakage and delivering a significant improvement in wastewater compliance.
We were well prepared for the opening of the nonhousehold retail market and are wellplaced as preparations get underway ahead of the next Price Review PR19.
Strategic report Our operations Water and wastewater continued Continuing outperformance The merged water business of South West Water and Bournemouth Water performed well during the year.
South West Waters Return on Regulated Equity RoRE performance continues to be sector leading and is outperforming its business plan with a RoRE of 12.6%.
This arises from base financing and operational returns with 6% as the base return 3.2% reflecting total expenditure savings and efficiencies 0.3% reflecting a net reward on Outcome Delivery Incentives ODIs and 3.1% reflecting the difference between actual and assumed financing costs.
This is consistent with the approach to our WaterShare mechanism.
A key highlight for the year is our significant capital investment of 191 million in our drinking water and wastewater operations.
This reflects our focus on enhancing our environmental performance and we are pleased with the progress seen during the year.
During the year Ofwat updated its guidance to companies which requires financing outperformance to be calculated using an inyear average RPI rate.
This approach reflects a financing outperformance of 2.4% and a total RoRE of 11.9% for 201617 10.1% for 201516.
South West Waters RoRE would remain sector leading and by the end of K6 period overall performance will converge.
Total expenditure savings South West Water continued to focus on driving value through efficiency.
It achieved cumulative total expenditure Totex savings of 129 million and financing outperformance of 67 million in the first two years of K6 20152020.
The business expects to remain at the forefront of cost efficiency for the water sector.
RoRE 201617
6.0% 2 Totex outperformance 3.2% 3 ODI outperformance 0.3% 4 Financing outperformance 3.1% 1 Interest outperformance is based on the outturn effective real interest rate on net debt using the forecast K6 average RPI notional gearing of 62.5% and an actual effective tax rate of 18.2%.
These savings were driven by continuing advantages from our strategic alliances including a new water distribution framework and the H 0 capital alliance which is now delivering efficient schemes within the Bournemouth region.
We are also ensuring efficient capital investment promoting offsite build techniques and changing the way we work through our iOPS programme focussed on innovation and new technology to deliver cost efficiency and customer service improvements.
We continued to deliver synergies from our acquisition of and merger with Bournemouth Water focusing on frontline functions having completed integration of backoffice and support services at the end of the prior year.
The targeted c.
27 million of net synergies over K6 are on track.
ODI rewards South West Water had 22 ODIs and Bournemouth Water 10 ODIs which have potential financial rewards or penalties.
These ODIs include the Service Incentive Mechanism SIM.
Operational performance for the year continued to improve and there was a net ODI reward of 3.6 million 5.5 million cumulatively over two years reflecting 0.3% RoRE outperformance to date.
South West Water maintained good reliability and serviceability across all four areas of operations and bathing water quality water restrictions interruptions to supply and leakage all resulted in rewards for the year.
Disappointingly performance in wastewater pollutions and external flooding fell below our targeted commitment and resulted in a penalty however performance did improve overall compared with the prior year.
The cumulative net reward of 5.5 million comprises 7.5 million of net rewards recognised at the end of the regulatory period and 2.0 million of net penalty which could be adjusted during the regulatory period.
Drinking water Drinking water quality is a key priority and we maintained the high standards set previously.
South
West Water achieved 99.96% and Bournemouth Water achieved 99.98%.
The improved performance in managing our network led to our best ever leakage result of 82ML per day exceeding our original target and delivering an ODI reward.
This reflects innovative approaches to network management including investment in realtime pressure management detection repairs and network monitoring.
This was our 20th consecutive year of unrestricted water supplies and the Bournemouth water region maintained its record of zero water restrictions since privatisation.
The average duration of supply interruptions per property was lower in both regions compared with the previous year.
In the South West Water region this performance delivered a small reward compared to the penalty incurred in 201516.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Investment and innovation We continued to invest in our assets to deliver drinking water improvements.
The new 60 million stateoftheart Mayflower Water Treatment Works in Plymouth is the largest single item of capital expenditure in our current fiveyear plan.
Serving Plymouth and South Devon this is a major construction and engineering project with the facility scheduled to open in 2018.
During the year we reached the halfway point in the build on time and on budget.
Mayflower will be one of only two plants in the world to use transformational ceramic membrane filter technology.
Construction is also progressing well at three other modern drinking water treatment works  at Tamar Lakes Tottiford and Northcombe.
Each will use Granulated Activated Carbon GAC a sophisticated filter technology for improved water treatment.
There was continued investment in our award winning Upstream Thinking programme of catchment management involving a range of stakeholders including wildlife trusts and river authorities.
During the year we worked with 1056 farms and improved 7568 acres of upstream land.
Wastewater
South West Water aims to ensure the safe and efficient removal and disposal of wastewater while minimising the possibility of sewer flooding and pollution.
We continued to implement a programme of wastewater treatment improvements and increased monitoring to prevent potential failure.
This delivered a significant improvement in numeric compliance the percentage of wastewater treatment works deemed compliant.
Performance for works with numeric consents was 98.4% compared to 95.8% in the previous year.
Our performance at our smaller descriptive sites was 99.4% compared to 99.1% last year.
We delivered record bathing water quality results Protecting the environment Significant incidents Categories 1 to 2 continued to fall however the number of minor incidents increased marginally to 246 2015 222.
Unfortunately the number of significant incidents at four is higher than target and although lower than the seven reported last year will result in a penalty for the year.
We are prioritising further improvement in this area of our wastewater operations.
We delivered record bathing water quality results against more stringent EU standards during the year.
Of the 143 bathing waters tested in the South West Water Region 141 98.6% were classified as sufficient or better.
116 beaches 81.1% were classified as excellent.
All of Cornwalls beaches passed and only two beaches in Devon failed with neither of these due to any failure on the part of South West Waters own assets.
These bathing water results are critically important given the importance of the coastal environment to the regions economy.
Upstream Thinking for sustainable solutions Upstream Thinking is a good example of our aim to examine longterm costs as well as environmental factors when assessing capital expenditure on our network infrastructure.
By delivering landscapebased solutions sympathetic to the environment rather than harder engineering solutions we are addressing water quality and flooding risk in the most sustainable manner.
Our strategy is to improve the quality of drinking water before it reaches treatment works making it more cost effective to treat water.
We also look to reduce flooding risk and retain water in catchments.
We could look solely at costly endofpipe solutions that might have had less preferable environmental impacts.
But by cooperating with farmers and other stakeholders we avoid the financial costs of hard engineering solutions and deliver solutions with a favourable sustainability score.
Mayflower will be one of only two plants in the world to use transformational ceramic membrane filter technology.
Strategic report Our operations Water and wastewater continued Customer service and engagement There was a significant improvement in our customer service performance during the year.
South West Water scored 81.6 under the SIM used by Ofwat to compare water company performance.
The score for 201617 continues the improving trend of recent years and compares well with the previous years score of 78.6.
This reflects good progress in how we deal with service issues as well as call centre investments in data analytics.
Bournemouth Waters SIM score was 86.3 in 201617 one of the highest in the industry.
The improved SIM score owes much to the approximately 30% reduction in written complaints received at South West Water and Bournemouth
The customer experience quality scores also improved across both regions during the year.
In addition our overall customer satisfaction was 89% in line with last year with valueformoney satisfaction at an alltime high with customer bills reducing in real terms over 20152020 regulatory period.
Support for those who need it There was also good progress in helping vulnerable customers including developing affordability schemes.
South West Water was one of the first companies to introduce a social tariff to help customers experiencing temporary or longterm problems in paying their water bills.
We implemented a new employee training and development programme during the year that extends the support for vulnerable customers.
We have also brought Bournemouth Water in line with South West Waters approach by rolling out a social tariff for the first time in 201718.
WaterShare
Our unique WaterShare scheme identified 4.0 million of benefits to customers during the year under review.
This is in addition to the 3.1 million shared in 201516.
Following discussions with the independent WaterShare panel it was decided to invest the 3.1 million in key areas of customer service.
How the benefit in 201617 is to be applied will again be considered by the WaterShare panel.
Nonhousehold market opening Since 1 April 2017 up to 1.2 million businesses and other nonhousehold customers across the country have been able to choose which retailer they buy water and wastewater services from.
Wholesale services providing water to premises and taking wastewater away are unaffected but business customers can choose who provides their retail service.
During the year the Group established Pennon Water Services which will operate independently of South West Water and can secure services from any wholesaler in the United Kingdom.
Equally South West Water has the freedom to supply other business retailers around the UK.
Wastewater investment Highlights of our investments and activity in wastewater during the year include process improvements and upgrades at four key sites and improvements in the sewage network to reduce the impact of saline infiltration the impact of salt water.
We also invested in increased capacity at our wastewater treatment works at Fluxton in Devon and Hayle in Cornwall.
Our continued investment in sustainability includes 5 million as part of our Downstream Thinking programme which seeks to reduce sewer flooding by improving urban drainage and 20 million for improvements in bathing waters and shellfish waters around Plymouth.
We also invested over 1 million to support the Exeter Flood Defence Scheme at Countess Wear Wastewater Treatment works.
This is a welcome opportunity to work with partners in the region to enhance sustainability and deliver more resilient services.
Think Sink We continue to target a reduction in sewer flooding and pollution through the promotion of responsible sewer usage with our customers.
Following the success of our awardwinning Love Y our Loo campaign which targeted communities in areas with a history of sewer blockages we launched a new Think Sink campaign in December 2016.
This encourages customers to take the pledge and avoid disposing of fat oil and grease among the major contributors to blockages down the drain.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 From September 2016 South West Water fully engaged in a period of shadow operation to ensure that systems and processes were ready for market opening operating as closely as possible to the market conditions and requirements whilst ensuring customer service levels were maintained.
Future market opportunities Ofwat is promoting the development of a market for bioresources also referred to as sludge a product from sewage which can be used for energy or as a fertiliser substitute and a market for water resources.
We conducted preliminary work on these potential opportunities during the year and are actively engaged with Ofwat in developing the potential frameworks for these markets.
Ahead of PR19 we are also engaging with customers and stakeholders around their priorities for water and wastewater services over the short and longterm.
The initial findings have helped inform our updated 25year strategic plan which is being published during the summer.
Our community Regional economy South West Water is one of the largest companies in its region.
The services it provides are essential for the areas economic sustainability and the company supports the employment of around 5000 staff directly and indirectly through the supply chain.
The company works closely with Local Enterprise Partnerships LEPs the Environment Agency and other stakeholders and regulators on projects and initiatives to ensure a sustainable and resilient future for the region.
Charitable partnerships In 201617 South West Water provided almost 75000 of community sponsorship as part of its business plan.
Using the Business in the Community framework as a guide which marries core business purpose with identified community and social needs South West Waters main sponsorships were with Devon and Cornwall Wildlife Trusts  in support of their community engagement and educational outreach programmes.
Activities included a 2day Wildlife Celebration at Trebah Gardens in Cornwall and 55 school visits to Wembury Marine Centre in Devon Surf Life Saving GB  in support of the Nippers and Youth Championships and a threeyear Graduate Lifeguard Project programme for young people who will be able to gain a National Vocational Qualification and become a Level 1 Coach at age 16 The South West Coast Path Association which takes care of the 630mile coast path one of the regions main tourist attractions British elite windsurfer and Olympic hopeful Izzy Hamilton from Bude who learned to windsurf at Roadford Lake.
Access and recreation The South West Lakes Trust an independent charity manages over 14000 acres of land on South West Waters behalf.
The Trust is the regions largest combined environmental and recreational charity taking care of 50 inland water sites which attracted more than 1.9 million visits during 201617.
Conservation access and recreation activities in the Bournemouth Water area including management of fisheries and moorings are now also being managed by South West Lakes Trust on South West Waters behalf.
MarketReady
In preparation for the opening of the non household retail market on 1 April 2017  we carried out a companywide training and awareness programme entitled MarketReady designed to ensure recognition and compliance with the new market codes.
A series of workshops were delivered to almost 2000 staff with messaging subsequently reinforced using an innovative webbased knowledgetesting application.
The MarketReady campaign also featured heavily in all internal communications throughout the year.
98.6% improved results for bathing waters investment in bathing and shellfish water improvements Strategic report Our operations Waste management Viridor is at the forefront of the resource sector in the UK transforming waste into energy high quality recyclates and raw materials.
Phil Piddington Managing Director
Viridor has delivered a strong performance across its recycling and energy asset base.
Our ERF portfolio is performing well and we have started construction of a new facility in Avonmouth for which we have already secured half of the inputs.
Our focus on selfhelp measures has reduced the risks in the recycling business and delivered significant financial benefit.
Key facts Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Ma t erial r e c y cling facility Ener gy r e c o v ery facility Strategic report Our operations Waste management continued Strong momentum Our energy recovery and waste recycling business enjoyed strong momentum in 201617.
Through our energy recovery facility ERF portfolio we are delivering on the Groups strategy to invest for growth.
Our announcement of a new ERF at Avonmouth near Bristol takes our total portfolio to 12 plants.
Of the three other ERFs currently under construction Dunbar and South London ERFs are progressing well.
Following the termination in the year of Interserve as our main contractor for Glasgow ERF the project is now progressing to our revised plan with commissioning expected in 2017.
To date the Group has invested more than 1 billion into its ERF asset base.
This significant investment in environmental infrastructure is helping us to transform our business model with an increasing focus on ERFs and recycling.
In coming years we expect our growing ERF business to be the largest contributor to Viridor followed by recycling with these operations together already successfully delivering new revenues that can replace our legacy landfill business.
Selfhelp measures during the year improved efficiency in our recycling operations while there was continued progress in commodity risk sharing with our customers.
We took further steps to evolve our approach to health and safety.
The Groups new director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability SHQS will work closely with Viridor to deliver a major transformation in our health and safety outlook that will benefit personal wellbeing and enhance business performance.
Viridors total energy capacity has continued to grow and with our joint venture partners we are already one of the largest independent power generators from waste in the UK.
We had 280MW of operating capacity from ERFs anaerobic digestion AD solar and landfill gas including joint ventures at 31 March 2017 and exported 1.5 terawatt hours TWh of power during the year.
Customer experience During the year we completed our first customer service survey to seek the views of over 1000 clients.
Viridor will use the findings to strengthen customer relationships and support the Groups wider growth strategy.
By improving the quality of our products and services we enhance the customer experience and this in turn supports customer retention and creates longterm business partnerships.
76% of Viridor customers said they were satisfied or very satisfied with the service The key requirement from the perspective of our customers is for a seamless service providing safe reliable collection.
We continue to develop a fully integrated service of waste management recycling and recovery recognising that customers are keen to avoid landfill.
Our aim is to maximise the amount of waste that goes into recycling and to divert the balance to our ERFs or landfill as appropriate.
By doing this we are supporting development of a circular economy with greater resource productivity leading to reduced waste and pollution.
Energy recovery facilities Viridor reported a good operational and financial performance for 201617.
Our ERF portfolio is a significant asset base comprising eight plants in operation with four under construction including Avonmouth.
This is the UKs largest network of modern lowcarbon energy recovery facilities and produces muchneeded energy.
At year end our ERFs provided 178MW of generating capacity.
Once the total committed ERF portfolio is completed in 202021 our ERFs alone will provide 276MW of energy generation capacity.
Longterm waste contracts provide a secure fuel source for the ERFs and strategically agreed energy offtake contracts provide assured earnings from the energy generated.
1.1bn invested to date in our ERF portfolio 1.5TWh power exported in 201617 Bringing new solutions to plastics recycling Viridor is continually working on solutions to align nextgeneration recycling resources with the needs of UK industry.
Our 12.5m advanced plastics recycling facility at Rochester is capable of processing 75000 tonnes of mixed plastics each year.
The Rochester team has partnered with packaging specialists Nextek funded by WRAP to help find a solution to the 1.3 billion black plastic readymeal trays sold by UK supermarkets that are not currently recyclable.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Plant optimisation We are maintaining a high level of performance in these facilities and demonstrating we can deliver longterm stable earnings.
This helped us exceed our target contribution of some 100 million of EBITDA from our ERF portfolio for 201617.
For the operational plants our focus was on optimisation and during 201617 we achieved average availability in excess of 90%.
Our operational ERFs have a design capacity of 2.1 million tonnes of waste inputs including joint ventures.
Our forecasts are for this to increase to 3.2 million tonnes of waste by 2020.
ERF growth Two of our ERFs under construction at Dunbar and Beddington are progressing well and to budget.
Delays at Glasgows Recycling and Renewable Energy Centre led Viridor to terminate the construction contract with
The project will be finished by an experienced team assembled by Viridor while contractual remedies will also support completion.
The client Glasgow City Council is supportive and commissioning of the plant is now expected in 2017.
We are building a strong operational team using power industry best practice.
We have demonstrated that we can build these facilities safely on time and to budget and during the year we achieved upper quartile availability and reliability.
Maintaining this high level of performance in our ERFs contributed to fulfilling our commitment to achieve c.
100 million EBITDA during the year.
The 252 million Avonmouth ERF near Bristol is scheduled for completion in 202021.
The plant will have a capacity of 320000 tonnes per annum and will deliver 34MW of electricity.
Viridor expects to fill the plants capacity on opening and by year end 50% of the fuel had already been agreed.
This includes some 35% of total capacity secured through a longterm contract with Somerset Waste Partnership.
This aligns with our strategy to achieve a balanced riskreward profile across the Group.
We are implementing that strategy by increasing longterm contracted revenue to match the life cycle of our assets.
There are further contracts for Avonmouth ERF in the pipeline.
Impact on carbon emissions 41% of the Groups 201617 emissions were attributable to our ERFs.
This part of the business will continue to contribute a significant proportion of our carbon footprint as more plants come on stream however there are clear environmental benefits due to the reduction of waste going to landfill.
Viridor is in the process of establishing energy efficiency projects at key sites although in the long term we believe our energy recovery activities and their related combined heat and power schemes will help to deliver a distinct improvement over landfill.
In addition the displacement of virgin materials in manufacturing with recycled material contributes to significant reductions in embodied carbon across product life cycles.
However this offset falls outside current greenhouse gas reporting scopes.
Innovative use of byproducts Viridors ERFs are moving closer to becoming a fully zero waste to landfill solution using innovative technology to treat the byproducts of the energy recovery process.
Incinerator Bottom Ash IBA the ash left behind after burning the waste and Air Pollution Control Residue APCr the byproduct of the filtering process to clean exhaust gases before they exit the facility are now being transformed into valuable construction products.
Our IBA is recovered for processing from all ERF sites and after the removal of metals is recycled into an aggregate that is used as capping layers subbases trenches and binding concrete to structures.
The aggregate is now widely recognised and used in nationally important construction projects such as the M25 widening.
Contracts are also in place for recycling APCr that includes an innovative technology that transforms the APCr into a carbon negative aggregate.
The
Environment Agency considers the aggregate to be a product in its own right having been assessed as an end of waste material that can be used in exactly the same way as virgin aggregates and with no worse environmental impact than virgin aggregate.
Viridor plays a vital part in the displacement of virgin materials in manufacturing supply chains with recycled material that significantly reduces embodied carbon across product lifecycles.
Ardley ERF achieves bestinclass delivery Viridors ERF at Ardley north of Oxford delivered worldclass safety performance in construction and was built ontime and onbudget.
It completed its first year of operations in 201617 and achieved upper quartile availability between 90% and 96%.
This high level of performance is normally associated with a mature asset and it would be reasonable to expect a lower level of 80%90% availability from a new plant.
The achievement at Ardley of upper quartile performance in the first year with a completely new team is the result of Viridors record of investing in quality people training and development and its commitment to effective operational processes and procedures.
Strategic report Our operations Energy recovery and waste recycling continued
Our recycling operations had a satisfactory year with Viridor retaining its position as one of the largest recycling businesses in the UK.
Recycling volumes traded in 201617 were slightly lower than previous years at 1.6 million tonnes.
We were active in many areas including mixed material recycling glass and plastics recycling paper recycling transforming food waste into organic and energy resources.
As one of the UKs largest glassrecycling companies our recycling plants in Sheffield and Glasgow processed over 245000 tonnes of glass in 201617.
Selfhelp measures Recyclate prices were mainly flat but under pressure with fluctuations across different commodities.
While the outlook for recyclate prices is relatively stable over the short term we are not relying on a nearterm recovery.
In addition local authority austerity in the face of central government cuts has made the market environment more difficult.
We therefore focused in 201617 on selfhelp optimisation measures.
These initiatives drove improved margins with EBITDA increasing by 6 per tonne from 8 per tonne in 201516 to 14 per tonne in 201617.
As part of the selfhelp initiative Viridor intensified its optimisation programme and combined with other ongoing efficiency initiatives this saw costs reduced by 1 per tonne for the year despite an increase in shipping costs.
Sharing commodity risk and opportunity In line with the Groups strategy of achieving a balanced risk profile we continue to work with stakeholders where we can share commodity risk and opportunity.
There are further opportunities for risk sharing arrangements as contracts expire and are renegotiated.
Local authority contracts Performance in 201617 across our key local authority contracts including Greater Manchester Glasgow Lancashire Somerset and West Sussex as well as the Thames Water contract remains broadly in line with 201516.
We began operating our 25year contracted service for Tomorrows Valley in Wales where four local authorities are collaborating in a 190 million residual waste contract that is securing fuel for Trident Park ERF.
In May 2016 we announced a significant multiauthority recycling project in Scotlands Clyde Valley.
This is expected to be worth around 700 million over the 25year contract period and will secure fuel for the Dunbar ERF.
Joint ventures The Lakeside ERF a 5050 joint venture with Grundon Waste Management continued to operate efficiently while Viridor Laing Greater Manchester a joint venture between Viridor and John Laing Infrastructure is delivering the 25year Greater Manchester Waste private finance initiative PFI contract which was the UKs largest waste and energy project entered into in 2009.
Solid recovered fuel produced from Greater Manchesters residual waste is used to generate heat and power at Runcorn 1 ERF TPSCo a joint venture between Viridor John Laing Infrastructure and Inovyn.
The Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority GMWDA continues to face financial challenges and in April 2017 confirmed it is seeking an exit and renegotiation of the PFI contract.
Diversion of waste from landfill remains ahead of contractual commitments and Viridor and its partners are keen to ensure this progress is able to continue.
Viridor and John Laing have been actively engaging with GMWDA as they consider their options.
There are provisions in the PFI Contract for compensation to be paid to Viridor and John Laing on termination.
Investment in dust control A key facet of our operations is managing the dust caused by our activities to minimise the impact on our staff as well as on the external environment.
The primary focus for dust control is elimination at source through localised extraction and dust filtration systems at key locations within the process.
Water suppression the dampening down of yard areas or haul roads is also used and we have invested in vacuum suction systems at a number of plants for use in cleaning and maintenance activities.
These measures as well as general standards of good housekeeping within our plants help us to keep dust levels under control.
Crayford MRF underlines benefits of selfhelp asset optimisation Viridor has one of Europes largest mixedwaste recycling facilities at Crayford in Kent.
Crayford MRF applies advanced technology to sort and recover comingled recyclable materials from local councils and businesses outside London.
This plant serves as a good example of our boosting productivity through asset optimisation and selfhelp measures that saw inputs into Crayford reduce marginally from the previous year but delivered a significantly increased EBITDA.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Along with our JV partners Viridor is already one of the largest independent power generators from waste in the UK.
Landfill
In 201617 we continued to manage our landfill energy business to maximise the value of landfill gas power generation optimise opportunities for waste disposal where it is not suitable for recycling or sending to ERFs whilst exploring alternative commercial development opportunities and other energy uses.
We operate a network of landfill gas power generation sites that contributed 99MW of capacity in 201617.
We are continuing our strategy of delivering cash flow from landfill sites and anticipate continued reduction of capacity.
However we believe there will be an ongoing requirement for some landfill capacity in the UK as some waste is not suitable for recycling nor for sending to ERFs.
Careful consideration will be given to selecting suitable sites for this opportunity our intention being to retain only a small number of strategic sites by 2020.
Viridor closed four sites during the year bringing the total number of operational sites to 11.
Landfill restoration and biodiversity Viridor continues to manage 31 closed landfill sites across the UK in accordance with biodiversity plans and using our experience in restoration.
Sites have been restored to heathland grassland woodland agriculture amenity parkland or a combination of these.
Viridor currently has eight sites that have achieved The Wildlife Trusts Biodiversity Benchmark which includes two heathland restorations T atchells and Warmwell in Dorset and a grassland restoration that has national significance for birdlife Beddingham in Sussex.
Community engagement Investing in educational programmes and supporting initiatives local to our operational facilities is a key element of our community engagement.
Our 11 educational facilities have received 19327 visitors over the year and helped deliver 122 outreach events to 6848 people.
The education facility at Ardley ERF has been shortlisted for the UBS Award for Education as part of Business in the Communitys Responsible Business Awards 2017 which recognised our Business Class Partnership with The Bicester School Industrial Cadet Programme Go4Set and Engineering Trust projects.
During 201617 Viridor has provided 8.0 million in community support sponsorship and charitable donations of which 7.7 million was paid to Viridor Credits for distribution via the Landfill Communities Fund.
We operate active community liaison groups to ensure effective dialogue with the local community and as part of our major construction projects we work hard to ensure maximum benefit is achieved for local communities in the surrounding area.
Energy efficiency programmes and reorganised operations have made our recycling facilities more efficient and productive.
Household Waste Recycling Centres Viridor manages a network of Household Waste Recycling Centres HWRCs in partnership with local authorities across the UK.
HWRCs complement kerbside collections by giving residents access to safe and modern facilities where they can bring along items that are not routinely collected from their home to maximise recycling.
Our HWRCs have won awards for site design and excellent customer services.
In areas serviced by our HWRCs recycling rates significantly exceed national averages often achieving recycling rates of more than 75%.
Investment in Leachate Management A number of operational projects have been launched aimed at reducing leachate generation including accelerated capping and restoration initiatives.
A dedicated leachate management team has been created to focus on driving down longterm management and disposal costs improving treatment plants and achieving the best environmental outcome.
1 Viridor Credits is an independent notforprofit organisation that administers Viridors contributions to the Landfill Communities Fund.
Strategic report Report of the Chief Financial Officer
Financial review
Susan Davy Chief Financial Officer Growth in Pennons profit is driven by delivery of ERF earnings and continued outperformance in water.
Overview
Pennon Group achieved a strong financial performance in 201617.
We delivered against our strategic objectives to lead in the UKs water and waste sectors invest for growth and drive value through efficiency.
The Group had the sector leading water company in the UK as measured by Return on Regulated Equity RoRE during the year.
South West Waters RoRE has led the sector since the start of the current regulatory period and is outperforming with a RoRE 12.6%.
South West Water continued its significant investment programme with the 60 million water treatment works in Plymouth the largest capital expenditure item in its current fiveyear plan.
The Group also established Pennon Water Services PWS to compete in the newly opened nonhousehold retail sector.
T o build scale it was announced during the year that South Staffordshire Plcs nonhousehold retail business would transfer to PWS in return for a 20% shareholding in PWS.
There was strong momentum in the energy recovery and waste recycling business in 201617.
Our energy recovery facility ERF portfolio provides an excellent example of how the Group is executing its strategy to invest for growth.
Our announcement during the year of a new ERF at Avonmouth takes our total portfolio to 12 plants and our overall investment in ERFs to 1.5 billion.
This major participation in UK environmental infrastructure is helping us transform our business model with an increasing focus on ERFs and recycling.
The high level of performance of our ERFs enabled us to exceed our c.
100 million EBITDA target from our ERF portfolio in 201617 delivering 107 million of EBITDA.
Both our water and waste operations implemented our strategy to drive value through efficiency.
We completed our Shared Services Review during the year an initiative involving planned centralisation of key corporate services and operational functions reflecting the more integrated nature of our Group.
This initiative will increase expected Group cost savings from c.
11 million previously announced to c.
17 million p. which c.
9 million p. has been secured to date.
South
West Water maintained its strong record of controlling total expenditure and remains at the forefront of cost efficiency in the water sector.
These efficiency initiatives support the Boards pledge in water to reduce bills in real terms over the 20152020 regulatory period.
Other efficiency successes include the Groups energy trading team that is ensuring Pennon is buying energy at the right price and enhancing profitability from energy we generate.
In addition our selfhelp measures during the year improved efficiency in our recycling operations.
Part of our strategy as we build our ERFs and in our recycling operations is to ensure we achieve a balanced riskreward profile.
We are successfully reducing Group risk by overlaying our longterm assets with longterm commercial arrangements and supporting these with longterm financing.
In February 2017 we unwound a derivative position entered into in 2011 that had become uneconomic at a break cost of 44 million.
One of our key financial objectives is to ensure we maintain strong liquidity and have access to the most efficient and effective funding to support our capital investment programme.
During the year our interest rate on average net debt remained low at 3.4% and at 31 March 2017 the Group continued to have a strong funding position with 1383 million of cash and facilities.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Performance overview Earnings per share pence 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 Underlying earnings reconciliation 2017 Nonunderlying items
Restructuring costs Unwind of derivative
Change in tax rate
Earnings per share p Operating profit 304.6 10.7    293.9 Profit before tax 250.0 10.7 44.8 16.0  210.5 Profit after tax PAT 191.6 8.4 36.8 12.8 21.3 180.5 PAT attributable to perpetual capital holders 16.2 PAT attributable to shareholders 164.3 39.8 Deferred tax before nonunderlying items 18.9 4.5 Nonunderlying items post tax 11.1 2.7 Earnings before nonunderlying items and deferred tax 194.3 47.0 Underlying earnings reconciliation 2016 Nonunderlying items
Restructuring costs
Change in tax rate
Earnings per share p Operating profit 261.8 10.2   251.6 Profit before tax 211.3 10.2 5.2  206.3 Profit after tax PAT 139.2 8.2 4.2 33.1 168.3 PAT attributable to perpetual capital holders 16.2 PAT attributable to shareholders 152.1 37.0 Deferred tax before nonunderlying items 39.2 9.5 Nonunderlying items post tax 29.1 7.0 Earnings before nonunderlying items and deferred tax 162.2 39.5 1 See reconciliation on page 40.
EBITDA m 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213
Underlying
Adjusted
Profit before tax m 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213 Dividend per share pence 201617 201516 201415 201314 201213
Underlying
Statutory
Before nonunderlying items and deferred tax Strategic report Report of the Chief Financial Officer continued Gross assets bn 5.9tel EBITDA m 201516 201415 Revenue m 1357.2 201617 201516 201415 1352.3 1353.1 Capital investment m 201617 201516 201415 Financial KPIs Group Group
Waste
Statutory
Underlying
Adjusted
Adjusted EBITDA reconciliation m 2017 2016 Statutory EBITDA 475.3 438.2 Nonunderlying items 10.7 10.2 Underlying EBITDA 486.0 448.4 IFRIC 12 interest receivable JV EBITDA JV IFRIC 12 interest receivable Adjusted EBITDA 546.2 508.4 1 These adjustments relate to the waste management business resulting in adjusted waste management EBITDA of 198.5 million 201516 176.5 million.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Statutory financial performance The Groups statutory results showed growth in both profit before tax to 210.5 million 201516 206.3 million and earnings per share to 39.8p 201516 37.0p.
This reflects strong earnings from both South West Water and Viridor supported by sector leading efficiencies in the water business and a full year increase in Viridors ERF operational capacity.
The performance of the underlying business is set out in more detail below in the financial performance section.
The statutory results include the impact of nonunderlying items totalling a charge after tax of 11.1 million 201516 29.1 million credit.
The
Directors believe excluding nonunderlying items and deferred tax provides a more useful comparison on business trends and performance.
The net nonunderlying charge of 11.1 million is a result of restructuring costs  10.7 million charge derivative movements  28.8 million charge taxation on the nonunderlying items above totalling a credit of 7.1 million taxation  21.3 million credit arising from the enacted reduction in the UK rate of corporation tax from 18% to 17% in 2020.
Financial performance before nonunderlying items
Group revenue was marginally ahead of last year at 1353.1 million 201516 1352.3 million.
Revenue from the water business was up by 2.6% to 561.0 million 201516 547.0 million as a result of 2.5% higher demand due to drier weather tariff increases of 1.4% with RPI of 1.1% and increased new connections.
This increase in revenue primarily linked to drier weather is above the regulatory tolerance levels and will result in a small penalty of 0.2 million.
Viridors revenue decreased by 1.6% to 793.5 million 201516 806.2 million due to the expected decrease in construction spend on service concession arrangements as plants come on stream and lower landfill volumes partly offset by the growing contribution of operational ERFs.
Excluding the impact of construction revenue Group revenue would have increased in the year by 20 million 1.5%.
Adjusted EBITDA Group underlying EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA were ahead of 201516 up 8.4% at 486.0 million 201516 448.4 million and 7.4% to 546.2 million 201516 508.4 million respectively.
Underlying operating profit increased by 16.3% to 304.6 million 201516 261.8 million and underlying profit before tax increased by 18.3% to 250.0 million 201516 211.3 million.
This has been achieved through an increase in profits from Viridor together with continuing strong South West Water financial performance and efficient ongoing finance costs across the Group.
Following the merger of Bournemouth Water into South West Water the water business recorded strong performances against the K6 regulatory contracts outperforming regulatory assumptions.
The water business profit before tax increased by 4.9% to 173.9 million 201516 165.7 million reflecting higher revenue from tariff increases and increased demand with operating costs of 211.9 million 201516 211.8 million broadly in line with last year.
With the highest potential returns in the sector for K6 South West Water is outperforming its business plan resulting in a cumulative RoRE of 12.6%.
More detail on RoRE performance is set out on page 28.
During the year Ofwat updated its guidance for calculating the financing outperformance using an inyear average RPI rate rather than a forecast RPI over the regulatory period.
South West Waters RoRE remains sector leading through this approach and the cumulative forecast performance over K6 is the same under both approaches.
South West Waters EBITDA increased during the year due to higher revenue and cost efficiencies along with other cost reductions.
While average RPI has been increasing 2.9% as at March 2017 total operating costs in 201617 were in line with last year with savings arising from operational maintenance synergies from the company mergers as well as targeted efficiencies contributing to cost performance.
Operating
HSE prosecution following the tragic fatality of an employee at a wastewater treatment works in December 2013.
In addition South West Waters bad debt charge continues to fall down by over a quarter since the end of K5 to 1.1% as a percentage of revenues 1.7% at the end of K5.
This was driven by strong collections as we work with our customers to manage their debt with the operations continually updating their approaches in targeting those customers with the means to pay whilst supporting those who have genuine affordability challenges.
At Viridor the portfolio of operational ERFs continues to perform well with the six most recently delivered ERFs ramping up as Viridor optimises each plant.
As a result Viridors EBITDA increased by 18.7% to 138.3 million 201516 116.5 million whilst 201617 adjusted EBITDA increased 12.5% to 198.5 million 201516 176.5 million.
Viridor has four further ERFs under construction including Avonmouth which we committed to during the year.
Dunbar and Beddington South London are progressing well and to budget with steps being taken to ensure construction of Glasgow ERF is completed successfully.
Viridors EBITDA was ahead of last year due to the ramping up of the existing ERF portfolio and recycling selfhelp measures where significant progress has been made in reducing the cost base and improving the utilisation of assets net of anticipated declines in landfill earnings primarily due to expected lower volumes.
Our ERF activities contributed EBITDA of 106.9 million 201516 89.7 million delivering our target of c.
100 million of EBITDA from ERFs by 201617 before IFRIC 12 interest receivable and our share of joint venture EBITDA.
Joint venture EBITDA increased slightly to 44.1 million 201516 43.3 million with strong EBITDA from all three joint ventures.
This resulted in a share of joint venture profit after tax of 4.2 million 201516 3.6 million.
During the year ERF earnings included contractual compensation of 12.7 million a similar level to previous years.
Recycling and resources EBITDA comprising recycling collection and contracts and other increased by 14.5% to 56.8 million 201516 49.6 million.
Recycling revenue at 90 per tonne 201516 85 per tonne has increased 5 per tonne reflecting renegotiated input contracts and recyclate prices.
Average operating costs fell by 2 per tonne to 72 per tonne 201516 74 per tonne as a result of targeted efficiencies.
This has been offset by an increase in shipping costs of 1 per tonne.
As a result the recycling EBITDA margin increasing by 6 per tonne to 14 per tonne 201516 8 per tonne.
We remain cautious about future recyclate price growth and are not relying on a nearterm recovery.
We are instead focusing on selfhelp measures to drive margin improvement and to look to share commodity riskopportunity with our clients.
Landfill EBITDA from power generation and waste disposal are down compared to last year by 3.7 million.
The decrease in earnings is primarily due to lower power prices and volumes.
Across the Group we look to efficiently manage and optimise value from our estates portfolio recognising a profit on sale of assets in the year of 7.5 million 201516 4.3 million.
Net finance costs Underlying net finance costs of 58.8 million were 4.7 million higher than last year predominantly reflecting higher RPI higher net debt from continuing capital investments and lower finance income following the unwind of the 2011 Peninsula MB derivative which reduces finance income by 8 million p. going forward.
We have secured funding at a cost that is efficient and effective.
The Group interest rate on average net debt for 201617 has slightly increased to 3.4% 201516 3.3% reflecting increases in RPI.
The Groups interest rate on average net debt for the year to 31 March 2017 is 3.4% after adjusting for capitalised interest of 12.9 million notional interest items totalling 5.8 million and interest received from shareholder loans to joint ventures of 10.2 million.
For South West Water this figure was 3.2%.
During the year underlying net finance costs excluding pensions net interest cost 1.2 million discount unwind on provisions 9.1 million and IFRIC 12 contract interest receivable 16.1 million were 64.6 million 201516 59.6 million covered 4.7 times 201516 4.4 times by Group operating profit.
1 Primarily relates to liquidated damages receivedreceivable when construction completed post the original contractual completion date.
Strategic report Profit before tax Group underlying profit before tax was 250.0 million an increase of 18.3% compared with the prior year 201516 211.3 million.
On a statutory basis profit before tax was 210.5 million 201516 206.3 million reflecting nonunderlying charges before tax of 39.5 million 201516 5.0 million.
Taxation
The Groups underlying mainstream UK corporation current tax charge for the year before prior year credits was 41.3 million the 7.0 million increase on last year is primarily driven by higher profits reflecting an effective tax rate of 16.5% 201516 34.3 million 16.2%.
There was a prior year credit of 1.8 million recognised for the year 201516 credit of 1.4 million.
In addition there is a nonunderlying 9.4 million current tax credit relating to nonunderlying items 201516 1.7 million credit.
Underlying deferred tax for the year before prior year charges was a charge of 17.8 million 201516 23.3 million.
The charge for 201617 primarily reflects capital allowances including on ERFs in excess of depreciation charge.
There was a prior year deferred tax charge of 1.1 million recognised for the year 201516 15.9 million charge.
In addition there is a nonunderlying 21.3 million deferred tax credit relating to the enacted reduction in the UK rate of corporation tax to 17% in 2020 and a 2.3 million deferred tax charge relating to other nonunderlying items.
This resulted in a total tax charge for the year of 30.0 million 201516 38.0 million.
We have recently concluded discussions with HMRC resolving the treatment of certain uncertain tax items.
Provisions for these uncertain tax items had been recognised in previous years no further amounts are required to be recognised in relation to these items.
Nonunderlying items The net nonunderlying charge of 11.1 million is a result of restructuring costs  10.7 million charge relating to restructuring costs from the Group wide Shared Services Review and migration to a Group IT platform including a 9.5 million noncash derecognition of an existing IT asset derivative movements  28.8 million charge reflecting the unwind of the 2011 Peninsula MB Limited PMB derivative charge 44.8 million offset by market movements on our longdated floating rate vanilla swaps taxation on the nonunderlying items above totalling a credit of 7.1 million taxation  21.3 million credit arising from the enacted reduction in the UK rate of corporation tax from 18% to 17% in 2020.
Unwind of the 2011 PMB derivative Since 2011 Pennon has received a fixed interest rate on a 200 million financial asset and paid an indexlinked interest rate on a 200 million loan designed to improve the Groups overall interest rate performance.
The counterparty to both instruments was PMB.
In combination these instruments were accounted for by Pennon as a derivative with a net interest income of 8 million p. c.
7 million in 201617 cash settled.
In periods of index underperformance losses arose in PMB which were group relieved with Pennon.
Following a change in legislation which saw the value of the derivative to Pennon moving from a liability of 4 million to a liability of c.
40 million Pennon made the decision to exit the transaction.
The break cost due to Nomura in respect of the termination was 44 million with an agreed payment date of June 2018.
The impact for the Group is a net cost of 35 million post tax.
The group relief claimed by Pennon has been treated as an uncertain tax item and has been substantially provided for over recent years.
Following the conclusion of discussions with HMRC no further amounts are required to be recognised by Pennon.
Post the unwind of the transaction the Groups interest will no longer include the c.
8 million p. underlying tax charge will reduce by a similar amount.
Earnings per share Earnings per share on both a statutory and underlying basis before deferred tax were ahead of last year up 7.6% at 39.8p 201516 37.0p and up 19.0% at 47.0p 201516 39.5p respectively reflecting higher profits.
Net assets per share at book value at 31 March 2017 were 365p up 1.1% on last year.
Dividends and retained earnings The statutory net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of 164.3 million has been transferred to reserves.
The Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 24.87p per share for the year ended 31 March 2017.
With the interim dividend of 11.09p per share paid on 4 April 2017 this gives a total dividend for the year of 35.96p an increase of 7.1% over 201516 and maintaining our longstanding sectorleading dividend policy of RPI  4% yearonyear growth.
We set that policy in the 20102015 regulatory period and confirmed its continuation through to 2020.
The net effect of this policy is that dividends per share will have almost doubled over the 10 years to 2020.
This 4% real growth above RPI per annum is driven by continued outperformance of our water business and by the significant investments we are making in Viridor which is successfully delivering on its targeted contribution to Group earnings.
We are actively seeking further opportunities for growth beyond 2020 with the aim of sustaining a sectorleading dividend policy over the longer term.
Proposed dividends totalling 149.5 million are covered 1.3 times by net profit before nonunderlying items and deferred tax 201516 1.1 times.
Dividends are charged against retained earnings in the year in which they are paid.
Operating costs before nonunderlying items Operating costs for the year totalled 1049 million.
The most significant areas of expenditure were Expenditure m Employment costs 180 Depreciation 178 Landfill tax 141 Raw materials and consumables 91 Transport 58 Power 41 Business rates 39 Abstraction and discharge consents 9 Excludes transport costs.
Report of the Chief Financial Officer continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Group capital investment Group capital investment was 384.7 million in 201617 compared to 316.9 million in 201516.
This peak level of investment is expected to continue in to 201718 reflecting the profile of investment in Viridors ERFs.
South West Waters capital expenditure was 190.9 million compared to 134.1 million in 201516.
The beginning of the new regulatory period reflects a change in the nature and extent of capital activity and an increase in activity in year two.
As anticipated the largest single project in South West Waters spending is the development of the innovative Mayflower water treatment works at North Plymouth.
Construction works are well advanced and the formation of the process elements is underway with over 5km of water pipeline and effluent pipes already installed.
Advanced techniques have been used to limit the impact on the surrounding area including micro tunnelling under a major road into Plymouth.
In addition investment has been targeted to improve wastewater compliance with process upgrades and improvements at six sites.
Viridors capital investment of 193.8 million was ahead of 201516 182.8 million.
The majority of expenditure this year reflects the ongoing ERF programme with significant expenditure at South London Dunbar and Glasgow ERFs.
The infrastructure at Dunbar is nearing completion with a significant element of the process plant having been delivered to site prior to installation.
The plant is expected to be operational in H2 201718.
Construction at Beddington is progressing to plan with access routes to the site being improved and the core infrastructure under construction.
Operations are expected to commence in H1 201819.
Glasgows Recycling and Renewable Energy Centre is receiving waste and generating energy.
New construction contracts with Doosan Babcock are progressing well with commissioning expected in 2017.
The major categories of expenditure were ERF 158m W a t er 91m 3 Wastewater 100m 4 Recycling 3m 5 Landfill energy 12m 6 Other 21m Cash flow The Groups operational cash inflows in 201617 at 456 million were 38 million higher than last year 201516 418 million.
These funds have been put to use in efficiently financing the Groups capital structure and investing in future growth through our substantial continuing capital investment programme.
This investment has resulted in higher Group net debt.
Summarised cash flow Cash inflow from operations Net interest paid 62 64 Tax paid 36 45 Dividends paid net of scrip 132 123 Hybrid periodic return 20 20 Capital investment Dividends and loan repayments received from joint ventures 5 34 Pension contributions 11 34 Equity placing and other share issues 2 102 Acquisitions net of cash acquired  91 Net cash outflow 161 114 Fair value of debt acquired from Bournemouth Water  160 Debt indexationinterest accruals 20 13 Increase in net borrowings 181 287 1 Before construction spend on service concession arrangements of 13 million 201516 14 million and pension contributions of 11 million 201516 33 million 2 Including construction spend on service concession arrangements and proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment Major components of the Groups debt finance at 31 March Financ e leasing 1384m Bank bilateral debt 404m 3 Indexlinked bonds 416m 4 European Investment Bank EIB loans 364m 5 Private placements 562m 6 Bond 2040 133m Liquidity and debt profile The Group has a strong liquidity and funding position with 1383 million cash and facilities at 31 March 2017.
This includes cash and deposits of 598 million including 224 million of restricted funds representing deposits with lessors against lease obligations and undrawn facilities of 785 million.
At 31 March 2017 the Groups loans and finance lease obligations totalled 3263 million.
After the 598 million held in cash this gives a net debt figure of 2665 million an increase of 181 million during the year.
During the year the Group has drawn the South West Water EIB funding of 130 million signed in 201516.
Since the year end the Group has signed 50 million of new and renewed revolving credit facilities to provide prefunding for future cash flows.
Strategic report The Group has agreed 110 million of funding from the EIB into Pennon Group plc in relation to the capital investment in Cardiffs Trident Park Energy Recovery Facility.
This funding is anticipated to be signed later in 2017 when the EIB expects to have clarity over the implications of Article 50 being triggered.
Negotiations are continuing with the EIB to secure additional funding for South West Water so this can be delivered in a timely manner following the clarity noted above.
The investment in Avonmouth ERF will be corporately financed and options are being considered including a new hybrid to continue the Groups diversified funding position.
The Group has a diversified funding mix of fixed floating and indexlinked borrowings.
The Groups debt has a maturity of up to 40 years with a weighted average maturity of 20 years matching the asset base.
Much of the Groups debt is floating rate with derivatives being used to fix the rate on that debt.
The Group has fixed or put swaps in place to fix the interest rate on a substantial portion of the existing water business debt for the entire K6 period in line with the Groups policy to have hedging in place before the start of a regulatory period.
486.3 million of South West Waters debt is indexlinked at an overall real rate of under 2.0%.
As a result of the aforementioned initiatives South West Waters cost of finance is among the lowest in the industry.
Twothirds of South West Waters net debt is from finance leases providing a long maturity profile to its debt.
Interest
Bournemouth Water was successfully integrated into South West Water on 1 April 2016 and as a result a quarter of the gross funding for the water business is RPI linked consistent with Ofwats notional level.
At 31 March 2017 the fair value of the Groups noncurrent borrowings was 28 million more than its book value 2016 less than 114 million as detailed in note 28 to the financial statements.
This reflects the benefit of securing interest rates below the current market rate offset by volatility in inflation markets.
Capital structure  overall position The Groups net debt has increased by 181 million to 2665 million with the increase reflecting significant capital investment.
The Groups gearing ratio at 31 March 2017 being the ratio of net debt to equity plus net debt was 63.8% 31 March 2016 62.5% reflecting continuing capital investment.
Group net debt includes 1132 million of investment in whollyowned ERFs Runcorn II Oxford Exeter Cardiff Glasgow Dunbar and South London and 87 million of funding for investments in joint ventures through shareholder loans which together represents 46% of Group net debt.
In addition the joint ventures have nonrecourse net debt from third parties excluding shareholder loans of which Pennons share is 194 million. corporate finance.
In March 2013 the Group issued a 300 million hybrid capital security recognised as equity as set out in note 37 to the financial statements.
During the year the Company continued to benefit from offering a scrip dividend alternative.
6.9 million 201516 6.3 million of potential cash dividend was retained in the business and resulted in the issuance of 771563 shares.
The combined South West Water and Bournemouth Water debt to RCV ratio is 61.8% 31 March 2016 59.7% which aligns with Ofwats K6 target for efficient gearing of 62.5%.
Regulatory capital value as at 31 March m 3teltel 4.5% Treasury policies The role of the Groups treasury function is to ensure we have the funding to meet foreseeable needs to maintain reasonable headroom for future contingencies and to manage interest rate risk.
It operates only within policies approved by the Board and undertakes no speculative trading activity.
The Board regularly monitors expected financing needs for at least the following 12 months.
These are intended to be met for the coming year from existing cash balances loan facilities and operating cash flows.
The Group has considerable financial resources and a broad spread of business activities.
The Directors therefore believe that it is well placed to manage its business risks.
Internal borrowing South West Waters and Bournemouth Waters funding is treated for regulatory purposes as ringfenced.
This means that funds raised by or for either company are not available as longterm funding for other areas of the Group.
Taxation strategy Our tax strategy is to fulfil our statutory obligations by the application of relevant tax legislation in a reasonable way engaging in tax planning only when it is aligned with the commercial and economic activity of the Company.
This is in line with the principles published by the Confederation of British Industry CBI in 2013.
The Group engages with HMRC in an open and transparent way identifying potential areas of uncertainty on a timely basis.
Due to the complexity of tax legislation the Group and tax authorities may sometimes have differing opinions on the treatment of certain tax items.
The Group manages this risk and accrues for areas of tax uncertainty in line with accounting standards requirements where appropriate.
The Board is regularly updated on tax matters and any tax implications of commercial activities are highlighted to the Board with the use of a risk matrix to assess the appropriateness of a proposal.
Report of the Chief Financial Officer continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Tax contribution 201617 collectedpaid The Group made a net payment of 36.4 million of UK corporation tax in the year 201516 45.0 million.
The main elements of the payment were 19.8 million in relation to 201617 instalment payments and 16.6 million in relation to earlier years.
The total tax charge for the year of 30.0 million is less than the charge that would have arisen had the accounting profit before tax been taxed at the statutory rate of 20%.
A reconciliation is provided in note 9 to the financial statements.
The mainstream tax charge for the year before deferred tax prioryear and nonunderlying items of 41.3 million results in an effective rate of 16.5% which is lower than the statutory rate of 20.0% mainly due to capital allowances received on ERF capital expenditure.
Landfill tax 147m 2 Employment taxes 57m 3 Business rates 39m 4 UK corporation tax 36m 5 Environmental payments 11m 6 Fuel Excise Duty 7m 7 VAT 5m 8 Carbon Reduction Commitment 3m 9 Other 5m The Groups total tax contribution extends significantly beyond the UK corporation tax payments.
Total taxes amounted to 310 million 201516 342 million of which a net amount of 45 million 201516 47 million was collected on behalf of the authorities for employee payroll taxes and VAT.
In addition to corporation tax the most significant taxes involved together with their profit impact were Landfill tax of 145 million 201516 166 million collected and paid on waste material deposited at our landfill sites.
This amount includes 6 million 201516 11 million paid to local environmental bodies via the Landfill Tax Credits Scheme.
Landfill tax is an operating cost which is recovered from customers and is recognised in revenue.
In addition the Group incurred landfill tax of 2 million 201516 1 million on the disposal of waste to third parties.
This is an operating cost for the Group and reduces profit before tax.
The net amount of landfill tax paid to HMRC by the Group and via third parties represents 13% of the total landfill receipts of HMRC in the year.
Value Added T ax VAT of 5 million paid 201516 8 million by the Group to HMRC.
VAT has no material impact on profit before tax Business rates of 39 million 201415 42 million paid to local authorities.
This is a direct cost to the Group and reduces profit before tax.
Employment taxes of 57 million 201516 54 million including employees Pay As You Earn PAYE and total National Insurance Contributions NICs.
Employer NICs of 16 million 201516 15 million were charged approximately 93% to operating costs with 7% capitalised to property plant and equipment.
The total amount of 50 million includes PAYE of 3 million 201415 2 million on pension payments made by the Group pension scheme.
Fuel Excise Duty of 7 million 201516 8 million related to transport costs.
This reduces profit before tax Payments to Environment Agency and other regulatory bodies total 11 million 201516  11 million This reduces profit before tax Carbon Reduction Commitment CRC payment for the Group of 3 million 201516 4 million.
This reduces profit before tax.
The corporation tax rate for 201617 used to calculate the current years tax is 20% and will reduce to 19% for the year to 31 March 2018 and 17% for the year ending 31 March 2021.
Pensions
The Group operates defined benefit pension schemes for certain employees of Pennon Group.
The main schemes were closed to new entrants on or before 1 April 2008.
At 31 March 2017 the Groups pension schemes showed an aggregate deficit before deferred tax of 68.0 million March 2016 40.9 million.
The deficit has increased due to the postBrexit fall in bond yields increasing the valuation of liabilities.
However over half of the increase in the valuation of liabilities has been offset by increases in asset values.
The net aggregate liabilities of 56 million after deferred tax represented around 2% of the Groups market capitalisation at 31 March 2017.
The 31 March 2016 actuarial valuation of the main scheme has been finalised the outcome is in line with the 2013 valuation and schedule of contributions which is consistent with Final Determination FD allowances for K6 20152020.
Insurance
Pennon Group manages its property and third party liability risks through insurance policies that mainly cover property and business interruption motor public liability environmental pollution and employers liability.
The Group uses three tiers of insurance to cover operating risks selfinsurance  Group companies pay a moderate excess on most claims cover by the Groups subsidiary Peninsula Insurance Limited of the layer of risk between the selfinsurance and the cover provided by external insurers cover provided by the external insurance market arranged by our brokers with insurance companies that have good credit ratings.
Susan Davy Chief Financial Officer Pennon Group plc Strategic report Risk report The Board is responsible for identifying principal risks and ensuring appropriate risk mitigation is in place to manage them effectively.
Risk management framework Successful management of existing and emerging risks is essential to the long term success of the Group and the achievement of its strategic objectives.
Pennon has established a fully embedded Group risk management framework to identify significant risks and determine whether they are being appropriately managed in line with the Groups agreed risk appetite and mitigated.
A Group Risk Forum provides a top down assessment of Group risks that supplements the bottom up risk assessments by each subsidiary.
The key stages of the risk process are Identification of significant risks by core business functions utilising agreed risk criteria based on a combination of likelihood over a fiveyear period and impact based on financial reputational management effort and impact on stakeholders and customers Principal and other business risks are captured in risk registers which are reviewed on an ongoing basis as part of a robust assessment of key risks mitigations controls and assurance activities defined by risk owners.
The assessment considers gross risk net risk after mitigation and risk appetite as well as the direction of travel of the risk level Quarterly risk and assurance forums are held to review and challenge principal risks where management justify their bottomup risk assessments through formal reports and presentations Principal risks of each subsidiary are reviewed and confirmed on a quarterly basis by the subsidiary executive management teams following which the Group Risk Forum completes a comprehensive topdown evaluation of risks that could impact on the delivery of Group strategic objectives.
The Forum consists of senior executives and its role is to debate challenge agree and prioritise the principal risks faced by the Group based on the risk appetite set by the
The risk assessment is then subjected to a thorough appraisal by the Pennon Executive before consideration by the Audit Committee and then formal presentation to the Board for approval The impact of risks on the three longterm strategic priorities is included in the following table of principal risks and uncertainties.
Risk appetite Risk appetite is defined as the level of risk it is considered appropriate to accept in achieving Group strategic objectives.
The appropriateness of the mitigation applied to each principal risk is considered by the Board in the context of the effectiveness of the overall control environment in ensuring compliance with the agreed risk appetite of the Board.
Robust risk assessment The Directors confirm that they have carried out a robust assessment of risks facing the Group including assessing the impacts on its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
The following table describes the principal risks and how they are being managed or mitigated in line with the Boards risk appetite.
These principal risks have been considered in preparing the viability statement on page 51.
Countess Wear Wastewater Treatment Works The Group faces a number of risks which if they arise could affect its ability to achieve its strategic objectives.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Law regulation and finance Principal risks Strategic impact Mitigation Net risk Direction Risk appetite Compliance with law regulation or decisions by
Longterm priorities affected Noncompliance could lead to financial penalties and other additional costs which could undermine our efforts to maximise cost base efficiency.
Damage to reputation could affect shareholder value.
Regulatory reform could lead to inefficiencies and have a consequential affect on customer affordability.
The June 2017 General Election could lead to a changed regulatory environment.
Robust regulatory framework ensures compliance with Ofwat Environment Agency and other requirements.
Full engagement in consultations on reform of policy and legislation helps influence change through effective stakeholder relationships.
Clear and accessible guidance for employees is in place and training programmes have been rolled out and are ongoing.
Good progress has been made in preparing for regulatory reform and we entered the nonhousehold retail market on1 April 2017.
We are fully engaged in the programme for the next regulatory price review.
External reviews support the assurance provided by the water business to its regulators.
High standards of compliance are sought with no appetite for legal and regulatory breaches.
As regulatory reform is progressing we aim to minimise the impact by targeting changes which are NPV neutral over the longer term to protect shareholder value and customer affordability.
Maintaining sufficient finance and funding to meet ongoing commitments Longterm priorities affected Failure to maintain funding requirements could lead to additional finance costs and put our growth agenda at risk.
Clear treasury and funding policies and an effective Group Treasury team.
Funding in place at effective average interest rates below many in its sector with prefunding and headroom including revolving credit facilities to meet future funding requirements.
Ensure funding requirements are fully met by maintaining prudent headroom.
Noncompliance or occurrence of avoidable health and safety incident Longterm priorities affected Breach of health and safety laws and regulations could lead to financial penalties significant legal costs damage to reputation and loss of shareholder value.
Risk is reduced through health and safety compliance systems policies and procedures which are currently being reviewed and enhanced supported by a programme of capital investment.
High standards of compliance are sought with no appetite for compliance breaches within the Group and third party operations.
Uncertainty arising from open tax computations where liabilities remain to be agreed Longterm priorities affected Censure for noncompliance with HMRC requirements could lead to financial penalties significant legal costs damage to reputation and loss of shareholder value.
Professionally qualified and experienced inhouse tax team supported by external specialists.
Significant progress made during 201617 to agree outstanding tax items with HMRC.
Full compliance with HMRC requirements.
Principal risks and uncertainties Risk level Low Medium High Increasing Stable Decreasing The low medium and high risk level is our estimate of the net risk to the Group after mitigation.
It is important to note that risk is difficult to estimate with accuracy and therefore may be more or less than indicated.
Current assessment of direction of travel of risk level.
Strategic impact
Leadership in cost base efficiency
Longterm priorities affected.
Strategic report Risk report continued Principal risks Strategic impact Mitigation Net risk Direction Risk appetite Increase in defined benefit pension scheme deficit Longterm priorities affected The Group could be called upon to increase funding to reduce the deficit impacting our cost base.
Use of professional advisers to manage the pension schemes investment strategy to ensure the scheme can pay its obligations as they fall due.
Risk increased postBrexit vote due to market uncertainties.
The situation has since stabilised as evidenced by the outcome of the recent triennial evaluation which demonstrates the recovery plan from 2013 is still on track.
Expectation that pension benefits can be paid in full without increased costs to the Company.
Market and economic conditions Principal risks Strategic impact Mitigation Net risk Direction Risk appetite Nonrecovery of customer debt Longterm priorities affected Potential impact on customer debt collection particularly with regard to vulnerable customers and affordability.
Water business debt collection strategies kept under review with new initiatives regularly implemented Targeting previous occupier debt after customer moves Specific case management and use of court claims and Use of charging orders.
Affordability tariffs e.
Restart
WaterCare FreshStart help to reduce bad debt exposure for customers struggling to pay.
Viridors debt collection risk is lower due to the high proportion of public sector accounts.
Minimise nonrecoverable debt.
We recognise customer affordability challenges and that given the inability to disconnect domestic customers some risk of uncollectable debt remains.
Macroeconomic risks arising from the global and UK economic downturn commodity and power prices Longterm priorities affected The economic climate and falling commodity and energy prices have a direct impact on the revenues generated by our recycling business.
Viridor is well positioned across the waste hierarchy with longterm contracts supporting the ERF segment.
The recycling self help measures focus on performance in mitigating the impact of global economic conditions on commodity prices.
Energy risk management at a Group level acts as a natural hedge between South West Water and Viridor offsetting any drop in power prices.
Existing investments that qualified for Renewable Obligation Certificates are protected by the grandfathering principle.
Taking welljudged risks and having response plans in place to mitigate external macroeconomic risk factors down to an acceptable level.
Law regulation and finance continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Operating performance Principal risks Strategic impact Mitigation Net risk Direction Risk appetite Poor operating performance due to extreme weather or climate change Longterm priorities affected Failure of our assets to cope with extreme weather conditions may lead to an inability to meet our customers needs environmental damage additional costs and loss of reputation.
Contingency plans emergency resources and investment through a planned capital programme mitigates the risks of extreme weather incidents.
We prepare a Water Resources Management Plan every five years and drought plans every three years which are both reviewed annually for a range of climate change and demand scenarios with schemes promoted to maintain water resources e. efficiency measures.
While no water restrictions are envisaged the risk is rising due to the recent prolonged period of dry weather.
Viridor has in place a regional adverse weather management strategy aimed at reducing disruption to site operations and transport logistics.
Reduce both the likelihood and impact through longterm planning and ensuring sufficient measures are in place to mitigate risk.
Poor customer serviceincreased competition leading to loss of customer base Longterm priorities affected Poor customer service has a direct impact on South West Waters delivery of the PR14 business plan and Viridors ability to retain and grow market share.
The opening up of the nonhousehold retail market to competition means that we must ensure we understand and meet the needs of our business customers if we are to deliver growth in this area.
Targeted improvements made to improve customer service including South West Waters relative industry standing during the K6 period.
Viridors strategy to diversify into energy recovery has offset the decline in landfill and current challenges in recycling.
Viridor is exploring alternative uses for its landfill assets.
Good customer service is at the heart of everything we do.
Continually seek to increase customer satisfaction.
Minimise the impact of market reform by defending the existing customer base whilst developing further markets.
Business interruption or significant operational failures incidents Longterm priorities affected Operational failure in our Water business could mean that we are not able to supply clean water to our customers or provide safe wastewater services.
This has a direct impact on successful delivery of the PR14 business plan.
Business interruption caused by defects outages or fire could impact the availability and optimisation of our ERFs and recycling facilities.
Detailed contingency plans and incident management procedures.
Equipment failure is managed through sophisticated planned preventative maintenance regimes.
Any disruption is alleviated by good liaison and communication.
Effective business continuity and contingency plans in place to mitigate the risk and accelerate the recovery from an incident with residual risk covered by insurance.
Strategic report Risk report continued Principal risks Strategic impact Mitigation Net risk Direction Risk appetite Difficulty in recruitment retention and development of appropriate skills which are required to deliver the Groups strategy Longterm priorities affected Ensuring we have a workforce of skilled and motivated individuals is key to delivery of all our strategic priorities.
We need the right people in place to share best practice deliver synergies and move the Group forward in the new shared services structure.
We need a team with the necessary commercial acumen to help our businesses grow and prosper.
Succession plans are in place.
The recent Group restructure Viridor transformation and integration of Bournemouth Water have strengthened the executive team but in turn has the potential to impact morale across the Group.
With reliance on EU nationals uncertainties across the Group following the Brexit vote mean the current assessment of the direction of travel of the risk is increasing.
Appropriate skills and experience in place with good succession plans to mitigate impact on strategic plan.
Business systems and capital investment Principal risks Strategic impact Mitigation Net risk Direction Risk appetite Failure or increased cost of capital projectsexposure to contract failures Longterm priorities affected The success of our capital programme and longterm contracts is key to our ability to provide top class customer service the delivery of our growth agenda and our aspirations to grow market share in our waste recycling and recovery business.
Skilled project management resource and oversight boards provide rigour to the delivery of major projects.
Due diligence on suppliers technologies and acquisitions.
Backtoback agreements and supplier guarantees provide protection.
Regular reporting of performance on major contracts and post project appraisals.
The Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority has publicly stated it is seeking an exit from the Greater Manchester Waste PFI.
PennonViridor is working closely with its JV partners to secure a mutually acceptable outcome.
Pennons investment activities are based on taking welljudged risks for appropriate returns.
Failure of information technology systems management and protection including cyber risks Longterm priorities affected Failure of our systems due to inadequate cyber security could lead to significant business interruption.
Corruption or loss of data could result in detriment to our customers financial penalties and reputational damage.
Major systems implementation is supported by a formal programme governance framework supplemented by specialist consultants.
Viridor systems are in the process of migrating to a Group shared service platform.
Cyber risks are mitigated by a strong information security framework cyber security awareness campaigns plus internal and external testing and formal ISO accreditation.
Ensure all possible measures are in place aligned to guidance issued by the National Cyber Security Centre NCSC commensurate with the fast changing cyber risk landscape.
Robust systems in place to support business activity with strong cyber protection to minimise a growing risk.
Operating performance continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Britains exit from the European Union As with all major decisions and changes that affect our business Pennon conducted a thorough analysis of the possible implications of a vote to leave the European Union.
Pennon did not take a public stance on the referendum in June 2016 as the Board believed that the vote was a personal decision.
It is too early to know the implications of the vote to leave this will only become clear when negotiations following the March 2017 triggering of Article 50 are complete.
In the meantime we are tracking Brexit implications in assessing every risk.
Ofwats principles for holding companies  Board leadership transparency and governance Ofwat requires that holding companies manage their risks in such a way that the regulated company is protected from risk elsewhere in the Group.
The principal risks and uncertainties disclosed above include the Grouplevel risks that could materially impact on South West Water.
Pennons risk management and internal control frameworks ensure that it does not take any action that would cause South West Water to breach its licence obligations.
Further the Groups governance and management structures mean that there is full understanding and consideration of South West Waters duties and obligations under its licence. as a result of activities elsewhere in the Group.
Viability statement The Board has assessed the Groups financial viability and confirms that it has a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over a fiveyear period.
The assessment has been made with reference to the Groups current position and prospects its longerterm strategy the Boards risk appetite and the Groups principal risks and how these are managed as detailed on pages 47 to 50 of the risk report.
The Groups strategic business plan and associated principal risks are a foundation of the scenario testing.
This assessment has considered the potential impact of these risks arising on the business model future performance solvency and liquidity over the period in question.
In making their assessment the Directors reviewed the principal risks and considered which risks might threaten the Groups viability.
Over the course of the year the Audit Committee has considered a deepdive review of the following principal risks to enable a thorough assessment of the impact of these risks on ongoing viability Principal risk Matters considered by the Audit Committee Cyber security Review of the cyber security framework in place Financial markets Ability to manage external shocks or potential market dislocations that could impact on financing strategy Brexit Initial assessment of Brexit implications and mitigations Wholesale energy risk Review of Group energy risk strategy to mitigate volatility in the wholesale energy market Drinking water contamination Review the risk to drinking water quality in the event of significant water contamination Legislative and regulatory compliance Management of changes in EU and UK legislation and regulation including the impact of Brexit ERF  business interruption and continuity management Review of business continuity planning in place across all ERF facilities Water Business debt collection Nonrecovery of household debt risks and mitigations Principal risk Matters considered by the Audit Committee Recycling and commodity market volatility Management and derisking of recycling and commodity market volatility Recruitment and retention Review of people risks including the ability to attract and retain the right skills to deliver the Group strategy Water resources flooding and resilience Consider the impact of climate change and drought risks on water resources and ongoing floodrelated resilience It was determined that none of the individual risks would in isolation compromise the Groups viability so a number of plausible risk combinations were considered to stress test the plan primarily by reducing revenues increasing costs and impacting cash flows.
The Board considered the monetary impact of these scenarios over a fiveyear period to ensure that they did not adversely impact the Groups viability.
The fiveyear period was chosen for consistency with the length of the Water businesss regulatory contract and the associated business planning cycle and the longerterm nature of the business.
In making the assessment the Directors have taken account of the Groups robust capital solvency position its ability to raise new finance and a key potential mitigating action of restricting any noncontractual payments.
In assessing the prospects of the Group the Directors note that as the Group operates in a regulatory industry which potentially can be subject to nonmarket influences such assessment is subject to uncertainty the level of which depends on the proximity of the time horizon.
Accordingly the future outcomes cannot be guaranteed or predicted with certainty.
As set out in the Audit Committees report on page 68 the Directors reviewed and discussed the process undertaken by management and also reviewed the results of the stress testing performed.
Forwardlooking statements This strategic report consisting of pages 1 to 51 contains forward looking statements regarding the financial position results of operations cash flows dividends financing plans business strategies operating efficiencies capital and other expenditures competitive positions growth opportunities plans and objectives of management and other matters.
These forwardlooking statements including without limitation those relating to the future business prospects revenues working capital liquidity capital needs interest costs and income in relation to Pennon Group and its subsidiaries wherever they occur in this strategic report are necessarily based on assumptions reflecting the views of Pennon Group and its subsidiary companies as appropriate.
They involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested by the forwardlooking statements.
Such forwardlooking statements should therefore be considered in the light of relevant factors including those set out in this section on principal risks and uncertainties.
The strategic report consisting of pages 1 to 51 was approved by the Board on 23 May 2017.
By Order of the Board Helen BarrettHague Group Company Secretary 23 May 2017 Strategic report Exmouth beach
The annual performance evaluation is an important tool for assessing the Boards effectiveness in overseeing the use of shareholders funds and ensuring the Pennon Executive implements the Groups strategy.
This years evaluation concluded that the balance of skills knowledge and experience on the Board helped it to demonstrate a high degree of effectiveness with a broad understanding of Pennons businesses the opportunities available to them and the threats they face.
Read more page 62 Committed to operating to the highest standards of corporate governance Two of our Directors have a background in industry three in finance and one in governance.
Three of our Directors have held office for less than three years reflecting our commitment to continually refresh the Board and bring in new ideas.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 52 Governance and remuneration 54 Chairmans letter to shareholders 56 Board of Directors 63 Board Committees reports 74 Remuneration report 100 Directors report  other statutory disclosures
53 Chairmans letter to shareholders Good governance provides the framework for effective delivery of our strategy the creation of shareholder value and the ongoing development of our sustainable business.
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to introduce the corporate governance report for 2017 on behalf of the Board.
This is the principal method of reporting to our shareholders on the Boards governance policies and the practical application of the principles of good corporate governance.
Strong governance is central to the successful management of any company.
At Pennon it provides the framework for effective delivery of our strategy the creation of shareholder value and the ongoing development of our sustainable business.
In my second year as Chairman of Pennon I remain committed to ensuring that we continue to operate to the highest standards of corporate governance.
During the year we monitored the operation of the revised governance structures that were put in place in April 2016 and a review was carried out by our Senior Independent Director Gill Rider alongside an independent external evaluation of the Boards structure operation and performance.
Based on these assessments the Board has concluded that the governance framework which comprises the operation of the Board its Committees executive management and the board of South West Water as well as the risk management and internal control environment described on pages 46 and 62 is robust and effective and is operating smoothly.
It provides strong foundation for efficient and transparent decisionmaking while preserving the degree of regulatory independence that Ofwat requires for the water business.
Role of the Board and its effectiveness My primary role as Chairman is to provide leadership to the Board and to provide the right environment to enable each of the Directors and the Board as a whole to perform effectively to promote the success of the Company for the benefit of its shareholders.
In doing so we take account of the interests of our customers employees suppliers the communities in which we operate and other interested stakeholders including Ofwat the Drinking Water Inspectorate the UK environment agencies and other regulatory bodies in the UK.
Sir John Parker
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 103 meetings and calls in our comprehensive IR programme city conferences salesforce briefings and roadshows The revised governance structure implemented in April 2016 has reinforced the good governance already in place and has helped us to operate effectively and cohesively as a Board.
It is my responsibility to act on the results of the annual performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees via an action plan approved by the
The aim is to identify further areas for improvement and ensure that our knowledge skills and processes remain relevant as the Groups businesses develop and grow.
Further details of the review which was facilitated by an external governance consultancy are set out later in this report.
The revised Board structure also assists the Directors in maintaining uptodate knowledge and understanding of our total business as we pursue our strategy described in the strategic report.
Shareholder engagement We maintain appropriate and regular dialogue with our shareholders to ensure that there is a good understanding of our rationale for our strategy and our performance actions.
It also allows shareholders to provide feedback on the matters they consider to be important and any issues which require addressing.
We have a comprehensive investor relations programme.
During the year some 103 meetings and conference calls were held.
Pennon attended eight city conferences and sales force briefings and eight roadshows including in the US and mainland
This engagement covered both current and prospective shareholders the majority of which are institutional with the remainder being a selection of large private client investment managers.
In addition this year we held a site visit to Viridors Ardley Energy Recovery Facility near Oxford.
The Chief Financial Officer continues to report to the Board regularly on major shareholders views about the Group and every six months the Companys corporate brokers present to the Board on equity market developments and shareholder perceptions.
This ensures that the Board is fully briefed on the views and aspirations of shareholders.
I will actively encourage the participation of our shareholders at our AGMs and will welcome questions on any business issues affecting the
As usual at our 2017 AGM on 6 July all of our Directors intend to be present together with a number of other senior executives of our businesses to meet with shareholders to further explain developments at Pennon.
Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code and other requirements I am pleased to report that throughout the year the Company complied with the provisions and applied the main principles set out in the UK Code with no exceptions to report.
The UK Code is published on the Financial Reporting Council FRC website www. rc.
September 2014 version of the Code which is effective for reporting periods commencing on or after 1 October 2014 and before 17 June 2016.
In addition as the holding company of South West Water Limited the Company has complied with Ofwats principles for holding companies in respect of Board leadership transparency and governance.
My introduction to this corporate governance report and the following sections are made in compliance with the UK Code Financial Conduct Authority FCA Listing Rule 9.8.6 and FCA Disclosure and Transparency Rules 7.1 and 7.2 and cover the work of our Board and its Committees our internal control systems and procedures including risk management our corporate governance statements relating to share capital and control our confirmation of the Company as a going concern and Directors responsibility statements.
Finally in accordance with reporting requirements on page 103 the Board confirms to shareholders that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Sir John Parker
Pennon Group plc 23 May 2017 Exeter ERF Governance Board of Directors Sir John Parker
GBE FREng DSc Eng ScD Hon DSc Hon DUniv Hon FRINA Sir John was appointed to the Board as Deputy Chairman on 1 April 2015 and became Chairman on 1 August 2015.
He is also chairman of the Nomination Committee.
Skills and experience Sir John is a highly experienced and independent chairman and brings a wealth of leadership experience across a range of industries.
He won the lifetime achievement award at The Sunday Times 2015 NonExecutive Director Awards and is widely recognised for his policy work on corporate governance including the value of diversity in the boardroom.
He has chaired five FTSE100 companies and was previously the chairman of National Grid plc senior nonexecutive director and chair of the Court of the Bank of England deputy chairman of DP World joint chair of Mondi and chair of BVT and PandO plc.
He was also president of the Royal Academy of Engineering from 2011 to 2014.
Since his appointment as Chairman Sir John has brought the Group together under a revised governance framework that features a new role of Group Chief Executive Officer and other senior positions.
The new team is working together collaboratively to drive forward the Groups strategy.
External appointments Sir John is the chairman of Anglo American plc and of Advanced Plasma Power Limited.
He is also a nonexecutive director of Carnival Corporation and Airbus Group and is a Visiting Fellow of the University of Oxford.
Sir Johns commitments are expected to reduce in 2017 when he retires from the board of Anglo American plc.
Christopher Loughlin
Chief Executive Officer
BSc Hons MICE CEng MBA Chris was appointed to the Board on 1 August 2006 upon joining Pennon as Chief Executive of South West Water.
He became the Group Chief Executive Officer on 1 January 2016.
Chris is chairman of the Pennon Executive and a member of the Sustainability Committee.
Skills and experience Chris has extensive experience of the regulated business environment and the management of major engineering and infrastructure services.
He started his career as a chartered engineer working in both the consulting and contracting sectors and after holding a number of senior positions with British Nuclear Fuels plc joined its board as an executive director.
Prior to joining Pennon he was chief operating officer with Lloyds Register and before that executive chairman of Magnox Electric plc.
He was also a senior diplomat in the British Embassy Tokyo.
Chris has a comprehensive understanding of the water industry.
He was previously a board member and for a period president of the Institute of Water and between April 2008 and March 2012 was chairman of Water UK.
Since his appointment as Group Chief Executive Officer Chris has set Pennon on a path of closer collaboration in pursuit of delivery of its strategy with the constituent parts of the Group now working together to identify synergies reduce costs and exploit opportunities for growth.
External appointments Chris is currently chairman of British Water a director of Water UK and a trustee of the charity WaterAid.
An enthusiastic advocate of local business Chris is also vice chairman of the Cornwall Local Enterprise Partnership.
Susan Davy Chief Financial Officer BSc Hons ACA Susan joined the Board on 1 February 2015.
She is a member of the Pennon Executive.
Skills and experience Susan is a graduate qualified chartered accountant with 20 years experience in the utility sector.
Prior to her current appointment Susan was Finance Director at South West Water between 2007 and 2015 during which time she was responsible for the companys Business Plan to 2020.
She has also held a number of other senior finance roles in the water sector including as Head of Regulation and Head of Finance Wastewater at Yorkshire Water.
Susans knowledge of the industry coupled with her financial and regulatory expertise has supported the development of Pennons strategy and her input has been invaluable to the Board in its deliberations.
Susan is highly respected in the City and has been instrumental in building Pennons reputation.
External appointments Susan is a member of the A4S Accounting for Sustainability CFO leadership network and a council member of CBI South West.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 56 Gill Rider Senior Independent Director NonExecutive CB PhD CCIPD Gill was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2012.
She is chairman of the Sustainability Committee and a member of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
Skills and experience Gill has a wealth of experience in leadership governance and remuneration across a broad range of sectors including professional services education and government.
Formerly she was head of the Civil Service Capability Group in the Cabinet Office reporting to the Cabinet Secretary and prior to that held a number of senior positions with Accenture LLP culminating in the post of chief leadership officer for the global firm.
She was previously president of the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development and a nonexecutive director of De La Rue plc.
As chairman of the Sustainability Committee Gill has encouraged and supported executive management in the development of a sustainability programme that underpins the delivery of Pennons strategy.
At Accenture she chaired the global corporate responsibility and Foundation giving programme and was instrumental in building sustainability objectives into Accentures worldwide human capital strategies.
External appointments Gill currently holds nonexecutive directorships with Charles T aylor plc where she is senior independent director and Intertek Group plc.
She is chairman of both their remuneration committees.
She is also chair of the council board of the University of Southampton.
Martin Angle Independent NonExecutive Director BSc Hons FCA MCSI Martin was appointed to the Board on 1 December 2008.
He is chairman of the Remuneration Committee and a member of the Audit Nomination and Sustainability Committees.
Skills and experience Martin is an experienced nonexecutive director bringing a wide range of knowledge and experience from a career in investment banking private equity and industry.
Over a 20year executive career in investment banking Martin held senior roles with SG Warburg and Co.
Ltd Morgan Stanley and Dresdner Kleinwort Benson before becoming the group finance director of TI Group plc then a FTSE 100 company.
He subsequently joined Terra Firma Capital Partners where he held various senior roles in its portfolio companies including the executive chairmanship of the Waste Recycling Group Limited then a major participant in the UK waste sector and Le Meridien Hotel Group where he was executive deputy chairman.
Martin has also served as a nonexecutive director on a number of boards including Savills plc where he was the senior independent director National Exhibition Group where he was chairman Severstal and Dubai International Capital.
As chairman of the Remuneration Committee Martin has steered Pennons approach on executive remuneration ensuring that it is aligned with and supports the Groups strategy.
External appointments Martin is currently vice chairman and nonexecutive director of the FIA Foundation the adviser to the Board of the Commercial Bank of Dubai and the adviser to NGP a private group based in the USA which is building out a major platform in renewable energy in emerging markets.
Neil Cooper Independent NonExecutive Director BSc Hons FCMA Neil joined the Board on 1 September 2014.
He is chairman of the Audit Committee and a member of the Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
Skills and experience Neil brings to the Board extensive experience in a wide variety of corporate and financial matters.
Most recently he was group finance director of Barratt Developments plc and before that group finance director of William Hill plc and Bovis Homes plc.
He also held senior finance positions at Whitbread plc worked for PricewaterhouseCoopers as a management consultant and held a number of roles with Reckitt and Colman plc.
As chairman of the Audit Committee Neil has been influential in directing Pennons approach on a number of significant matters including internal control governance and financial reporting.
External appointments
Helen BarrettHague Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Solicitor LLB Hons Helen joined Pennon as Group General Counsel and Company Secretary to the Board in March 2016.
Skills and experience Helen has extensive corporate experience including capital raisings initial public offerings corporate restructuring mergers and acquisitions both in the UK and overseas.
She began her career in private practice before moving inhouse in 1999 and subsequently held positions of increasing responsibility with the Generics Group AG Aveva Group plc and Alent plc.
Helen is responsible for the provision of legal and company secretarial services to the Group for statutory and regulatory compliance in terms of business conduct and for supporting the Chairman and the Board in ensuring that Pennons high standards of governance continue to be met.
She is also chairman of the board of trustees of the Pennon Group Defined Contribution Pension Scheme.
External appointments
Governance
Viridor Executive Meeting Chaired by the Viridor Managing Director and consisting of principal executives of Viridor Pennon Executive Meeting Chaired by the Group CEO and consisting of principal executives of the Group South West Water Executive Meeting Chaired by the South West Water Managing Director and consisting of principal executives of South West Water The Board and its governance framework The Board of Pennon Group plc and its governance framework is set out below.
The Board acts as the main governing body for the purpose of oversight of Viridors business.
For regulatory reasons South West Waters business continues to be overseen by the board of South West Water Limited.
The boards and committees of Pennon Group plc and South West Water Limited usually meet sequentially on the same day or days facilitated by the dual directorships held by a number of the Directors.
Read more pages 61 and 62
Committee
Members two independent NonExecutive Directors  two South West Water nonexecutive directors of which one is a vacancy for South West Water matters and the Group CEO
Pennon Board Consisting of the Chairman the Group CEO the CFO and three independent NonExecutive Directors The South West Water Board Consisting of the Chairman the Group CEO the Managing Director the Finance Director three Pennon NonExecutive Directors and three South West Water nonexecutive directors Nomination Committee Members the Chairman three independent NonExecutive Directors and three South West Water non executive directors of which one is a vacancy for South West Water matters Audit Committee Members three independent NonExecutive Directors and two South West Water nonexecutive directors for South West Water matters Remuneration Committee Members three independent NonExecutive Directors and two South West Water nonexecutive directors of which one is a vacancy for South West Water matters Recruitment is underway to fill the vacancy for a nonexecutive director of South West Water 58 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Pennon Board composition independence and experience
2017 2016 66.7% 33.3% 57.0% 43.0%
NonExecutive
At the end of the year the Board of Directors comprised the Chairman two Executive Directors and three NonExecutive Directors.
Diversity as at 31 March 2017 2016 33.3% 66.7% 28.6% 71.4%
Female
The Board continued to exceed its target of 25% female representation throughout the year and at the year end it was 33.3%.
Experience as at 31 March 33% 43% 43% % 17%
Finance
Governance
All of the NonExecutive Directors are considered to have the appropriate skills experience in their respective disciplines and personality to bring independent and objective judgement to the Boards deliberations.
Their biographies on pages 56 and 57 and the experience chart above demonstrates collectively a broad range of business financial and other relevant experience.
Directors roles Neil Cooper is chairman of the Audit Committee and in accordance with the UK Code and FCA Disclosure and Transparency Rule 7.1.1 he has recent and relevant financial experience as set out in his biography on page 57.
Martin Angle is also a member of the Audit Committee and he has relevant financial experience as set out in his biography on page 57.
There is a clear separation of responsibilities between the Chairman and the CEO divided between managing the Board and the business while they of course maintain a close working relationship.
Tenure as at 31 March 50% 29% 14% 57% % 33% 03 years 46 years 710 years All of the NonExecutive Directors were considered by the Board to be independent throughout the year.
None of the relationships or circumstances set out in provision B.1.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the UK Code applied to the NonExecutive Directors listed on the following page.
In December 2017 Martin Angle will reach the ninth anniversary of his appointment.
The Board is satisfied that Martin continues to demonstrate independence of character and judgement in the performance of his role as a Director and therefore has determined that he remains independent.
Sir John Parker met the independence criteria set out in provision B.1.1 of the UK Code on his appointment as Chairman and there have been no significant changes to his external commitments since his appointment.
All Directors are subject to reelection each year in accordance with provision B.7.1 of the UK Code.
Governance Position Director Role Chairman Sir John Parker  Leading the Board and setting its agenda Promoting the highest standards of integrity and probity and ensuring good and effective governance Managing Board composition performance and succession planning Providing advice support and guidance to the CEO Representing the Group and being available to shareholders Discussing separately with the NonExecutive Directors performance and strategic issues
Executive Officer Chris Loughlin  Managing the Group and providing executive leadership Developing and proposing Group strategy Leading the operation of the Group in accordance with the decisions of the Board Coordinating with the Chairman on important and strategic issues of the Group and providing input to the Boards agenda Contributing to succession planning and implementing the organisational structure Leading on acquisitions disposals business development and exploiting Group synergies Managing shareholder relations
Independent
Director
Gill Rider  Assisting the Chairman with shareholder communications and being available as an additional point of contact for shareholders Being available to other NonExecutive Directors if they have any concerns that are not satisfactorily resolved by the Chairman Leading the annual evaluation of performance of the Chairman with the other NonExecutive Directors Chief Financial
Susan Davy  Supporting the CEO in providing executive leadership and developing Group strategy Reporting to the Board on performance and developments across the business Implementing decisions of the Board Managing specific business responsibilities
Directors
Martin Angle Neil Cooper Gill Rider Critically reviewing the strategies proposed for the Group Critically examining the operational and financial performance of the Group Evaluating proposals from management and constructively challenging managements recommendations Contributing to corporate accountability through being active members of the Committees of the Board South West Water nonexecutive directors Martin Hagen Matthew Taylor
As for the Pennon NonExecutive Directors above but only in respect of South West Water matters Board meetings and attendance The Directors and their attendance at the nine scheduled meetings of the Board during 201617 are shown below Members Appointment date Attendance
Sir John Parker April 2015 99 NonExecutive Directors Martin Angle December 2008 99 Neil Cooper September 2014 99 Gill Rider September 2012 99 South West Water nonexecutive directors Martin Hagen  99 Steve Johnson Matthew Taylor  99 Executive Directors Susan Davy February 2015 99 Christopher Loughlin August 2006 99 Ian McAulay September 2013 44 1 Representing South West Water interests.
2 Until 28 April 2016.
3 Until 31 August 2016.
All the Directors are equally accountable for the proper stewardship of the Groups affairs but they do have specific roles which include those set out below The Board and its governance framework continued In 2016 the number of scheduled Board meetings was reduced from ten to nine per year plus an annual strategy day and the number of scheduled Committee meetings was reduced to four per year to coincide with Board meetings.
Board and Committee meetings are arranged over a session lasting a day and a half which includes a working dinner for the Directors.
Additional meetings of Committees are arranged as and when necessary.
This approach allows for longer agendas and in depth review and discussion around complex matters.
Managing the Group and its subsidiaries The Boards responsibilities include overall leadership of the Group setting the Groups values policies and standards approving Pennons strategy and objectives and providing oversight of the Groups operations and its performance.
The Board makes decisions in relation to Group and Viridor business in accordance with its schedule of matters reserved.
The South West Water board continues to operate as a separate independent board in accordance with its own schedule of matters reserved to ensure compliance with Ofwats principles on board leadership transparency and governance.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Detailed consideration of certain matters is delegated to Board Committees to the Executive Directors and to the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary as appropriate.
In addition to the matters the Directors are required to decide by statute or regulation the matters reserved to the Board in relation to Pennon Group plc and Viridor Limited include all acquisitions and disposals major items of capital expenditure authority levels for other expenditure risk management process and monitoring of risks approval of the strategic plan and annual operating budgets Group policies procedures and delegations appointments to the Board and its Committees.
The Board also ratifies certain decisions taken by the South West Water board including major capital projects and investments longterm objectives and commercial strategy the fiveyear regulatory plan annual budgets and certain decisions relating to financing.
This approach is compatible with Ofwats principles for holding companies in respect of Board leadership transparency and governance.
Operation of the Board The Board operates by receiving written reports circulated in advance of the meetings from the Executive Directors and the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary on matters within their respective business areas of the Group.
When appropriate the Board also receives presentations on key areas of the business and undertakes site visits to gain a better understanding of the operation of business initiatives.
Under the guidance of the Chairman all matters before the Board are discussed openly.
Presentations and advice are received frequently from other senior executives within the Group and from external advisers to facilitate the decisionmaking of the Board.
The Pennon Board and the South West Water board usually meet sequentially which allows a more holistic and cohesive approach to decisionmaking and communication across the Group.
This is facilitated by the dual directorships held by a number of the Directors.
Pennon Executive management The role of the Pennon Executive is to define and drive the business priorities that will achieve delivery of the strategy.
It is responsible for ensuring to the extent of the authority delegated by the Board the proper and prudent management of Group resources to create and maximise shareholder value.
Chaired by the Chief Executive Officer the Pennon Executive meets formally on a monthly basis to review and refine recommendations to be presented to the Board.
Members of the Pennon Executive
Chris Loughlin Chief Executive Officer
Susan Davy Chief Financial Officer Adele Barker Interim Group director of Human Resources Helen BarrettHague Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Stephen Bird Managing Director South West Water Sarah Heald Director of Corporate Affairs and Investor Relations Steve Holmes Director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability
Ed Mitchell Director of Environment and interim Operations director Wastewater Services South West
Phil Piddington Managing Director Viridor Paul Ringham Commercial director Viridor Bob Taylor Operations director Drinking Water Services South West Water Board support and training Directors have access to the advice and services of the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary and the Board has an established procedure whereby Directors in order to fulfil their duties may seek independent professional advice at the Companys expense.
Newly appointed Directors receive a formal induction which includes an explanation of the Group structure regulatory and legal issues the Group governance framework and policies the Groups approach to risk management and its principal risks financial and nonfinancial including environmental social and governance ESG risks duties and obligations including protocols around conflicts of interest and dealing in shares and the current activities of the Board and its
Directors also visit operating facilities across the Group and have meetings with staff to receive briefings on key processes and systems.
The training needs of Directors are reviewed as part of the Boards performance evaluation process each year.
Training consists of attendance at external courses organised by professional advisers and also internal presentations from senior management.
Pennon Board composition South West Water board composition 3 independent nonexecutive directors of both South West Water and Pennon 3 independent nonexecutive directors of South West Water 3 independent
Directors of Pennon In attendance 3 independent nonexecutive directors of South West Water Chairman Group CEO Managing Director South West Water Finance Director South West Water Chairman Group CEO CFO In attendance Group CFO Recruitment is underway to fill the one vacancy Governance Performance evaluation The Board undertakes a formal and rigorous review of its performance and that of its Committees and Directors each year.
This year Armstrong Bonham Carter LLP who are independent board performance consultants with no other connection with the Company facilitated the evaluation of the Boards and the Committees performance.
The exercise was conducted in March 2017 by way of a series of structured interviews with all the Directors various members of the senior executive team the Internal Audit Manager and the External Audit Partner.
The agenda for these interviews was circulated to each participant prior to the meetings and was designed to assess whether the Directors had thoroughly discussed and agreed the use of shareholders funds to ensure the Company was successful whilst managing the risks inherent in the strategy plans and the operating environment the effectiveness of the Board in ensuring that the executive team had implemented the strategy and plans and had managed all the other activities of the Company well.
Armstrong Bonham Carter collated and analysed the results from each interview and prepared separate reports on the performance of the Board as a whole and one for each Committee all of which were reviewed and discussed by the Board.
The Senior Independent Director separately conducted a review of the individual directors performance and the Chairmans performance was evaluated separately by the NonExecutive Directors led by the Senior Independent Director.
The review concluded that the Board its Committees and its individual Directors had demonstrated a high degree of effectiveness.
The new Board structure was viewed most positively and had helped the NonExecutive Directors to achieve a broader knowledge of both businesses.
Consequently the Board had a good understanding of opportunities for growth and the threats facing the business.
The Boards commitment to health and safety was widely noted and all Directors commented on the need to improve performance following three fatalities since 2013.
The appointment of a new Group director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability who will work to embed a strong health and safety culture throughout the Group was welcomed.
In addition the Board agreed to adopt actions relating to the development of Group strategy the shaping of Pennons corporate values and increased focus on employee engagement.
Subsequently the Board agreed and implemented an action plan which it will monitor regularly.
Conclusions and recommendations in respect of the composition of the Board were considered by the Nomination Committee and are covered on page 70.
Board Committees terms of reference In accordance with Group policies a range of key matters are delegated to the Boards Committees as set out on pages 63 to 73 of this governance report.
The terms of reference of each of the Boards Committees are set out on the Companys website site and are also available from the Group Company Secretary upon request.
Dealing with Directors conflicts of interest In accordance with the directors interest provision of the Companies Act 2006 and the Companys Articles of Association the Board has in place a procedure for the consideration and authorisation of Directors conflicts or possible conflicts with the Companys interests.
This has operated effectively during the year.
Risk management and the Groups system of internal control The Board is responsible for maintaining the Groups system of internal control to safeguard shareholders investment and the Groups assets and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
There is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the Group that has been in place throughout 201617 and up to the date of the approval of this annual report and accounts.
The Groups system of internal control is consistent with the FRCs new Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting FRC Internal Control Guidance.
The Board confirms that it applies procedures in accordance with the UK Code and the FRC Internal Control Guidance which brings together elements of best practice for risk management and internal control by companies.
The Boards risk framework described on page 46 in the strategic report provides for the identification of key risks including ESG risks in relation to the achievement of the business objectives of the Group monitoring of such risks and ongoing and annual evaluation of the overall process.
As part of the review of the effectiveness of the system of risk management and internal control under the Group risk management policy all Executive Directors and senior managers are required to certify on an annual basis that they have effective controls in place to manage risks and to operate in compliance with legislation and Group procedures.
The Group also has policies covering suspected fraud antibribery and whistleblowing which were reviewed and refreshed during the year.
Allegations of misconduct and irregularity are thoroughly investigated and followup action in respect of the Groups control environment is taken when appropriate.
In the normal course of business investigations into irregularities may be ongoing as of the date of the approval of the financial statements.
The Groups processes and policies serve to ensure that a culture of effective control and risk management is embedded throughout the Group and that the Group is in a position to react appropriately to new risks as they arise.
Details of key risks affecting the Group are set out in the strategic report on pages 47 to 50.
The Board and its governance framework continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Board Committees reports The Audit Committee report Neil Cooper Audit Committee Chairman Dear Shareholder I am pleased to introduce the Audit Committees report on its activities during the year.
As in previous years the principal responsibilities of the Committee continue to be focused in a number of key areas firstly on ensuring the appropriateness of the Groups financial reporting an activity which includes the testing of accounting judgements made in preparing reporting and in assessing whether the presentation of the Groups activities is fair balanced and understandable.
Secondly on reviewing and challenging the ongoing effectiveness of the internal control environment and thirdly on the scope of risk management processes across the Group including monitoring the Groups risk appetite as well as acting as a forum in which to carry out more detailed reviews of higher risk areas of the operation.
Monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of the external auditor and the internal audit function is an important ongoing element of the Committees assurance activities.
These responsibilities are discharged throughout the year in accordance with the calendar of business of the Committee which is designed to allow sufficient time for their consideration whilst also permitting time to be spent on related key financial matters.
In this context the Committee notes that the Financial Reporting Council FRC Audit Quality Review team assessed the audit of the Groups 2016 report and accounts during the year and the Committee has received and discussed a report from the Companys external auditor with regards to the findings as set out on page 66.
Following the establishment last year of a new Group executive risk management forum to assess risk appetite and monitor key risks and their mitigation the Committee has received detailed deep dive presentations from senior management on individual principal risks including for example drinking water contamination risk wholesale energy market risk ERF business interruption and continuity management EUUK regulatory and legislative change non recoverable debt in South West Water and Viridor recycling and commodity activities.
More detail on our risk management processes principal risks and their associated mitigation can be found on pages Aligned with this we continue to assess the Companys viability over a period of five years which we consider to be aligned with key business cycle periods in the water business and the longerterm nature of Viridors ERF assets as well as being reasonable in terms of our ability to look forward with some certainty in the business and regulatory environment in which the Company operates.
Our viability statement is reported on page 51.
As part of the halfyear and yearend reporting review process we reviewed and challenged the key financial reporting judgements of management as set out on page 65.
Significant matters considered by the Committee both during the year and in relation to the yearend financial statements are laid out in this report.
Neil Cooper Audit Committee Chairman The role of the Audit Committee is to ensure that robust systems are in place for financial reporting internal control and risk management.
Governance The Audit Committee report continued Audit Committee composition and meetings Date of appointment to Pennon Audit Committee Attendance South West Water audit committee member Committee chairman Neil Cooper September 2014 55 Committee members Martin Angle December 2008 55 Gill Rider September 2012 55 South West Water nonexecutive directors Martin Hagen  55 Matthew Taylor  55 1 Representing South West Water interests.
The Pennon Audit Committee and the South West Water audit committee meet sequentially on the same day.
The responsibilities of the South West Water audit committee mirror those of the Pennon Audit Committee but only in respect of South West Water.
Other regular attendees to Committee meetings during the year included Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer Managing Directors of South West Water and Viridor Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Finance Directors of South West Water and Viridor Group Financial Controller Group Audit Manager and external auditor.
In addition the Board Chairman has an open invitation to attend the Committee meetings.
In the last year he attended those meetings at which the Committee reviewed the halfyear and fullyear financial results of the Group.
In accordance with the UK Code the Board is satisfied that Neil Cooper and Martin Angle have recent and relevant financial experience and also in accordance with FCA Rule 7.1.1R of the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules have competence in accounting or auditing.
Details of each Directors significant current and prior appointments are set out on pages 56 and 57.
All of the Committee members are also members of the Remuneration Committee which allows them to provide input into both Committees on any Group performance matters and on the management of any risk factors relevant to remuneration matters.
Significant matters considered by the Committee The calendar of business of the Committee sets in place a framework for ensuring that it manages its affairs efficiently and effectively throughout the year and is able to concentrate on the key matters that affect the Group.
The most significant matters that the Committee considered and made decisions on during the year and where appropriate since the year end are set out below and opposite.
Financial reporting Monitored the integrity of the financial statements of the Group and the halfyear and fullyear results announcements relating to the Groups financial performance including reviewing and discussing significant financial reporting judgements contained in the statements After a detailed review in accordance with its established process advised the Board that the presentation of the Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable in accordance with reporting requirements and recommended their approval for publication Internal control and compliance Review of internal audit reports on core systems and processes across the Group for example Group treasury contract management and Recycling and Recovery Approved updated policies in relation to treasury and going concern assessment Reviewed an external quality assessment on the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function Monitored the effectiveness of key strategic projects including Viridors Enterprise transformation and South West Waters market ready programme External auditor  Considered auditors report on its review of the annual results focusing on key findings Assessed external auditor and its effectiveness in respect of the previous years external audit process Recommended to the Board reappointment of the external auditor for approval at the Annual General Meeting with the Committee being authorised to agree the external auditors remuneration Considered and approved the audit plan and audit fee proposal for the external auditor Monitored the provision of nonaudit services Considered the findings of the FRCs review of the 2016 external audit
Reviewed the Groups risk management framework and compliance with that framework during the year and after the year end up until the publication of the Companys annual report Reviewed the assessment of the risks by the Executive Directors and considered risk appetite Reviewed the Group risk register and considered appropriate areas of focus and prioritisation for the audit work programme for the year Management of information security across the Group in mitigating key IT risks Received as part of the risk management review the annual report on any whistleblowing Carried out regular deep dives at Committee meetings on principal risk areas Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Discussed the results of independent performance evaluation of the Committee conducted by Armstrong Bonham Carter LLP Reviewed new annual report disclosure requirements including the audit report Considered and approved Group accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements Reviewed updated Group policies covering treasury and foreign exchange Confirmed compliance with the UK Code Regularly held separate meetings with the external auditor and the Group Internal Audit Manager without members of management being present In respect of the monitoring of the integrity of the financial statements which is a key responsibility of the Committee identified in the UK Code the significant areas of judgement considered in relation to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 are set out in the following table together with details of how each matter was addressed by the Committee.
At the Committees meetings throughout the year the Committee and the external auditor have discussed the significant matters arising in respect of financial reporting during the year and the areas of particular audit focus as reported on in the independent auditors report on pages 106 to 113.
In addition to the significant matters set out in the table below the Committee considered a range of other matters.
These include presentational matters in particular relating to the nonunderlying disclosure format and ensuring a fair presentation of statutory and nonstatutory performance and financial measures.
During the year the Group has seen substantial impact from movements in derivatives both as a result of market movements and as a result of changes in our expectations of economic benefits.
This has led to the early unwind of a derivative through Peninsula MB Limited giving rise to a substantial nonunderlying charge.
The Committee and Board have received several updates and reports from the Chief Financial Officer in regard to these movements deeming managements approach to the accounting recognition and disclosure of these items as nonunderlying to be appropriate.
Area of focus by the Committee How the matter was addressed by the Committee
There were a number of judgement areas in respect of revenue recognition relating to income from measured water services estimates of timing of receipt of unmeasured revenue accounting for revenue from longterm service concession arrangements under IFRIC 12 and calculation of accrued income on waste management contracts and powergen.
The Committee relied on South West Waters track record of assessing an appropriate level of accrual at previous year ends given actual outturns and Viridors internal processes for analysing complex longterm contracts.
The Committee also closely considered the work in respect of these areas at year end by the external auditor as well as reviewing disclosures around revenue recognition accounting policies.
Noncurrent asset impairment review and provisions Recognising that the value of certain noncurrent assets and longterm environmental provisions within Viridor can be sensitive to changes in assumptions over future discount rates and cash flow projections which require judgement the Committee pays careful attention to asset impairment and provisions.
The Committee noted the substantial headroom in the mandatory review of goodwill for impairment resulting in this area being deemed less judgemental.
Following a detailed review of the analysis undertaken and consideration of management assumptions in relation to both the value of environmental provisions and the assessment of indicators for potential impairment of noncurrent assets the Committee was satisfied that a robust and consistent approach had been followed and that the managements assertion that the carrying value of these assets and liabilities remained reasonable and therefore the Committee were able to approve the disclosures in the financial statements.
This key area was also closely reviewed as part of the yearend audit by the external auditor.
South West Water bad and doubtful debts Regular updates on progress against debt collection targets and other contractual payments due are received by the Board.
Performance is monitored regularly against South West Waters historical collection record and the track record of other companies in the sector.
At the year end the external auditor reported on the work it had performed which together with the detailed analysis reported enabled the Committee to conclude that managements assessment of the yearend position was reasonable.
Provisions for uncertain tax positions It remains the general policy of the Group to take a balanced view of its tax position and only release tax provisions when matters under discussion are expected to be cleared by HM Revenue and Customs.
At the year end the Chief Financial Officer provided a report to the Board setting out the resolution of a number of uncertain tax items the background to which had been considered in detail by the Committee on a regular basis as part of progress reports from the Chief Financial Officer.
It was noted that on resolution of these matters the level of judgement required in assessing the year end tax creditor was consequently reduced.
Where appropriate expert external legal and accounting advice and other specialist taxation advice had been sought which assisted the Committee in forming a view on the appropriateness of the provisions for remaining uncertain tax positions and related tax disclosures in the financial statements.
Going concern basis for the preparation of the financial statements and viability statement A report from the Chief Financial Officer on the financial performance of the Group including forwardlooking assessments of covenant compliance and funding levels under differing scenarios is provided to the Board on a periodic basis.
Rolling fiveyear strategy projections and the resultant headroom relative to borrowings is also regularly reviewed by the Board including scenarios to better enable the committee to understand the potential range of outcomes.
At the end of each six month period the Chief Financial Officer prepares for consideration by the Committee a report focusing on the Groups liquidity over the 12month period from the date of signing either the annual report or halfyear results.
This year the Committee has also considered a report from the Chief Financial Officer on the Groups financial viability over an appropriate period which the Board considers to be five years in connection with the new UK Corporate Governance Code requirement for a viability statement to be given by the Board.
Consideration of these reports and constructive challenge on the findings of the reports including the scenario testing carried out by management has enabled the Committee to form its assessment and satisfy itself that it remains appropriate for the Group to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements and in addition advise the Board on providing the viability statement set out on page 51.
Effectiveness of the external audit process Receiving high quality and effective audit services is of paramount importance to the Committee.
We continue to monitor carefully the effectiveness of our external auditor as well as its independence bearing in mind that it is recognised there is a need to use our external auditors firm for certain nonaudit services.
We have full regard to the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards and ensure that our procedures and safeguards meet these standards.
The current external auditor Ernst and Young LLP was appointed following a comprehensive audit tender process and approval by shareholders at the Companys 2014 AGM.
Their reappointment was approved at the 2016 Annual General Meeting.
Debbie OHanlon is the audit partner and has been in that role since Ernst and Youngs appointment.
Governance The Audit Committee report continued The external auditor produced a detailed audit planning report in preparation for the yearend financial statements which has assisted the auditor in delivering the timely audit of the Groups annual report and financial statements and which was shared with and discussed by the Committee in advance.
The effectiveness review of the external auditor is undertaken as part of the Committees annual performance evaluation which was carried out by independent external consultants Armstrong Bonham Carter
Further details of the performance evaluation are provided on page 62.
No issues were raised during that review and the Committee concluded that the auditor was effective during the year.
In addition during the year the FRCs Audit Quality Review team reviewed the audit of the Groups 31 March 2016 financial statements focussing on the audit of impairment taxation and revenue.
The FRC categorised the audit as good or limited improvements required with no significant areas for improvement identified.
Following the review and discussion of the findings by the Committee changes were made to the auditors approach to the audit of revenue in the waste business.
The Committee considered that it is appropriate that the external auditor be reappointed and has made this recommendation to the
The Committee chairman has also met privately with the external auditor.
Auditor independence The Committee carefully reviews on an ongoing basis the relationship with the external auditor to ensure that the auditors independence and objectivity is fully safeguarded.
The external auditor reported on their independence during the year and again since the year end confirming to the Committee that they have complied with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards and based on their assessment that they were independent of the Group.
Provision of nonaudit services In line with the requirements of the EU Audit Directive and Regulation which came into force on 17 June 2016 the Committee continues to have a robust policy for the engagement of the external auditors firm for nonaudit work.
The Committee receives a regular report covering the auditors fees including details of nonaudit fees incurred.
Recurrent fees relate to agreed procedures in relation to annual regulatory reporting obligations to Ofwat work most efficiently and effectively performed by the statutory auditor.
The policy is for nonaudit fees not to exceed 70% of the audit fee for statutory work.
The Committee carefully reviews nonaudit work proposed for the statutory auditor taking into consideration whether it was necessary for the auditors firm to carry out such work and would only grant approval for the firms appointment if it was satisfied that the auditors independence and objectivity would be fully safeguarded.
If there was another accounting firm that could provide the required level of experience and expertise in respect of the nonaudit services then such firm would be chosen in preference to the external auditor.
The level of nonaudit fees payable to the external auditor for the past year is 11.3% of the audit fee which is well within the Groups 70% nonaudit fee limit.
The Chief Financial Officer regularly reports to the Committee on the extent of services provided to the Company by the external auditor and the level of fees paid.
The fees paid to the external auditors firm for nonaudit services and for audit services are set out in note 7 to the financial statements on page 132.
Internal audit The internal audit activities of the Group are a key part of the internal control and risk management framework of the Group.
At Group level there is a longstanding and effective centralised internal audit service led by an experienced head of function who makes a significant contribution to the ability of the Committee to deliver its responsibilities.
A Group internal audit plan is approved in September each year.
It takes account of the principal risks the activities to be undertaken by the external auditor and also the Groups annual and ongoing risk management reviews.
This approach seeks to ensure that there is a programme of internal and external audit reviews focused on identified key risk areas throughout the Group.
The Group Internal Audit Manager reports regularly to the Committee on audit reviews undertaken and their findings and there are regular discussions correspondence and private meetings between the Group Internal Audit Manager and the Committee chairman.
During the year an external assessment of the internal function was performed by KPMG LLP concluding that the Companys internal audit function conforms to IIA standards issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors.
The review highlighted both areas of good practice and some areas for improvement which would improve the delivery of the Companys internal audit function.
Fair balanced and understandable assessment To enable the Committee to advise the Board in making its statement that it considered that the Companys Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable FBU on page 103 the Committee has applied a detailed FBU review framework that takes account of the Groups welldocumented verification process undertaken in conjunction with the preparation of the Annual Report and Accounts.
This is in addition to the formal process carried out by the external auditor to enable the preparation of the independent auditors report which is set out on pages 106 to 113.
In preparing and finalising the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts the Committee considered a report on the actions taken by management in accordance with the FBU process and an FBU assessment undertaken by each Group executive management board.
This assisted the Committee in carrying out its own assessment and being able to advise the Board that it considered that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Statement of compliance with CMA order Having undertaken a competitive audit tender process in 2014 the Company is in compliance with the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Gill Rider Sustainability Committee
The Sustainability Committee report Dear Shareholder I am pleased to introduce the Sustainability Committees report on its activities during the year.
Sustainability remains an integral part of Pennons strategy and the Group continues to take this responsibility seriously in all its business and operational practices.
Our investment and our commitment to high levels of service and performance will contribute to meeting our communities longterm needs  for water energy and waste management.
The role of the Sustainability Committee is to promote the highest standards of corporate responsibility by bringing together and reviewing initiatives that drive sustainability approving targets and monitoring the progress made in achieving Pennons strategic sustainability objectives.
Those objectives are set out on page 69.
We are well equipped to oversee performance from the perspective of the Group and that of the individual businesses with additional attendees Lord Matthew Taylor South West Water nonexecutive director Stephen Bird Managing Director South West Water and Phil Piddington Managing Director Viridor contributing to the Committees discussions.
We are delighted with the strengthening of the executive team and envisage that director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability the director of Environment and the interim director of Human Resources all recently recruited to Grouplevel roles will play a central role in supporting the Committee as we continue to guide the business and advise the Board on sustainability which we believe is material to delivery of the Groups strategy.
Pennons business model and its strategic priorities on pages 14 to 17 show how a thorough approach to sustainability helps us to draw together the needs of society with the delivery of commercial success.
The Groups longterm strategic priorities are designed to create value for all our stakeholders  our customers our communities and our people as well as our investors  and details of how we are implementing this strategy are provided throughout the annual report.
We are pleased to note the results in both businesses which confirm sustainability is indeed integrated in all we do.
Gill Rider Sustainability Committee Chairman Our approach to sustainability helps us to draw together the needs of society with the delivery of commercial success.
Governance Sustainability Committee composition and meetings Date of appointment to Pennon Sustainability Committee Attendance South West Water sustainability committee member Committee chairman Gill Rider September 2012 55 Committee members Martin Angle December 2008 55 Chris Loughlin November 2006 55 Ian McAulay September 2013 22 na South West Water nonexecutive directors Steve Johnson Matthew Taylor  55 1 Until 31 August 2016.
2 Representing South West Water interests.
3 Until 28 April 2016.
The Pennon Sustainability Committee and the South West Water sustainability committee meet sequentially on the same day.
Senior executives also attend meetings to support discussions on their specific areas of expertise.
Neil Cooper stood down from the Committee on 1 April 2016 and Steve Johnson who was a member of the South West Water sustainability committee resigned on 28 April 2016 as a nonexecutive director of South West Water.
Recruitment for a replacement is underway.
The responsibilities of the South West Water sustainability committee mirror those of the Pennon Sustainability Committee but only in respect of South West Water.
In addition the South West Water sustainability committee continues to provide oversight of South West Waters performance against its sustainability targets and the sustainability activities that are core to the successful delivery of South West Waters K6 Business Plan 20152020.
This is consistent with Ofwats requirement for independent governance of our regulatory business.
During the year the Committee continued to apply the best practice framework published by Business in the Community BitC a leading businessled charity that promotes responsible business.
The structure provided through BitCs key areas of sustainability marketplace workplace community and environment is reflected in Pennons sustainability objectives and supports the development of a range of targets by South West Water and Viridor as part of their business planning processes.
We aim to set stretching targets and as at 31 March 2017 South West Water had achieved eight of its 12 targets for the year and Viridor had completed eight out of 16 of its targets.
Further details will be provided in Viridors sustainability report and South West Waters company annual performance report to be published in June 2017 and July 2017 respectively.
The Sustainability Committee balances the requirement to conduct business in a responsible manner in relation to environmental social and governance ESG matters while at the same time delivering strong financial performance and lasting value for shareholders and other stakeholders.
The Sustainability Committee reviews and approves as appropriate the strategies policies management initiatives targets and performance of the Pennon Group companies in the areas of occupational health and safety and security environment workplace policies responsible and ethical business practice customer service and engagement and the role of the Group in society.
Since last years report the Committee has considered a wide range of matters in the course of fulfilling its duties in accordance with its terms of reference the Groups health and safety performance including a health and safety deep dive and the effectiveness of health and safety policies and procedures environmental strategy and performance performance in respect of customer service and engagement the Groups approach to community relations and investment performance against the Groups workplace policy including review of the results of employee engagement surveys conducted by Pennon South West Water and Viridor sustainable procurement and practices within the supply chain sustainability reporting for 2016 and the associated verifiers reports and recommendations progress against the sustainability targets for 201617 and sustainability targets for 201718.
In addition the Committee considered the development of Pennons new Code of Conduct which sets out the principles that should guide our employees actions and support everyday decision making the establishment of a Groupwide compliance and ethics programme the results of Business in the Communitys 2016 benchmarking assessment of South West Water and Viridor with both organisations awarded two and a half stars out of five the results of Committees independent performance evaluation conducted by Armstrong Bonham Carter LLP modifications to the Committees terms of reference.
The Sustainability Committee report continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic sustainability objectives The Sustainability Committee has defined the following strategic objectives which drive the sustainability targets set by South West Water and Viridor.
Commentary on our performance against our objectives is integrated throughout the strategic report.
Manage Pennon Group as a sustainable and successful business for the benefit of our customers shareholders and other stakeholders Aim to ensure that all our business activities have a positive economic social and environmental impact on the communities in which we operate Engage with our customers and other stakeholders and foster good relationships with them Strive for the highest standards of health and safety in the workplace so as to minimise accidents incidents and lost time Develop and motivate our employees treat them fairly and ensure that they are fully engaged in all aspects of Pennon Groups objectives and follow the highest standards of business conduct Aspire to leadership in minimising emissions that contribute to climate change and develop climate change adaption strategies Aspire to leadership in all aspects of waste prevention and resource efficiency by delivering solutions for society to address the environmental challenge of depleting natural resources.
Reporting and verification In reporting on sustainability the Company has sought to comply with the Investment Association Guidelines on Responsible Investment Disclosure.
Pennons sustainability performance and reporting has been audited by Strategic Management Consultants Limited SMC an independent management consultancy specialising in technical assurance in the utility sector.
Pennon considers that SMCs method of verification  which includes testing the assumptions methods and procedures that are followed in the development of data and auditing that data to ensure accuracy and consistency  complements the best practice insight gained through South West Waters and Viridors membership of Business in the Community.
Certain disclosures within this annual report that relate to the sustainability performance of South West Water and Bournemouth Water have been verified by SMC against the output of an independent audit of regulatory data conducted by CH2M.
Benchmarking
Pennon is a constituent of the FTSE4Good Index an equity index series that is designed to facilitate investment in companies that meet globally recognised corporate responsibility standards.
Companies in the FTSE4Good Index Series have met stringent environmental social and governance criteria and are positioned to capitalise on the benefits of responsible business practice.
Pennon sustainability report Pennons sustainability reporting is integrated throughout the strategic report and specifically in the following sections Chairmans statement page 8 Business model page 14 Strategic priorities page 16 Our people page 18 Review of the Chief Executive Officer page 20 Our operations pages 26 to 37 South West Water and Viridor sustainability reports The sustainability report for Viridor will be published in June 2017 and South West Water will incorporate its sustainability reporting in its company annual performance report and regulatory accounts which will be published in July 2017.
Both documents will be available to view at site and also on the subsidiaries websites.
Full details of the sustainability targets for South West Water and Viridor for 201617 and their performance against them are given in their respective reports.
Governance The Nomination Committee met four times during the year to fulfil the duties set out in its terms of reference.
Matters considered by the Committee during the year included The recruitment for a nonexecutive director of South West Water to fill the vacancy arising from the resignation of Steve Johnson in April 2016 The appointment of the Group director of Safety Health Quality and Sustainability the interim Group director of Human Resources and the Group director of Environment The recruitment of a director of Wastewater Services South West Water A review of succession plans the leadership needs of the Group and the Groups approach to succession planning resulting in the instigation of a project to be undertaken by the interim Group director of Human Resources the structure size and composition of the Board including the skills knowledge independence diversity and experience of the Directors taking into account the findings of the independent performance evaluation conducted by Armstrong Bonham Carter LLP a review of the time spent by NonExecutive Directors in fulfilling their duties and the other directorships they hold the steps to be taken to bring further skills and experience in environmental management into the executive team resulting in the appointment of Ed Mitchell to the new role of director of Environment after the year end the Groups performance against its diversity and equality policies.
It is the practice of the Committee led by the Chairman to appoint an external search consultancy to assist in Board appointments to ensure that an extensive and robust search can be made for suitable candidates.
Buchannan Harvey and Co who have no other connection with the Company were engaged to assist with the recruitment of a nonexecutive director for the South West Water board the process for which is still underway.
Sir John Parker Nomination Committee Chairman The Nomination Committee report We are pleased to report that at the year end 36% of Pennon Executive members were women.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Nomination Committee composition and meetings Date of appointment to Pennon Nomination Committee Attendance South West Water nomination committee member Committee chairman Sir John Parker April 2015 44 Committee members Martin Angle December 2008 44 Neil Cooper September 2014 44 Gill Rider September 2012 44 South West Water nonexecutive directors Martin Hagen 22 Steve Johnson Matthew Taylor 22 1 Representing South West Waters interests.
2 Until 28 April 2016.
The Pennon Audit Committee and the South West Water audit committee meet sequentially on the same day.
The responsibilities of the South West Water nomination committee mirror those of the Pennon Nomination Committee but only in respect of South West Water.
The CEO also attends meetings when invited.
Diversity policy The Committee is required by the Board to review and monitor compliance with the Boards diversity policy and report on the targets achievement against those targets and overall compliance in the annual report each year.
The Boards diversity policy confirms that the Board is committed to the search for Board candidates being conducted and appointments made on merit against objective criteria and with due regard for the benefits of gender and ethnic diversity on the Board satisfying itself that plans are in place for orderly succession of appointments to the Board and to senior management to maintain an appropriate balance of skills and experience within the Group and on the Board and to ensure progressive refreshing of the
In addition within the spirit of Principle B.2 of the UK Code the Board endeavours to achieve and maintain a minimum of 25% female representation on the Board a minimum of 25% female representation on the Groups senior management team.
The Committee is pleased to report that as at 31 March 2017 and as disclosed on page 59 one third of the Boards Directors are women and as such the Group has exceeded 25% female representation at Board level.
We are pleased to report that at the year end 36% of Pennon Executive members were women compared to the reported 22% at 31 March 2016.
Action is being taken to improve diversity across the workforce which will assist in increasing female representation at senior management level as described on page 19.
The Committee and the Board will continue to monitor and promote diversity across the Group with the aim of ensuring women are appropriately represented on the Pennon Executive.
As well as its diversity policy the Group has a number of policies in place embracing workplace matters including nondiscrimination and equal opportunities policies which are reported on separately on page 18 together with information regarding the gender breakdown of the workforce on page 19.
Governance The Committee met seven times during the year to fulfil the duties set out in its terms of reference.
In particular the Committee is responsible for ensuring remuneration is aligned with and supports the Groups strategy reflects our values as a Group and optimises performance maintaining and in every third year reviewing the remuneration policy and considering any changes necessary to ensure it remains appropriate and fulfils its purpose of attracting and retaining high calibre people who are able to contribute to the success of the Group advising the Board on the framework of executive remuneration for the Group determining the remuneration and terms of engagement of the Chairman the Executive Directors and senior executives of the Group.
The Committees activities during the financial year The Committee engaged in the following activities during the year Annual executive salary review Annual review of the Chairmans fee Determining performance targets in respect of the Annual Incentive Bonus Plan for 201617 Reviewing drafts of the Directors remuneration report for 201516 and recommending it to the Board for approval for inclusion in the 2016 annual report Determining bonuses and deferred bonus awards pursuant to the Companys Annual Incentive Bonus Plan in respect of the year 201516 Approving the Performance and Coinvestment Plan awards for the year Martin Angle Remuneration Committee Chairman The Remuneration Committee report Our remuneration policy must help us to attract and retain high calibre people who are able to contribute to the success of the Group.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Approving the remuneration arrangements for the new Finance Director Viridor Approving the release of the 2013 deferred bonus share awards and the vesting of executive share options pursuant to the Annual Incentive Bonus Plan Determining the outcome of the 2013 Performance and Coinvestment Plan awards Considering and debating issues relating to the review of the remuneration policy and future arrangements for the annual bonus and longterm incentive plan L TIP with a particular focus on performance metrics and incentive levels to ensure these are aligned with the new management structure and strategic objectives Reviewing and agreeing to recommend the removal of the co investment obligation under the Performance and Coinvestment Plan and an increase in our shareholding guidelines The results of independent performance evaluation of the Committee conducted by Armstrong Bonham Carter LLP.
The Committees focus for 2017 18 Complete the design of the new simplified LTIP and oversee its implementation Ensure that targets are stretching but also fair and achievable so that they act to retain motivate and incentivise management to deliver the Groups strategic goals and to create longterm value for shareholders Improve the process around and disclosure of personal bonus targets Conduct a shareholder consultation process in preparation for its submission to shareholders for approval at the AGM Monitor on an ongoing basis the alignment of executive pay and benefits with the strategic direction of the Group.
Remuneration Committee composition and meetings Date of appointment to Pennon Remuneration Committee Attendance South West Water remuneration committee member Committee chairman Martin Angle December 2008 77 Committee members Neil Cooper September 2014 67 Gill Rider September 2012 77 South West Water nonexecutive directors Martin Hagen  77 Steve Johnson 1 Representing South West Water interests.
2 Until 28 April 2016.
The Pennon Remuneration Committee and the South West Water remuneration committee meet sequentially on the same day.
The responsibilities of the South West Water remuneration committee mirror those of the Pennon Remuneration Committee but only in respect of South West Water.
Steve Johnson who was a member of the South West Water remuneration committee resigned as a nonexecutive director of South West Water on 28 April 2016 In accordance with the Code all of the Committee members are independent NonExecutive Directors and the Committee is advised by Deloitte an independent remuneration consultant to ensure remuneration is determined impartially.
The Chairman of the Board attends from time to time but is not a member of the Committee.
The CEO also attends meetings when invited except for such part of a meeting when matters concerning his own remuneration are to be discussed.
Governance Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Waste processing at Exeter ERF
remuneration report
75 Directors remuneration at a glance Annual statement from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 78 Directors remuneration policy Changes to the remuneration policy Future policy table Executive Directors Future policy table NonExecutive Directors Illustrations of applications of remuneration policy Approach to recruitment remuneration Dates of Directors service contractsletters of appointment Policy on termination of service agreements and payments for loss of office Statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company Statement of consideration of shareholder views 88 Annual report on remuneration Operation of the remuneration policy for 2017 18 Single total figure table audited information Annual bonus outturn for 201617 Performance and Coinvestment
Retirement benefits and entitlements audited information Director changes  additional information audited information Out side app ointment s NonExecutive Director fees and benefits All employee performance and other contextual information Share award and shareholding disclosures audited information Shar eholder dilution Details of share awards The Remuneration Committee and its advisers Statement of voting at general meeting Dir e c t or s r emuner a tion report compliance 74 Governance Directors remuneration at a glance Key components of Executive Directors remuneration Base salary Set at a competitive level to attract and retain high calibre candidates to meet Companys strategic objectives in an increasingly complex business environment.
Benefits
Benefits provided are consistent with the market and level of seniority and to aid retention of key skills to assist in meeting strategic objectives.
Annual bonus Incentivises the achievement of key performance objectives aligned to the strategy of the Company.
Longterm incentive plan Provides alignment to the achievement of the Companys strategic objectives and the delivery of sustainable longterm value to shareholders.
Shareholding guidelines Create alignment between executives and shareholders and promote longterm stewardship.
Pension
Provides funding for retirement and aids retention of key skills to assist in meeting the Companys strategic objectives.
Allemployee share plans Align the interests of all employees with Company share performance.
Summary of Directors remuneration 201617
Benefits including
Annual bonus cash and deferred shares Long term incentive plan
Total remuneration Executive Directors Chris Loughlin 510 2tel1318 Susan Davy NonExecutive directors Sir John Parker 266     266 Neil Cooper 66     66 Martin Angle 67     67 Gill Rider 72     72 See the full single total figure of remuneration tables on page 89 Key proposed changes in policy and implementation Performance measurement Reshaping our performance measurement framework to align with the strategic priorities of the Group  for both the annual bonus and the LTIP.
Holding period Formalising our existing two year holding period.
L TIP opportunity A proposed increase to our LTIP opportunity to align it better with the market aiding retention and recruitment  the first increase to incentive quantum we have made for 10 years.
Shareholding guidelines Increasing our shareholding guidelines for the Executive Directors to provide stronger alignment with shareholders and longterm strategy.
Read more about the changes to our remuneration policy on pages 76 to 79 75 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Annual Statement from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Dear Shareholder
I am pleased to present on behalf of our Board the Remuneration Committees Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
We are submitting a revised Directors Remuneration Policy Policy for a binding shareholder vote at the 2017 AGM following the expiration of a three year period.
As explained below the revised Policy follows the first comprehensive review of our executive remuneration arrangements for 10 years and reflects the major changes Pennon has made to its strategy management structure and governance in the last year.
This includes the appointment of Chris Loughlin to the newly created role of Group CEO leading a new restructured Pennon Executive team.
It also reflects the challenges we face in the recruitment and retention of executive talent.
We have always sought to take a responsible approach to executive remuneration and are mindful of the views of shareholders and wider stakeholders.
We have therefore consulted with the shareholder base and taking on board feedback have aligned our proposals accordingly.
On pages 88 to 99 we set out our annual report on remuneration which contains the remuneration of the Directors for the year 201617 including the single remuneration figure table.
It also provides details on how our policy will be applied for 201718.
This section of the report together with this letter is subject to an advisory shareholder vote at this years AGM.
Last year the Remuneration Committee was pleased to note that 97% of shareholders who voted approved the annual report on remuneration.
The Committee appreciates the support of its shareholders.
Policy review Over the last year we have undertaken a comprehensive review of all aspects of our executive remuneration arrangements.
A particular focus was given to looking at our performance measurement framework afresh against our new Group structure and to ensure its continued relevance and alignment with strategy and consistency with best practice.
Throughout the process the Committee has received advice from its remuneration advisers Deloitte LLP and from the Board Chairman.
This has been the first review of incentive levels for 10 years and while a number of best practice features have been adopted in recent years our review has also sought to address recent challenges that Pennon has faced in recruiting talent in a changing talent pool and business environment.
Over the last ten years the complexity of our business has increased and we are now one of the largest environmental infrastructure groups in the UK.
Our objective continues to be to have remuneration arrangements that ensure the commitment of our Executive Directors to our longterm strategic objectives and to the creation of shareholder value whilst ensuring their behaviours reflect the values of the organisation and actions are taken in accordance with our high standards of governance.
Our remuneration arrangements ensure the commitment of our Executive Directors to our longterm strategic objectives and to the creation of shareholder value.
Read more about our strategic objectives on page 16 76 Governance Proposed modifications As a result of our review and following input and feedback from shareholders we are proposing some modifications to our remuneration policy including a refreshed approach to our performance measurement framework with metrics which are strongly aligned to our Group strategy and targets which are regarded as stretching.
Longterm incentive plan L TIP performance measures introduction of new performance metrics under our LTIP aligned with our key strategic objectives.
It is proposed for 201718 that LTIP awards will be based on a combination of EPS growth dividend growthdividend cover and return on capital employed
These metrics align executives with the delivery of sustainable earnings and related cash flows as well as our sectorleading dividend policy.
We also took account of shareholder feedback and included a portion of the award linked to the longterm capital returns generated by our business.
This moves away from our historic approach of using only Total Shareholder Return TSR.
Our review highlighted that it has become increasingly difficult to formulate a robust sector comparator group and a FTSE 250 group is often counter cyclical to our sector.
L TIP opportunity  a proposed increase to our LTIP opportunity the first increase to incentive quantum we have made for 10 years.
Under the proposed new policy the maximum opportunity for executive directors will be increased from 100% to 150% of salary.
Our recent experience in recruitment has led us to believe that we are not sufficiently competitive in the market.
While careful consideration was given to the current climate the Committee strongly believes that it is in shareholders interests to enable Pennon to compete for talent on a level playing field securing an executive team who can deliver longterm business success.
Our incentive levels will continue to be positioned conservatively against the market.
As a Committee we also recognise the importance of stretching performance metrics in circumstances where we are seeking a higher maximum award.
L TIP simplification and performance alignment  simplification of our longterm incentive framework with the removal of the coinvestment element under the new LTIP.
In addition vesting for threshold performance will be reduced from 30% to 25%.
Annual bonus performance measures  an increase in the combined weighting on Group financial metrics and the key operational measures on which performance is assessed by our regulator customers communities and wider stakeholders.
We are not proposing any change to the existing maximum award or policy that 50% of any bonus is deferred into shares which are normally released after three years.
Shareholding guidelines and longterm stewardship  the size of the shareholding expected to be held by the Executive Directors will be significantly increased from 100% of salary to 200% of salary for both the CEO and CFO.
This is to enhance the focus on longterm stewardship and to provide stronger alignment with shareholders.
Holding periods  we introduced twoyear holding periods in 2015.
We are retaining this feature and are formalising it as part of our policy.
Further details on the remuneration policy are set out on pages 79 to 87.
Overall performance achieved during the year The Group achieved a strong performance in 201617 across its water and waste businesses delivering against its strategic objectives.
Group underlying profit before tax was 250.0 million an increase of 18.3% compared to 201516.
Earnings per share before deferred tax and nonunderlying items was up 19.0% at 47.0p reflecting higher profits.
South West Waters return on regulated equity RoRE at 12.6% continues to lead the sector and Viridor generated EBITDA of 107 million during the year ahead of the target of c.
100 million.
Key remuneration decisions For 201718 salaries for executive directors were increased by 1.5% consistent with increases awarded to the wider employee population.
The bonus outturns for the Executive Directors for 201617 reflect the strong achievements of the Group businesses in the year the Companys performance against corporate financial targets and the Executive Directors performance against individual targets.
Half of the bonus is deferred into shares.
Further details of targets measures and performance are set out on pages 90 and 91.
As regards the Companys longterm incentive plan the overall estimated outturn for awards vesting in 2017 at the end of the three year period is 43.7% of the maximum 100%.
This reflects that the Companys total shareholder return is estimated to exceed both the comparator index performance and the FTSE 250 group.
Board changes Ian McAulay CEO of Viridor stepped down from the Board on 31 August 2016 and left the Group on 31 December 2016.
Details of his leaving arrangements are set out on page 92.
Looking forward We will continue to review our remuneration arrangements and performance measures to ensure they are aligned with our strategy.
In conclusion I hope you find our report this year informative and that we can rely on your vote in favour of the remuneration policy and our annual report on remuneration.
Martin D Angle Remuneration Committee chairman Remuneration review  the key principles we followed Align executive targets with the Companys key strategic objectives Ensure a transparent simple and equitable approach to pay Incentivise the delivery of sustainable longterm value to shareholders Attract and retain high calibre executives in an increasingly competitive talent market Drive the right behaviours at all times from executives Support the underlying strategic priorities of operating safely with an engaged workforce and focus on customer service Improve transparency and line of sight under the performance measurement framework Apply similar remuneration principles to members of the Pennon Executive Seek feedback and input on our proposals from shareholders.
77 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017
Introduction
The remuneration policy described in this part of the report is intended to apply to the Company subject to a binding shareholder vote following the date of the Companys 2017 AGM which is scheduled to be held on 6 July 2017.
Shareholders will also be asked to approve a revised longterm incentive plan LTIP.
This will replace the current Performance and Coinvestment Plan PCP which will expire in July 2017.
The Directors remuneration policy will be displayed on the Companys website at siteaboutusgovernanceandremuneration immediately after the 2017 AGM and will be available upon request from the Group Company Secretary.
Changes to the remuneration policy The Remuneration Committee undertook a comprehensive review of the remuneration policy following the end of a three year period as well as the expiry of our longterm incentive plan the existing PCP will expire in July 2017.
Following this review which included a consultation process with our largest shareholders the key changes to the policy include Reshaping our performance measurement framework to align with the strategic priorities of the Group A proposed increase to our LTIP opportunity to align it better with the market aiding retention and recruitment  the first increase to incentive quantum we have made for 10 years Formalising our existing two year holding period Significant increase in our shareholding guidelines for Executive Directors.
Component Existing policy New policy Rationale and link to strategy Annual bonus Performance measures Performance targets relate to corporate and personal objectives.
Normally 70% relates to financial targets or quantitative measures.
Performance measures Increase in the portion of the award relating to financial and quantitative operational measures  amounting to 80% in 201718.
Improved focus on Group measures and reflects new Group management structure.
Strong link to measurable financial and operational KPIs which underpin the delivery of our strategy and value to shareholders and our customers.
Maximum award Maximum award of 100% of salary.
Maximum award No change to the Policy Retain our current annual bonus maximum with alignment to annual KPIs.
Deferred element A proportion usually 50% of any bonus is deferred into shares in the Company which are normally released after three years.
Deferred element No change to the Policy.
Alignment of executives and shareholders with a significant portion of any bonus deferred into shares.
LTIP Performance measures Total shareholder return TSR against the performance of a waterwaste peer group index and constituents of the FTSE 250 index excluding investment trusts.
Performance measures A combination of EPS growth sustainable dividend growth and dividend cover and return on capital.
Performance measurement framework more closely aligned to Pennons strategy.
Move away from TSR due to increasing challenge in forming robust and relevant comparator group due to sector consolidation and the FTSE 250 group which is often counter cyclical to our sector.
Coinvestment requirement Requirement to acquire coinvestment shares equivalent to onefifth of the value of the award.
Coinvestment requirement No coinvestment requirement under the new policy.
Simplification of our longterm incentive framework.
Shareholdings requirements will significantly increase see below but are no longer linked to the LTIP.
Maximum award Maximum award of 100% of salary.
Maximum award Maximum award of 150% of salary.
Ensure we can recruit and retain executive talent.
Following the increase Pennon will continue to be positioned conservatively against the market.
78 Governance Component Existing policy New policy Rationale and link to strategy LTIP continued Threshold vesting 30% of maximum award.
Threshold vesting 25% of maximum award.
Reduced threshold vesting to reflect best practice.
Holding periods Twoyear holding periods were introduced for awards made from 2015.
Holding periods Twoyear holding periods will continue to apply and will be formally included in Policy.
Extend time horizons to five years and enhance longterm focus of executives.
Shareholding requirements 100% of salary for executive directors 200% of salary for both the CEO and CFO.
Strengthen alignment of executives with shareholders and promote longterm stewardship.
Future policy table  Executive Directors The table below sets out the elements of the total remuneration package for the Executive Directors which are comprised in this Directors remuneration policy.
Where it is intended that certain provisions of the 2014 remuneration policy will continue to apply this is indicated in the future policy table below.
How the components support the strategic objectives of the Company How the component operates including provisions for recovery or withholding of any payment Maximum potential value of the component Description of framework used to assess performance Base salary Set at a competitive level to attract and retain high calibre candidates to meet the Companys strategic objectives in an increasingly complex business environment.
Base salary reflects the scope and responsibility of the role as well as the skills and experience of the individual.
Salaries are generally reviewed annually and any changes are normally effective from 1 April each year.
In normal circumstances salary increases will not be materially different to general employee pay increases.
However the Committee reserves the right to make increases above those made to general employees for example in circumstances including but not limited to an increase in the scope of the role.
When reviewing salaries the Committee has regard to the following factors Salary increases generally for all employees in the Company and the Group Market rates Performance of individual and the Company Other factors it considers relevant.
There is no overall maximum.
None although individual and Company performance are factors considered when reviewing salaries.
Benefits
Benefits provided are consistent with the market and level of seniority to aid retention of key skills to assist in meeting strategic objectives.
Benefits currently include the provision of a company vehicle fuel health insurance and life assurance.
Other benefits may be provided if the Committee considers it appropriate.
In the event that an Executive Director is required to relocate relocation benefits may be provided.
The cost of insurance benefits may vary from year to year depending on the individuals circumstances.
There is no overall maximum benefit value but the Committee aims to ensure that the total value of benefits remain proportionate.
None.
Annual bonus Incentivises the achievement of key performance objectives aligned to the strategy of the Company.
Annual bonuses are calculated following finalisation of the financial results for the year to which they relate and are usually paid three months after the end of the financial year.
A portion of any bonus is deferred into shares in the Company which are normally released after three years.
Normally 50% is deferred.
Any dividends on the shares during this period are paid to the Directors.
Malus and clawback provisions apply which permit net cash bonuses andor deferred bonus shares to be forfeited repaid or made subject to further conditions where the Committee considers it appropriate in the event of any significant adverse circumstances including but not limited to a material failure of risk management serious reputational damage a financial misstatement or misconduct.
Clawback may be applied for the period of three years following determination of the cash bonus.
The maximum bonus potential for each Director is 100% of base salary.
Performance targets relate to corporate and personal objectives which are reviewed each year.
For 201718 in relation to the financial and operational measures of the annual bonus framework there will be an 80% overall weighting of which 50% will be profit before tax 10% return on regulated equity and 20% operational measures.
All of these measures will be subject to defined quantitative targets.
The measures weighting and threshold levels may be adjusted for future years.
Following the financial year end the Committee with advice from the Chairman of the Board and following consideration of the outturn against target by the chairman of the Audit Committee assesses to what extent the targets are met and determines bonus levels accordingly.
In doing so the Committee takes into account overall Company performance and in exceptional circumstances may exercise its discretion and adjust the bonus to reflect any specific factors.
79 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 How the components support the strategic objectives of the Company How the component operates including provisions for recovery or withholding of any payment Maximum potential value of the component Description of framework used to assess performance Longterm incentive plan L TIP Provides alignment to the achievement of the Companys strategic objectives and the delivery of sustainable longterm value to shareholders.
Annual grant of conditional shares or equivalent.
Share awards vest subject to the achievement of specific performance conditions measured over a performance period of no less than three years.
Dividend equivalents including dividend reinvestment may be paid on vested awards.
An underpin applies which allows the Committee to reduce or withhold vesting if the Committee is not satisfied with the underlying operational and economic performance of the Company.
For grants made in 2015 and 2016 onwards under the PCP as well as all grants made from 2017 under the LTIP malus and clawback provisions apply which permit shares to be forfeited repaid or made subject to further conditions where the Committee considers it appropriate in certain circumstances.
The circumstances in which malus may be applied include but are not limited to material misstatement serious reputational damage or the participants misconduct.
The circumstances in which clawback may be applied are material misstatement or serious misconduct.
In addition a two year holding period will apply in respect of any shares which vest at the end of the three year performance period.
Malus may be applied during the three year performance period and clawback may be applied up until the end of the holding period.
The maximum annual award is 150% of base salary.
The current performance measures for the LTIP are based on a combination of growth in earnings per share EPS sustainable dividend growth and dividend cover and return on capital.
For 201718 awards performance measures will be weighted as follows 40% based on EPS growth 40% based on a combination of dividend growth and a dividend cover metric 20% based on return on capital employed.
The underpin evaluation includes consideration of safety environmental social and governance ESG factors as well as financial performance.
No more than 25% of maximum vests for minimum performance.
The Committee will keep the performance measures and weightings under review and may change the performance condition for future awards if this were considered to be aligned with the Companys interests and strategic objectives as well as the impact of regulatory changes.
However the Committee would consult with major shareholders in advance of any proposed material change in performance measures.
Commitments made under the 2014 policy Performance conditions set under the previous remuneration policy approved at the 2014 AGM will continue to apply to awards granted in 2014 2015 and 2016.
These awards are due to vest in 2017 2018 and 2019 respectively.
Previous performance conditions were based on total shareholder return TSR against the performance of a waterwaste peer group index and constituents of the FTSE 250 index excluding investment trusts.
For awards granted under the 2014 remuneration policy no more than 30% of the maximum vests for minimum performance.
Directors remuneration policy continued 80 Governance How the components support the strategic objectives of the Company How the component operates including provisions for recovery or withholding of any payment Maximum potential value of the component Description of framework used to assess performance Shareholding requirements Create alignment between executives and shareholders and promote longterm stewardship.
200% of salary for both the CEO and CFO.
Pension
Provides funding for retirement and aids retention of key skills to assist in meeting the Companys strategic objectives.
Defined benefit pension arrangements are closed to new entrants.
Defined contribution pension arrangements have been available to new staff since 2008.
A cash allowance may be provided as an alternative andor in addition where pension limits have been reached.
The maximum annual pension contribution or cash allowance is 20% of salary.
For Executive Directors who commenced employment prior to April 2013 the maximum annual pension contribution or cash allowance is 30% of salary.
Legacy defined benefit pension arrangements will continue to be honoured.
Whilst one Executive Director is a pension member there are no further prospective accruals in respect of defined benefit pension arrangements.
None.
Allemployee share plans Align the interests of all employees with Company share performance.
Executive Directors may participate in HMRC approved allemployee plans on the same basis as employees.
The maximum is as prescribed under the relevant HMRC legislation governing the plans.
None.
81 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the policy table Operation of executive share plans The longterm incentive plan will be operated in accordance with the rules of the plan as approved by shareholders.
The deferred bonus awards will be governed by the rules adopted by the Board from time to time.
Awards under any of the Companys share plans referred to in this report may Be granted as conditional share awards nilcost options or in such other form that the Committee determines has the same economic effect Have any performance conditions applicable to them amended or substituted by the Committee if an event occurs which causes the Committee to determine an amended or substituted performance condition would be more appropriate and not materially less difficult to satisfy Incorporate the right to receive an amount in cash or additional shares equal to the value of dividends which would have been paid on the shares under an award that vest up to the time of vesting or where the award is subject to a holding period release.
This amount may be calculated assuming that the dividends have been reinvested in the Companys shares on a cumulative basis Be settled in cash at the Committees discretion.
Preexisting commitments The Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments andor payments for loss of office including exercising any discretion available in connection with such payments outside the policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the 2014 AGM the date the Companys first shareholderapproved directors remuneration policy came into effect ii before the policy set out above came into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholderapproved directors remuneration policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
The Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS which under the 2014 remuneration policy operated in conjunction with the deferred element of the annual bonus has been removed.
No ESOS options have been offered to Executive Directors since 2013.
Early vesting events On a change of control or voluntary wind up of the Company LTIP awards may vest to the extent determined by the Committee having regard to the performance of the Company and unless the Committee determines otherwise the period of time that has elapsed since grant.
Deferred bonus awards may vest in full.
Alternatively participants may have the opportunity or be required to exchange their awards for equivalent awards in another company although the Committee may decide in these circumstances to amend the performance conditions.
The Committee also has the discretion to treat any variation of the Companys share capital or any demerger special dividend or other transaction that may affect the current or future value of awards as an early vesting event on the same basis as a change of control.
Amendments to the remuneration policy The Committee may make minor amendments to the policy for example for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for that amendment.
Performance measures and targets The performance conditions for the annual bonus plan are selected by the Committee each year to reflect key performance indicators for the Company and key metrics used by the Board to oversee the operation of the businesses.
In respect of the LTIP performance conditions for 201718 awards will be EPS growth a sustainable dividend metric comprising dividend growth and dividend cover and return on capital employed ROCE.
The Committee chose these measures as they are closely aligned with Pennons strategic focus on the delivery of sustained earnings and related cash flows as well as our sectorleading dividend policy.
ROCE also measures the longterm capital returns generated by our businesses.
The performance targets are set in the context of the Companys forecasts and market expectations and are regarded as stretching targets.
The Committee may amend performance measures weightings and targets in the context of the Companys strategy the impact of changes to the regulatory framework accounting standards and any other relevant factors.
The measurement of performance against performance targets is at the Committees discretion which may include appropriate adjustments to financial or nonfinancial elements andor consideration of overall performance in the round.
Performance conditions may also be replaced or varied if an event occurs or circumstances arise which cause the Committee to determine that the performance conditions have ceased to be appropriate.
If the performance conditions are varied or replaced the amended conditions must in the opinion of the Committee be fair reasonable and materially no less difficult than the original condition when set.
The Committee would consult with major shareholders in advance of any proposed material change in performance measures.
Differences in remuneration policy for all employees When setting remuneration for Executive Directors the Committee considers relevant information about pay and conditions in the Group.
Senior executives and Executive Directors generally receive a higher proportion of their total pay in the form of variable remuneration and share awards.
All administrative employees of the Group are entitled to base salary and pension provision including life assurance.
In addition all administrative staff in Pennon Group and South West Water and all senior and middle management staff in the operations functions in Viridor are entitled to participate in annual bonus arrangements the levels of which are based on the seniority and level of responsibility.
Longterm incentive share awards are only available to senior executives and Executive Directors and certain benefits are generally available only to more senior employees at management level and above.
Directors remuneration policy continued 82 Governance Future policy table  NonExecutive Directors The table below sets out the Companys policy in respect of the setting of fees for NonExecutive Directors.
How the components support the strategic objectives of the Company How the component operates Maximum potential value of the component
Set at a market level to attract NonExecutive Directors who have appropriate experience and skills to assist in determining the Groups strategy.
Fees are set by the Board with the Chairmans fees being set by the Committee.
The relevant Directors are not present at the meetings when their fees are being determined.
NonExecutive Directors normally receive a basic fee and an additional fee for any specific Board responsibility such as membership or chairmanship of a Committee or occupying the role of Senior Independent Director.
In reviewing the fees the Board or Committee as appropriate consider the level of fees payable to NonExecutive Directors in other companies of similar scale and complexity.
Total fees paid to Nonexecutive Directors will remain within the limits stated in the Articles of Association.
Benefits
The benefits provided for the Chairman are consistent with the market and level of seniority.
Expenses incurred in the performance of non executive duties for the Company may be reimbursed or paid for directly by the Company including any tax due on the expenses.
The Chairmans benefits include the provision of a driver and vehicle when appropriate for the efficient carrying out of his duties.
None.
83 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Illustrations of applications of remuneration policy The total annual remuneration for the Executive Directors that could result from the proposed remuneration policy based on salaries for 201718 is shown below.
Fixed remuneration Annual variable remuneration Longterm variable remuneration Chris Loughlin  Chief Executive Oicer 100% 700 61% 22% 17% 1154 35% 26% 39% 1995
Mid performance
Fixed remuneration Annual variable remuneration Longterm variable remuneration Susan Davy  Chief Financial Oicer 100% 526 60% 23% 17% % 872 35% 26% 39% % 1516
Mid performance
Scenario Assumptions
Minimum performance Fixed pay which constitutes base salary pension and benefits in kind.
These values are made up of the salaries for 201718 set out on page 88 and an estimate of the value of the benefits and pension.
Mid performance Fixed pay and 50% of the maximum annual bonus and 25% of the maximum long term incentive award.
Maximum Fixed pay and 100% vesting of the annual bonus and of longterm incentive awards.
No adjustments have been made for potential share price growth or payment of dividends.
Benefits from allemployee schemes have also been excluded.
84 Governance Approach to recruitment remuneration When considering the appointment of Executive Directors the Committee seeks to balance the need to offer remuneration to attract candidates of sufficient calibre to deliver the Companys strategy whilst remaining mindful of the need to pay no more than is necessary.
The Committee will appoint new Executive Directors with a package that is in line with the remuneration policy that has been agreed by shareholders and is in place at the time.
Base salary may be set at a higher or lower level than the previous incumbent.
Other elements of remuneration would be in line with the Companys policy set out in the in the future policy.
The maximum variable pay opportunity on recruitment excluding buyouts would be in line with the future policy table being a maximum annual bonus award of 100% of salary and maximum award under the LTIP of 150% of salary.
The Committee may determine for the first year of appointment that any annual bonus will be subject to different weightings or objectives.
To facilitate recruitment it may be necessary to recompense a new Executive Director for the expected value of incentive rewards foregone with their previous employer buyout awards.
The
Committee may make buyout awards in accordance with LR9.4.2 of the Listing Rules.
The Committee will ensure that any such award would at a maximum match the value of the awards granted by the previous employer and be made only where a Director is able to demonstrate that a loss has been incurred from leaving his or her previous employment.
Any buyout would take into account the terms of the arrangement forfeited including in particular any performance conditions and the time over which they vest.
The award would have time horizons which are in line with or greater than the awards forfeited.
For interim positions a cash supplement may be paid rather than salary for example a Nonexecutive Director taking on an executive function on a shortterm basis.
Where an employee is promoted to the position of Executive Director including if an Executive Director is appointed following an acquisition or merger preexisting awards and contractual commitments would be honoured in accordance with their established terms.
Nonexecutive Directors fees would be in line with the policy set out in the future policy table on page 83.
Dates of Directors service contractsletters of appointment The dates of Directors service contracts and letters of appointment and details of the unexpired term are shown below.
Executive Directors Date of service contract Expiry date of service contract Chris Loughlin 1 January 2016 At age 67 20 August 2019 Susan Davy 1 February 2015 At age 67 17 May 2036 Ian McAulay 2 August 2013 At age 65 25 April 2030 Resigned on 31 August 2016 Each of the Executive Directors service contracts is subject to 12 months notice on either side.
NonExecutive Directors Date of initial letter of appointment Expiry date of appointment Sir John Parker 19 March 2015 31 March 2018 Martin Angle 28 November 2008 30 November 2017 Neil Cooper 17 July 2014 30 August 2017 Gill Rider 22 June 2012 30 August 2018 The policy is for Executive Directors service contracts to provide for 12 months notice from either side.
The policy is for NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment to contain three months notice period from either side and for the Chairmans letter of appointment to contain a 12 months notice period from either side.
All NonExecutive Directors are subject to annual reelection and letters of appointment are for an initial threeyear term.
Copies of Executive Directors service contracts and NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
85 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Policy on termination of service agreements and payment for loss of office The Companys policy is that Executive Directors service agreements normally continue until the Directors agreed retirement date or such other date as the parties agree.
Otherwise they are terminable on one years notice.
There are no liquidated damages provisions for compensation on termination within Executive Directors service agreements.
Taking into account the circumstances of any termination the Committee may determine that a payment in lieu of notice should be made.
Any such payments would be restricted to salary and benefits.
In these circumstances consideration would be given to phasing of payments and an individuals duty and opportunity to mitigate losses.
The Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with a directors cessation of office or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of compromise or settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any fees for outplacement assistance andor the directors legal andor professional advice fees in connection with his cessation of office or employment.
The Company may meet ancillary costs such as outplacement consultancy andor reasonable legal costs if the Company terminates the Executive Directors service contract.
Any compensation payable will be determined by reference to the terms of the service contract between the Company and the employee as well as the rules of the various incentive plans as set out in the table below.
Annual bonus Normally no bonus is payable unless an Executive Director is employed on the date of payment.
In certain good leaver circumstances death disability redundancy retirement and any other circumstance at the Committees discretion a bonus may be payable.
Any such bonus would be based on performance and prorated to reflect the period of service with performance normally assessed at the same time as other employees.
The
Committee retains discretion to adjust the timing and prorating of any award to take account of any prevailing exceptional circumstances which they consider would be fair to the Company and to the employee.
Share deferral would not normally apply.
Deferred shares Unvested awards would normally lapse upon cessation.
In certain good leaver circumstances unless the Committee determines otherwise the restricted period is not automatically terminated on cessation of employment rather the restricted period continues to apply as if the leaver was still in employment.
However awards may be released to participants on cessation of employment at the discretion of the Committee.
Good leaver circumstances are death injury illhealth disability redundancy retirement the sale of the individuals employing business or company out of the Group and any other circumstance at the Committees discretion.
Longterm incentive plan Any unvested awards would normally lapse upon cessation of the individuals employment within the Group.
In certain good leaver circumstances awards vest to the extent determined by the Committee taking into account the extent to which the performance conditions have been satisfied the period of time elapsed between grant and the cessation of employment and such other factors as the Committee may deem relevant.
Awards would normally vest on the original normal vesting date and be released at the end of the twoyear holding period unless the Committee determines awards should be subject to earlier vesting and release dates.
If a participant dies an award will unless the Committee determines otherwise vest and be released at the time of the participants death taking into account the extent to which the performance conditions have been satisfied and the period of time elapsed since grant.
Good leaver circumstances are death ill health injury disability redundancy retirement where the participants employer is no longer a member of the Group where the participant is employed in an undertaking which is transferred out of the Group or for any other reason that the Committee determines.
All awards would lapse if a participant was summarily dismissed.
Allemployee awards Leavers will be treated in accordance with the HMRC approved rules.
Other awards Where a buyout award is made on recruitment leaver provisions would be determined at the time of award.
Directors remuneration policy continued 86 Governance Statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company In setting executive remuneration the Committee takes account of employment market conditions and the pay and benefits differentials across the Group.
The Committee considers annual summary reports of employee remuneration and the terms and conditions of employment within each operating company and has regard to these in setting salary and other benefits for the Executive Directors and senior management.
The reports of employee remuneration do not include comparison metrics.
The Committee does not consult with employees when drawing up the Directors remuneration policy but does take account of the Groupwide policy as described above.
Statement of consideration of shareholder views The Committee has taken into account general good governance best practice and shareholder views when formulating the remuneration policy.
As part of our recent remuneration review we carried out an extensive consultation process and consulted our Top 30 shareholders comprising 63% of the shareholder base.
As a result of this process a number of changes were made to our proposals including the use of a ROCE metric under our new LTIP and a significant increase in our shareholding guideline from 100% to 200% for both the CEO and the CFO.
87 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017
This section sets out how the Company has applied its remuneration policy in the 201617 year and details how the new policy will be implemented for the year 201718.
In accordance with section 439 of the Companies Act this section will be put to an advisory vote at the Companys AGM which is scheduled to be held on 6 July 2017.
Operation of the remuneration policy for 2017 18 A summary of the specific remuneration arrangements for Executive Directors in 201718 is described below Base salary 201718 salaries are Chris Loughlin 517650 Susan Davy 395850 Salaries were increased by 1.5% in line with increases for all employees.
Pension and benefits No changes.
Salary supplement cash allowance of 30% for Chris Loughlin and 25% for Susan Davy from which is deducted the employers contribution to the defined benefit or defined contribution pension schemes for the Directors.
Annual bonus No change to maximum opportunity of 100% of salary.
No change to operation of deferral with 50% of the bonus to be deferred into shares for three years.
For 201718 the annual bonus will be based on the following performance measures 60% based on Group financial metrics 50% PBT 10% RoRE.
20% based on operational metrics weighted equally between Waste and Water.
These measures will be quantitative and measurable and are key to meeting the needs of our customers our regulator and wider stakeholders.
Water metrics Waste metrics Service Incentive Mechanism SIM Bathing quality
Waste water pollution incidents Duration of interruptions to supply Waste water and waste asset reliability.
ERF availability Delivery against recycling action plan Growth in customer base.
20% based on personal strategic measures.
These will be relevant to the individual and will include health and safety environmental performance development and delivery of commercial priorities for the Group PR19 and leveraging of synergies.
For bonuses from 201415 both malus and clawback apply as described in the remuneration policy.
Longterm incentive plan Maximum award of 150% of base salary for both the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer.
For 201718 performance measures will be EPS growth a sustainable dividend measure and ROCE with targets set as follows EPS growth  40% weighting EPS growth pa Vesting
6% 25%
10% 100% Straightline vesting between threshold and maximum.
Sustainable dividend measure dividend growth and dividend cover  40% weighting The performance measure comprises two performance targets both of which need to be achieved.
There is a gateway dividend growth target of RPI4% per annum.
There is then an EBITDA dividend cover target which operates as follows EBITDA dividend cover Vesting
2.6 25%
3.6 100% Straightline vesting between threshold and maximum.
As an additional underpin the board must also be satisfied with the level of EPS dividend cover.
EBITDA dividend cover will be based on adjusted EBITDA calculated as underlying EBITDA  share of JV dividends and interest receivable  IFRIC12 interest receivable.
For the purpose of the calculation dividend cover would be based on the policy of 4% pa above RPI.
Annual report on remuneration 88 Governance
Return on capital employed ROCE  20% weighting Average ROCE Vesting Threshold 8% 25% Maximum 10% 100% ROCE is defined as operating profit  JV profit after tax  interest receivable divided by capital employed debt  equity including hybrid.
Straightline vesting between threshold and maximum.
The LTIP award will be subject to an underpin relating to overall Group performance including consideration of environmental social and governance factors and safety performance as well as financial performance.
For awards from 201516 both malus and clawback apply and a holding period applies in respect of any shares which vest at the end of the three year performance period as described in the remuneration policy report.
Performance is measured over three years and a twoyear holding period applies.
Shareholding guideline 200% of salary for both the CEO and CFO.
NonExecutive Director fees NonExecutive Director fees for 201718 are set out below.
They include an increase of 1.5% approved by the Board for the Chairman and for the Non Executive Directors effective from 1 April 2017.
Role
Fees
Chairman 270331 Basic Nonexecutive Director fee 47198 Additional fees Senior Independent Director fee 7000 Additional fee for chairman of the Audit Committee 14210 Additional fee for chairman of the Remuneration Committee 10150 Additional fee for chairman of the Sustainability Committee 10150 Committee fee 5075 Single total figure of remuneration tables audited information Base salaryfees
Annual bonus cash and deferred shares Long term incentive plan
Total remuneration 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 ii 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 Executive Directors Chris Loughlin iv Susan Davy Ian McAulay 238   Nonexecutive directors Sir John Parker 266 219         266 219 Neil Cooper 66 65         66 65 Martin Angle 67 62         67 62 Gill Rider 72 65         72 65 i Benefits comprise a car allowance and medical insurance. of the accrued dividends payable on the vesting shares. iii See page 92 for further information. iv Appointed 1 January 2016  previously Executive Director and Chief Executive South West Water.
For 201516 remuneration is aggregate total in the year in respect of both positions. v Stepped down from the Board on 31 August 2016 and left the Group on 31 December 2016.
89 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Annual bonus outturn for 201617 The performance targets set and the performance achieved in respect of the annual bonus for 201617 for both Executive Directors is set out below.
In line with the Committees policy 50% of any bonus is payable in shares the release of which is deferred for a threeyear restricted period.
Chris Loughlin Measure Threshold Target Maximum
Bonus outturn EPS 30% weighting 37.53p 41.7p 47.96p 47.0p 24.83% Average South West Water directors performance 20% weighting The average of the bonus earned by the executive directors of South West Water in respect of targets which related to Operating profit 224.6m 229.2m 233.8m 237.2m 17.56% Return on regulated equity 7.0% 9.0% 11% 12.6% Net debt Totex outperformance The achievement of a range of service improvements relating to bathing water quality SIM leakage wastewater compliance pollutions resolution of operational contacts duration of supply interruptions asset reliability and employee engagement.
Average Viridor directors performance 20% weighting The average of the bonus earned by the executive directors of Viridor in respect of targets which related to EBITDA  JVs 119.6m 132.9m 146.2m 142.5m 14.82% Budgeted restructuring savings 56.1m 59.0m 62.0m 58.7m Sales revenue 731.9m 770.4m 808.9m 785.0m Environmental compliance events  11  3 Personal strategic objectives 30% weighting Successful implementation of new governance arrangements across the Group to ensure these are effective and efficient with improved processes communications and development of common services and synergies Refreshment of Group strategy including identification of focus and growth areas as well as agreement of appropriate business model for waste recycling.
Establishment of Growth Forum to consider and validate growth opportunities.
Centralisation of the recycling business model.
Implementation of self help measures for margin Viridor has improved from 3.2% to 4.7% Revision of succession planning process and structure for directors Enhancement of Pennons recognition branding and reputation with internal and external stakeholders.
Completion of a group wide rebranding exercise which following board approval was rolled out throughout the organisation.
Results of investor surveys on Pennon brand recognition at investor level Delivery of strategic priorities around Group level processes synergies and efficiencies.
Achievement of 100 million EBITDA target for ERF with improvement in recycling margins.
Strong progression of Shared Services and establishment of a Group executive 26.84% Total outturn 84.05% some objectives and the detailed targets continue to be commercially confidential Annual report on remuneration continued 90 Governance Susan Davy Measure Threshold Target Maximum
Bonus outturn EPS 30% weighting 37.53p 41.7p 47.96p 47.0p 24.83% Average South West Water directors performance 20% weighting The average of the bonus earned by the executive directors of South West Water in respect of targets which related to Operating profit 224.6m 229.2m 233.8m 237.2m 17.56% Return on regulated equity 7.0% 9.0% 11% 12.6% Net debt Totex outperformance The achievement of a range of service improvements relating to bathing water quality SIM leakage wastewater compliance pollutions resolution of operational contacts duration of supply interruptions asset reliability and employee engagement.
Average Viridor directors performance 20% weighting The average of the bonus earned by the executive directors of Viridor in respect of targets which related to EBITDA  JVs 119.6m 132.9m 146.2m 142.5m 14.82% Budgeted restructuring savings 56.1m 59.0m 62.0m 58.7m Sales revenue 731.9m 770.4m 808.9m 785.0m Environmental compliance events  11  3 Personal strategic objectives 30% weighting Review of the Groups funding strategy in light of growth requirements and changes to the SWW regulatory framework Reviewing and optimising finance resources and support throughout the Group.
Successful centralisation of procurement and property teams and completion of the review of financial advisors leading to appointment of new brokers Successful delivery of plan to deliver reduction in overheads and cost base.
Development of the Growth Board to review growth opportunities across the Group Successful completion of 2016 review of pension valuation and funding position ensuring appropriate risk and funding exposure 27.82% Total outturn 85.03% some objectives and the detailed targets continue to be commercially confidential Ian McAulay Ian McAulay stepped down from the Board on 31 August 2016 and left the Group on 31 December 2016.
He did not receive a bonus for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Performance and Coinvestment Plan outturn for 201617 The PCP awards made on 14 July 2014 which are due to vest on 14 July 2017 are the awards included in the single figure table.
The extent to which the awards will vest is subject to the satisfaction of the performance conditions that were in place at the time the awards were made 50% of the award vests subject to the Companys TSR performance measured against an index made up of the following six listed comparator companies National Grid Plc Sch Environnement Severn Trent Shanks Group Suez Environnement United Utilities The remaining 50% of the award vests subject to the Companys ranked TSR performance against the constituents of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts.
Currently it is estimated that the outturn will result in a 43.7% vesting as set out in the table below.
The calculation of TSR performance from the start of the performance period on 1 April 2014 to 10 May 2017 was undertaken by Deloitte LLP for the Committee.
Threshold 30% of maximum vests Maximum 100% of maximum vests Achievement in the period to 1 April 2017 Vesting outturn Comparator index 50% of award Equal to index 15% above the index 4.87% above the index 26.4% FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts 50% of award Above 50th percentile At or above 75th percentile 52.0% 17.3% TOTAL 43.7% Straightline vesting between points.
For below threshold performance 0% vests.
As the calculation requires averaging TSR performance over the first three months of the performance period and comparing it to the average over the three months following the end of the performance period 1 April 2017 to 30 June 2017 the achievement and the outturn is an estimate at the date of calculation 11 May 2017 Vesting of an award is also subject to the underpin described on page 80 which the Committee has determined to the date of this report would be satisfied.
91 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Retirement benefits and entitlements audited information Details of the Directors pension entitlements and pensionrelated benefits during the year are as follows Value of defined benefit pension
Cash allowances in lieu of pension Total value for the year
Accrued pension at 31 March 2017 Chris Loughlin   153 153 67 20 August 2019 Susan Davy 25  84 109 65 17 May 2034 18 ii Ian McAulay iii 25 April 2030 i The value of the defined benefit pension accrued over the period comprises the total pension input amount which has been calculated in line with regulatory requirements less the pension contributions paid by the Director. ii Accrued pension is based on service to the year end and final pensionable salary at that date. iii Continued to receive pension benefits until cessation of employment on 31 December 2016.
Chris Loughlin is not a member of any of the Pennon Groups pension schemes and receives a sum in lieu of pension entitlement equivalent to 30% of salary.
Susan Davy receives an overall pension benefit from the Company equivalent to 25% of her salary which in 201617 comprised an employers contribution of 13554 and a cash sum of 83946.
She is a member of Pennon Groups defined benefit pension arrangements and is entitled to normal retirement pension payable from age 65 of broadly 180th of pensionable remuneration for each year of pensionable service completed.
The employers contribution to the pension for Susan Davy is deducted from the overall pension allowance.
Pensions in payment are guaranteed to increase at a rate of 5% p. pa or CPI if lower for service accrued in the period after this date.
If a Director dies within five years of retiring a lump sum equal to the balance of five years pension payments is paid plus a spouses pension of one half of the members pension.
Pensions may also be payable to dependants and children.
Ian McAulay was a member of Pennon Groups defined contribution arrangement and received an overall pension benefit from the Company equivalent to 20% of his salary until the cessation of his employment on 31 December 2016.
No additional benefits will become receivable by a Director in the event that the Director retires early.
Director changes  additional information Payments in connection with leaving arrangements  Ian McAulay audited information Ian McAulay stepped down from the Board on 31 August 2016.
He left the employment of Viridor Waste Management Limited on 31 December 2016 at which point salary and benefits ceased to be paid.
Mr McAulay did not receive an annual bonus award in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017.
The treatment of Ian McAulays share awards was in line with the Companys remuneration policy approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM Awards made to Mr McAulay in 2014 2015 and 2016 under the Performance and Coinvestment Plan were forfeited in accordance with the Rules of the Plan Deferred shares allocated to Mr McAulay in 2014 2015 and 2016 pursuant to the Annual Incentive Bonus Plan which related to previous performance periods were released to him following cessation of his employment on 31 December 2016 at an aggregate value of 269784.
The 3651 ESOS options granted in 2014 in association with Mr McAulays 2014 deferred bonus share award lapsed upon his stepping down from the Board Deferred shares allocated to Mr McAulay as a buyout award upon his appointment as Chief Executive Viridor were released to him on 30 September 2016 being the end of the threeyear restricted period together with additional shares in lieu of shares that could have been acquired with the amount of each cash dividend on the released shares during the restricted period.
The total value was 149579.
Outside appointments Executive Directors may accept one board appointment in another company.
Board approval must be sought before accepting an appointment.
Fees may be retained by the Director.
Currently no Executive Directors hold outside company appointments other than with industry bodies or governmental or quasigovernmental agencies.
Annual report on remuneration continued 92 Governance NonExecutive Director fees and benefits The NonExecutive Directors fees were increased by the Board for 201617 by amounts ranging from 0.6% to 7.3% to reflect principally changed responsibilities and additional commitments arising from the revised Board governance structure.
The Chairmans increase approved by the Committee was 1.5%.
The Chairmans benefits comprise provision of a driver and vehicle when appropriate for the efficient carrying out of his duties.
He is entitled to expenses on the same basis as for the other NonExecutive Directors.
All employee performance and other contextual information Historical TSR The graph below shows the value over the eight year period ended on 31 March 2017 of 100 invested in Pennon Group on 1 April 2009 compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE 250 Index.
This index is considered appropriate as it is a broad equity market index of which the Company is a constituent.
T otal shareholder return TSR Apr17 Apr09 Apr10 Apr11 Apr12 Apr13 Apr14 Apr15 Apr16 5tel350 Total Shareholder Return  Since April 2009 Pennon FTSE 250 Equivalent chief executive officer remuneration As the Company did not have a Group Chief Executive Officer until 1 January 2016 the Committee has provided historic single figure information in the form of the average remuneration of the Executive Directors for years up to and including 201415.
Their remuneration was considered to be the most appropriate to use as they were the most senior executives in the Company.
For 201516 the Committee has provided the average remuneration for the Executive Directors excluding the Group CEO and the Group CEOs remuneration for the year as explained in footnotes i and ii below.
For 201617 the Group CEOs remuneration for the year is shown.
200910 201011 201112 201213 201314 201415 201516 ii iii Average Executive Director single figure of remuneration 000 916 1091 122tel738 1119 1318 Annual bonus payout % of maximum 91.79 94.69 72.87 47.00 67.56 68.20 66.37 83.98 84.05 LTIP vesting % of maximum iv i The average of the Executive Directors excluding the Group CEO. ii Group CEO for the year including remuneration received between 1 April 2015 and 31 December 2015 when in position as Chief Executive South West Water. iii Group CEO  first complete year in role. iv The longterm incentive plan LTIP vesting percentage excludes accrued dividends which are added on vesting. v The LTIP vesting percentage is an estimate as at 11 May 2017.
Comparison of CEO remuneration to employee remuneration The table below shows the percentage change between 201516 and 201617 in base salary benefits and annual bonus for the Group CEO from his appointment on 1 January 2016 and all employees.
The percentage increase in average remuneration for employees is calculated using wages and salaries excluding sharebased payments of 157.1 million 201516 158.0 million analysed into the three components in the table and the average number of employees of 4799 201516 4987 both as detailed in note 13 to the Group financial statements.
Percentage change in salary Percentage change in benefits Percentage change in annual bonus CEO remuneration na na na All employees 3.31% 0.00% 0.00% Prior to 1 January 2016 there was no CEO of Pennon Group.
The increase in remuneration for Chris Loughlin following promotion to Group Chief Executive Officer of Pennon from his previous position as Chief Executive South West Water is set out in the single total figure of remuneration table on page 89 and is not directly comparable with the general increases to allemployees across the Group.
The increase in bonus outturn as a percentage of maximum was 0.1%.
The salary increase for 201718 is 1.5%.
93 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Relative importance of spend on pay million million Percentage change Overall expenditure on pay 179.9 180.0 0.2% Distributions to ordinary shareholders 138.5 129.5 6.9% Distributions to perpetual capital security holders 20.3 20.3 0.0% Purchase of property plant and equipment cash flow 354.1 283.7 24.8% i Excludes nonunderlying items.
The above table illustrates the relative importance of spend on pay compared with distributions to equity holders.
The purchase of property plant and equipment cash flow has also been included as this was the most significant outgoing for the Company in the last financial year.
Share award and shareholding disclosures audited information Share awards granted during 201617 The table below sets out details of share awards made in the year to Executive Directors.
Executive Director Type of interest Basis of award Face value
Performance restricted period end date Chris Loughlin
100% of salary 30% of maximum 31 March 2019 Susan Davy 390 Ian McAulay 405 Chris Loughlin
50% of bonus awarded na 4 July 2019 Susan Davy 119 Ian McAulay 119 i This award lapsed when Ian McAulay stepped down from the Board on 31 August 2016.
PCP awards were calculated using the share price at close on 29 June 2016 which was 9.20 per share.
The date of grant was 1 July 2016.
Deferred bonus awards were calculated using the share price at which shares were purchased on the market on 1 July 2016 in order to satisfy the award which was 9.5014.
Directors shareholding and interest in shares The Remuneration Committee believes that the interests of Executive Directors and senior management should be closely aligned with the interests of shareholders.
To support this the Committee operates shareholding guidelines.
For 201617 this guideline was 100% of salary for Executive Directors.
From 201718 the Committee has significantly increased these guidelines to 200% of salary for both the CEO and CFO.
Annual report on remuneration continued 94 Governance The beneficial interests of the Executive Directors in the ordinary shares 40.7p each of the Company as at 31 March 2017 or date of cessation if earlier and 31 March 2016 together with their shareholding guideline obligation based on the 201617 guideline of 100% of salary and interest are shown in the table below Unvested awards Share interests including connected parties at 31 March 2017 Share interests including connected parties at 31 March 2016
Shareholding guideline met
Deferred bonus shares ESOS Chris Loughlin 290323 247745 100% Yes 153251 4984 57435 Susan Davy ii 57119 44197 100% Yes 100382 2635 29876 Ian McAulay iii 18748 18748 No longer applicable i Details of options that vested under the Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS and were exercised during the year are provided on page 97.
No share options are held that are vested but have not been exercised. appointment as Chief Financial Officer on 1 February 2015.
Share interests shown are as at 31 August 2016 being the date he stepped down from the Board Unvested awards made to him under the Performance and Coinvestment Plan numbering 137831 performance awards have lapsed.
33080 deferred bonus shares were released to him following cessation of his employment on 31 December 2016.
His buyout award of 16091 deferred shares was released following the end of the threeyear restricted period on 30 September 2016.
His ESOS options awarded to him on 27 August 2014 have lapsed.
Since 31 March 2017 4858 additional ordinary shares in the Company have been acquired by Chris Loughlin as a result of participation in the Companys scrip dividend alternative and the Companys Share Incentive Plan and 59 additional ordinary shares in the Company have been acquired by Susan Davy as a result of participation in the Companys Share Incentive Plan.
There have been no other changes in the beneficial interests or the nonbeneficial interests of the above Directors in the ordinary shares of the Company between 1 April 2017 and 22 May 2017.
NonExecutive Directors shareholding The beneficial interests of the NonExecutive Directors including the beneficial interests of their spouses civil partners children and stepchildren in the ordinary shares 40.7p of the Company are shown in the table below
Shares held at 31 March 2017 Shares held at 31 March 2016 Sir John Parker 10000 10000 Martin Angle Neil Cooper Gill Rider 2500 2500 There have been no changes in the beneficial interests or the nonbeneficial interests of the above Directors in the ordinary shares of the Company between 1 April 2017 and 22 May 2017.
There is no formal shareholding guideline for the NonExecutive Directors however they are encouraged to purchase shares in the Company.
Shareholder dilution The Company can satisfy awards under its share plans with new issue shares or shares issued from treasury up to a maximum of 10% of its issued share capital in a rolling 10 year period to employees under its share plans.
Within this 10% limit the Company can only issue as newly issued shares or from treasury 5% of its issued share capital to satisfy awards under discretionary or executive plans.
The percentage of shares awarded within these guidelines and the headroom remaining available as at 22 May 2017 is as set out below Awarded Headroom Total Discretionary schemes 1.48% 3.52% 5% All schemes 4.08% 5.92% 10% 95 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Details of share awards a Performance and Coinvestment Plan longterm incentive plan In addition to the above beneficial interests the following Directors have or had a contingent interest in the number of ordinary shares 40.7p each of the Company shown below representing the maximum number of shares to which they would become entitled under the plan should the relevant criteria be met in full Director and date of award
1 April 2016
Market price upon award in year
Value of shares upon vesting before tax
31 March 2017 Date of end of period for qualifying conditions to be fulfilled Chris Loughlin 020713 57810  653.00p 24625 224  010716 140714 48465  798.50p   48465 130717 010715 49352  810.50p   49352 300618 010716  55434 920.00p   55434 300619 Susan Davy ii 020713 21347  653.00p 9093 83  010716 140714 17893  798.50p   17893 130717 010715 40098  810.50p   40098 300618 010716  42391 920.00p   42391 300619 Ian McAulay iii 140714 44458  798.50p    130717 010715 49352 810.50p    300618 010716  44021 920.00p    300619 i 37.9% of the July 2013 award shares vested on 1 July 2016 at a market price of 911.24p per share.
The total number of shares that vested included additional shares equivalent in value to such number of shares as could have been acquired by reinvesting the dividends which would otherwise have been received on the vested shares during the restricted period of three years.
The balance of the award lapsed. interest in her role as Chief Financial Officer. iii Ian McAulays share awards lapsed upon his stepping down from the Board on 31 August 2016.
Annual report on remuneration continued 96 Governance Payments to past Directors David Dupont who retired as an Executive Director of the Company on 31 January 2015 remained entitled to a pro rata share of the PCP award made on 2 July 2013 his entitlement reflecting the proportion of the restricted period he was employed by the Company.
37.9% of the PCP award made on 2 July 2013 vested on 1 July 2016 and David Dupont received this award together with additional shares to the value of accrued dividends on such shares pro rated on the same basis as the award shares amounting in total to 12996 shares valued at 118425 at the date of vesting.
The award made to David Dupont on 14 July 2014 lapsed in its entirety due to his retirement being before the financial year end of the year in which the award was made.
The following Directors had or have a contingent interest in the number of ordinary shares 40.7p each of the Company shown below representing the total number of shares to which they have or would become entitled under the deferred bonus element of the Annual Incentive Bonus Plan the bonus plan at the end of the relevant qualifying period Director and date of award
1 April 2016
Market price of each share upon award in year
Value of shares upon vesting before tax
31 March 2017 Date of end of period for qualifying conditions to be fulfilled Chris Loughlin 050813 16978  693.00p 16040 ii 141  040816 270814 19552  821.50p   19552 260817 270715 19124 791.00p   19124 260718 040716  18759 950.14p   18759 030719 Susan Davy 050813 7555  693.00p 6617 ii 58  040816 270814 7543  821.50p   7543 260817 270715 9809 791.00p   9809 260718 040716  12524 950.14p   12524 030719 Ian McAulay 300913 16091  696.00p 18087 iii 150  290916 270814 7775  821.50p 7775 iv 63  260817 270715 12779 791.00p 12779 iv 104  260718 040716  12526 950.14p 12526 iv 102  030719 i A portion of Susan Davys share awards are those she received in her previous position as finance and regulatory director South West Water up to 31 January 2015 in which she retains an interest in her position as Chief Financial Officer. ii These shares were released on 25 August 2016 at 882.01p per share.
Executive share options granted in 2013 pursuant to the ESOS in conjunction with the operation of the annual bonus plan were exercised by the Directors on 18 August 2016.
Further details are provided below.
Deferred bonus shares equivalent in value to the gain on the ESOS options were forfeited. iii Ian McAulays buyout award was released at the end of the threeyear restricted period on 30 September 2016 at 827.00p per share.
In addition 1996 shares were issued being the number of shares that could have been acquired with the amount of each cash dividend on the released shares during the restricted period. iv These shares were released on 6 January 2017 following cessation of Ian McAulays employment on 31 December 2016 at 815.55p per share.
ESOS options granted in conjunction with Ian McAulays 2014 bonus award lapsed upon his stepping down from the Board on 31 August 2016.
During the year the Directors received dividends on the above shares in accordance with the conditions of the bonus plan as follows Chris Loughlin 23026 Susan Davy 11259 Ian McAulay 9798.
Chris Loughlin received his dividend in the form of ordinary shares 40.7p each in the Company as a result of participation in the Companys scrip dividend alternative.
These shares are included in the figure given for the additional ordinary shares 40.7p each in the Company that he acquired since 31 March 2016 given on page 95.
The following Directors had a contingent interest in the number of options shown in the ordinary shares 40.7p each of the Company pursuant to the Companys ESOS.
Under the Companys new remuneration policy the ESOS has been removed and executive share options are no longer offered in conjunction with deferred bonus shares.
Date of award
1 April 2016
Exercised in year
Market price of each share on exercising
31 March 2017
Chris Loughlin 050813 4329  4329 693.00p 884.5p Susan Davy 050813 4329  4329 693.00p 884.5p Ian McAulay ii 270814 3651   821.50p i Susan Davys share options are those she received in her previous position as finance and regulatory director South West Water up to 31 January 2015 in which she retained an interest in her position as Chief Financial Officer. ii Ian McAulays ESOS options lapsed following his stepping down from the Board on 31 August 2016.
97 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 d Sharesave scheme Details of options to subscribe for ordinary shares 40.7p each of the Company under the allemployee Sharesave scheme were Date of award
1 April 2016
Exercised in year
Market price of each share on exercising Market value of each share at 31 March 2017
31 March 2017
Chris Loughlin 030713 2788   538.00p  811.00p 2788 010918  280219 240615 2196   683.00p  811.00p 2196 010920  280221 Susan Davy 240615 2635   683.00p  811.00p 2635 010918  280219 The Remuneration Committee and its advisers Martin Angle Committee chairman Neil Cooper and Gill Rider were members of the Committee throughout the year and at any time when the Committee considered any matter relating to Directors remuneration during the year.
During the year the Committee received advice or services which materially assisted the Committee in the consideration of remuneration matters from Sir John Parker Chairman of the Board Helen BarrettHague Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Adele Barker interim Group director of Human Resources and from Deloitte LLP.
Deloitte LLP was appointed directly by the Committee.
Deloitte LLP assisted in the remuneration policy review for Executive Directors and in calculating the Companys total shareholder return compared with two comparator groups for the Companys longterm incentive plan as well as providing advice on remuneration trends and market practice.
Deloitte LLPs fees in respect of advice which materially assisted the Committee during 201617 were 88330 arrived at from an hourly rate basis of charging.
During the year Deloitte LLP also provided tax corporate finance and risk advisory services to the Group.
Deloitte LLP is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Committee is satisfied that the advice it has received from Deloitte LLP has been objective and independent.
Statement of voting at general meeting The table below sets out the voting by the Companys shareholders on the resolution to approve the Directors remuneration report at the Annual General Meeting held on 1 July 2016 including votes for against and withheld.
Annual report on remuneration 2016 AGM For % including votes at the Chairmans discretion 97.49 Against % 2.51 Withheld number 218770 Remuneration policy 2014 AGM For % including votes at the Chairmans discretion 97.11 Against % 2.89 Withheld number 264354 A vote withheld is not counted in the calculation of the proportion of votes for and against a resolution.
The Remuneration Committee is pleased to note that over 97% of shareholders who voted approved the 201516 Directors remuneration report.
The Committee appreciates the continuing support of its shareholders.
Annual report on remuneration continued 98 Governance Directors remuneration report compliance This Directors remuneration report has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
It also complies with the requirements of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules and the Disclosure and Transparency Rules.
The UK Corporate Governance Code also sets out principles of good governance relating to directors remuneration and this report describes how these principles are applied in practice.
The Committee confirms that throughout the financial year the Company has complied with these governance rules and best practice provisions.
The above regulations also require the external auditor to report to shareholders on the audited information within the annual report on remuneration which is part of the Directors remuneration report.
The external auditor is obliged to state whether in its opinion the relevant sections have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
The external auditors opinion is set out on page 112 and the audited sections of the annual report on remuneration are identified in this report.
On behalf of the Board Martin D Angle Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 23 May 2017 99 Directors report other statutory disclosures
This Directors report is prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and regulations made thereunder.
It comprises pages 54 to 73 and 100 to 103 as well as the following matters which the Board considers are of strategic importance and as permitted by legislation has chosen to include in the strategic report rather than the Directors report risk management systems page 46 of the strategic report likely future developments of the Company pages 24 and 25 of the strategic report important postbalance sheet events page 25 of the strategic report certain employee matters page 18 and 19 of the strategic report as well as the disclosures below.
In addition there are a number of disclosures which are included in the Directors report by reference including financial risk management note 3 of the notes to the financial statements financial instruments page 42 of the strategic report and notes 2o and 18 of the notes to the financial statements.
Board of Directors The Directors in office as at the date of this report all of whom served during the year are named on pages 56 and 57.
In addition Ian McAulay who was Chief Executive Viridor and an Executive Director of Pennon Group plc served during the year until his resignation from the Board on 31 August 2016.
Financial results and dividend The Directors recommend a final dividend of 24.87 pence per ordinary share to be paid on 1 September 2017 to shareholders on the register on 7 July 2017 making a total dividend for the year of 35.96 pence the cost of which will be 149.5 million resulting in a transfer to reserves of 14.8 million.
The strategic report on pages 38 to 45 analyses the Groups financial results in more detail and sets out other financial information.
Directors insurance and indemnities The Directors have the benefit of the indemnity provisions contained in the Companys Articles of Association Articles and the Company has maintained throughout the year Directors and officers liability insurance for the benefit of the Company the Directors and its officers.
The Company has entered into qualifying third party indemnity arrangements for the benefit of all its Directors in a form and scope which comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and which were in force throughout the year and remain in force.
Employment policies and employee involvement The Group has a culture of continuous improvement through investment in people at all levels within the Group.
The Group is committed to pursuing equality and diversity in all its employment activities including recruitment training career development and promotion and ensuring there is no bias or discrimination in the treatment of people.
In particular applications for employment are welcomed from persons with disabilities and special arrangements and adjustments as necessary are made to ensure that applicants are treated fairly when attending for interview or for preemployment aptitude tests.
Wherever possible the opportunity is taken to retrain people who become disabled during their employment in order to maintain their employment within the Group.
Information regarding the Groups workplace policies is provided on page 18.
The Board has a diversity policy and encourages gender diversity in particular.
Further details of the Boards diversity policy are set out in the report of the Nomination Committee on page 71 and information regarding the diversity of the workforce is provided on page 19.
Employees are consulted regularly about changes which may affect them either through their trade unionappointed representatives through consultation groups or by means of the elected staff council which operates in South West Water for staff employees.
These forums together with regular meetings with particular groups of employees are used to ensure that employees are kept up to date with the business performance of their employer and the financial and economic factors affecting the performance of the Group.
The Group also cascades information monthly to all employees to provide them with important and up to date information about key events and to obtain feedback from them.
Further information about employment matters relating to the Group is set out on pages 18 and 19 of the strategic report.
The Group encourages share ownership among its employees by operating an HM Revenue and Customs approved Sharesave scheme and Share Incentive Plan.
Following shareholder approval at the 2014 AGM these were amended to provide for the increased savings limits approved by government.
At 31 March 2017 around 41% of the Groups employees were participating in these plans.
Greenhouse gas emissions Change in emissions Gross greenhouse gas emissions for the Group this year increased by 14% primarily as a result of Viridors newly commissioned energy recovery facilities reaching their full operating capacity.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Viridors energy recovery facilities burn waste that would otherwise have gone to landfill.
This has the double benefit of extracting more of the energy embedded in the waste and substituting energy generated from other predominantly fossil fuel sources.
There has been a 4% reduction yearonyear in emissions from the Groups landfill sites and a similar percentage increase in renewable energy generation across the Group.
All Group companies benefitted from a reduction in the UKs average electricity grid emissions conversion factor which fell sharply by 11% between 201516 and 201617.
This resulted in an overall reduction in the Groups Scope 2 emissions over the year and saw both South West Water and Bournemouth Water record lower overall emissions than in the previous year.
South West Water recorded an increase in emissions from energy usage associated with the provision of drinking water services driven by an unusually dry year.
The companys water resources models signalled the need to protect water resources that would normally be toppedup naturally from rainfall.
As a result additional raw water was pumped into reservoirs over the winter period to ensure sufficient water supplies would be available for the subsequent summer period.
A corresponding reduction in emissions from energy usage was seen in the waste water side of the business as the lack of rainfall meant less surface water runoff ended up in the sewer system and needed to be pumped.
For the second year in succession the Groups gross Scope 1 and 2 emissions are growing at a faster rate than our revenue.
This is reflected in the emissions intensity measure we use of tCO 2 e100000 revenue.
This indicator has increased this year from 112tCO2 e100000 to 127tCO2 e100000.
Methodology and approach We have adopted the equity share approach for Viridor companies.
This means that emissions from joint venture operations can be accurately attributed to the company in proportion to the percentage of Viridors holding.
The remaining companies in the Group continue to use the financial control approach.
This is the conventional method for parent companies and subsidiaries within a group that have the ability to direct financial and operating policies and retain the majority of the organisations risk and rewards.
Quantification and reporting We have followed the Governments guidelines for mandatory greenhouse gas emissions reporting published by DEFRA in June 2013 and updated in October 2013.
In calculating our emissions we have used the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition and the web based conversion factors provided by DEFRA.
Market and Location based methodology In 2015 the Greenhouse Gas Protocol introduced the marketbased and locationbased methodologies for reporting Scope 2 emissions from imported energy.
This change of reporting guidance allows organisations that contractually purchase electricity from generators where the supply is backed by appropriate certificates or other instruments to use an emission factor that is specific to the electricity being purchased.
No such qualifying supply was procured by Pennon Group companies for 201617 and therefore we have decided to continue to report using only the locationbased methodology this year we intend to review this approach again next year.
Organisational boundary The emissions listed here cover the Pennon Group of companies each of which uses the financial control approach except where Viridor use an equity share approach where a joint venture exists.
Operational Scopes We have measured our Scope 1 2 and certain Scope 3 emissions where information is available.
Intensity measurement We have chosen an intensity measure of Scope 1 and 2 gross emissions in tCO 2 e per 100000 revenue External assurance statement Our greenhouse gas emissions data has been independently verified by Strategic Management Consultants.
Certain aspects that relate to the disclosures of South West Water and Bournemouth Waters emissions have been subject to an independent audit of regulatory data conducted by CH2M.
The assumptions methods and procedures that are followed in the development of the reported data have been tested and the data audited for accuracy and consistency.
Carbon offsets We rely on selfgenerated renewable energy to reduce our overall Scope 2 emissions and supplement this with power purchase contracts with third parties for renewable energy through private wire where it is available near our sites.
Renewable energy export Pennon Group selfgenerates more electricity than it uses and much of its renewable electricity generation is exported to the grid.
We account for this exported renewable electricity in our net emissions measure where we subtract emissions credits up to the limit of our gross volume of Scope 2 emissions.
Pennon Group plc greenhouse gas emissions 201617 201516 Scope 1 1576428 1351192 Scope 2 144707 157089 Scope 3 60760 56764 Total gross emissions 1781895 1565044 Green tariff electricity offset 1774 2041 Exported renewable energy reduction up to total amount of electricity purchased and consumed by organisation 142933 155048 Total annual net emissions 1637188 1407955 Biogenic emissions outside of scopes 1692423 1767878 Intensity measure tCO2e gross Scope 12100000 revenue 127.1 112 Scope 1 direct emissions Activities owned or controlled by our organisation that release emissions straight into the atmosphere for example the combustion of fuels in companyowned and controlled stationary equipment and transportation emissions from site based processes and sitebased fugitive emissions.
Scope 2 indirect emissions Emissions released into the atmosphere associated with our consumption of purchased electricity heat steam and cooling.
These are indirect emissions that are a consequence of our activities but which occur at sources we do not own or control.
Scope 3 other indirect emissions Emissions that are a consequence of our actions which occur at sources which we do not own or control and which are not classed as Scope 2 emissions.
Governance Human rights and antislavery The Group is fully supportive of the principles set out in the UN Declaration of Human Rights and the Group Ethics Policy outlines the high standards of employment practice with which everyone in Pennon Group is expected to comply.
The Group also supports the International Labour Organizations core conventions for the protection and safety of workforces wherever they may be throughout the Group.
The Groups commitment to ensuring the human rights of its employees are not infringed extends to those of its suppliers.
Supplier codes of conduct are in place to ensure that people are treated fairly and with respect and dignity.
In addition we have in place policies and procedures to assess monitor and reduce the risk of modern slavery and human trafficking occurring in our businesses and supply chains.
Risk assessments of any high risk supply partners have been completed by Viridor South West Water and Bournemouth Water to ensure compliance with the Modern Slavery Act across the Group and our antislavery and human trafficking webbased statement for the year is available at site Research and development Research and development within the Group involving water and waste treatment processes amounted to 0.2 million during the year 201516 0.1 million.
Overseas branches The Company has no overseas branches.
Pennon Group donations During 201617 the Group provided a total of 136000 in charitable donations No political donations were made or political expenditure incurred and no contributions were made to a nonEU political party 201516 nil.
Purchase of own ordinary shares The Company has authority from shareholders to purchase up to 10% of its own ordinary shares as renewed at the Annual General Meeting in 2016 which was valid as at 31 March 2017 and remains currently valid.
No purchases were made during the year.
As at 1 April 2016 10356 shares were held in treasury with a nominal value of 4215 and representing 0.003% of issued share capital.
1913 treasury shares representing 0.0005% of issued share capital as at 1 April 2016 were reissued during the year under the Companys Executive Share Option Scheme for proceeds of 13257.
Disclosures required by publicly traded companies The following disclosures are made pursuant to Part 6 of Schedule 7 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 and Rule 7.2.6.
Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR.
As at 31 March 2017 Details of the Companys issued share capital which consists of ordinary shares of nominal value 40.7 pence each are set out in note 33 to the financial statements on page 160.
All of the Companys issued shares are fully paid up rank equally in all respects and are listed on the Official List and traded on the London Stock Exchange.
The rights and obligations attaching to the Companys shares in addition to those conferred on their holders by law are set out in the Companys Articles copies of which can be obtained from Companies House in the UK or by writing to the Group Company Secretary at the Companys registered office There are no restrictions on the transfer of issued shares of the Company or on the exercise of voting rights attached to them except where the Company has exercised its right to suspend their voting rights or to prohibit their transfer following the omission of their holder or any person interested in them to provide the Company with information requested by it in accordance with Part 22 of the Companies Act 2006 or where their holder is precluded from exercising voting rights by the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules or the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers.
There are no persons with special rights regarding control of the Company.
No shares issued under the employee share schemes have rights with regard to control of the Company that are not exercisable directly by the employees Details of significant direct or indirect holdings of securities of the Company are set out in the shareholder analysis on page 175.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders which may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights The Companys rules about the appointment and replacement of Directors are contained in the Articles and accord with usual English company law provisions.
The powers of Directors are determined by UK legislation and the Articles in force from time to time.
Changes to the Articles must be approved by the Companys shareholders by passing a special resolution The Directors have the power to make purchases of the Companys own shares in issue as set out above.
The Directors also have the authority to allot shares up to an aggregate nominal value of i 55978817 such amount to be reduced by any shares allotted or rights granted under ii below in excess of 55978817 and ii 111957635 by way of a rights issue such amount to be reduced by any shares allotted or rights granted from i above which was approved by shareholders at the 2016 Annual General Meeting AGM.
In addition shareholders approved a resolution giving the Directors a limited authority to allot shares for cash other than pro rata to existing shareholders.
These resolutions remain valid until the conclusion of this years
Similar resolutions will be proposed at this years AGM.
The
Directors have no present intention to issue ordinary shares other than pursuant to the Companys employee share schemes and the scrip dividend alternative Directors report other statutory disclosures continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 f There are a number of agreements which take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid such as bank loan agreements eurobond documentation hybrid capital securities documentation private placement debt and employees share plans.
This may result in certain funding agreements being altered or repaid early.
The impact on employees share plans is not considered significant and There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Going concern Having considered the Groups funding position and financial projections the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resource to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report the Directors remuneration report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for the year.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates which are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements.
The Directors confirm that they have complied with the above requirements in preparing the financial statements.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the International Accounting Standards IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 56 and 57 confirms that to the best of his or her knowledge The financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and of the Company.
The strategic report pages 1 to 51 and the Directors report pages 100 to 103 include a fair review of the development and performance of the business during the year and the position of the Company and the Group at the year end together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties they face.
Following receipt of advice from the Audit Committee that the annual report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website site Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Statement as to disclosure of information to the auditor So far as each of the Directors in office at the date of the signing of the report is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and ii each of the Directors has taken all the steps each Director ought to have taken individually as a Director in order to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
The Directors report consisting of pages 54 to 73 and 100 to 103 was approved by the Board on 23 May 2017.
By Order of the Board Helen BarrettHague Group Company Secretary 23 May 2017 Governance Our business continues to grow supported by ongoing investment in our assets Capital investment in South West Water up from 134.1m in previous year Capital investment in Viridor up from 182.8m in previous year This includes improving and future proofing our services with projects such as the Mayflower Water Treatment Works in Plymouth and generating growth through the expansion of our fleet of Energy Recovery Facilities with four new plants due to be operational in Avonmouth Beddington Dunbar and Glasgow by 2020.
Skelmersdale
Recycling Facility Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements and shareholder information 106 Independent auditors report 114 Financial statements 173 Fiveyear financial summary 174 Shareholder information
Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Pennon Group plc Our opinion on the financial statements In our opinion Pennon Group plcs Group financial statements and Parent Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union What we have audited Pennon Group plcs financial statements comprise Group Parent Company Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Balance sheet Balance sheet Statement of changes in equity Statement of changes in equity Cash flow statement Cash flow statement Related notes 1 to 44 to the financial statements Related notes 1 to 44 to the financial statements The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Parent Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Overview of our audit approach Risks of material misstatement  Valuation of noncurrent assets Viridor Valuation of landfill related provisions Viridor Revenue recognition across the Groups operations Valuation of the provision for doubtful debts SWW Completeness of provisions for uncertain tax positions and tax disclosures Group including SWW and Viridor.
Audit scope  We performed a full scope audit of three components The components where we performed full scope audit procedures accounted for 100% of Profit before taxation before nonunderlying items 100% of Revenue and 96% of Total assets.
Materiality  Overall Group materiality of 12.5 million which represents approximately 5% of Profit before taxation before nonunderlying items.
Union as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Our assessment of risks of material misstatement We identified the risks of material misstatement described below as those that had the greatest effect on our overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and direction of the efforts of the audit team.
In addressing these risks we have performed the procedures below which were designed in the context of the financial statements as a whole and consequently we do not express any opinion on these individual areas.
Risk Risk direction Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Valuation of noncurrent assets Viridor Refer to the Audit Committee report page 63 accounting policies page 119 and note 17 of the consolidated financial statements page 139 The net book value of Viridors property plant and equipment is 1121 million 2016 1012 million as included in note 17.
The Group is required to review the carrying value of assets when impairment indicators are identified.
There is risk that assumptions and judgements used by management in determining whether there are any impairment indicators or in performing impairment reviews when required could be susceptible to management bias.
During the year as part of the Groupwide Shared Services Review a decision to rationalise systems resulted in the derecognition of system related assets and a related charge to the income statement of 9.5 million.
There is a risk that judgements used to calculate the derecognition charge could include management bias.
Our procedures include We read managements paper on impairment indicators for other noncurrent assets and evaluated whether indicators have been appropriately considered and assessed judgements for evidence of management bias We compared the current year performance of Viridor with the forecasts produced in the prior year to corroborate managements assessment in relation to indicators of impairment We inspected other external publicly available information on sector developments such as EU led recycling targets to corroborate managements assessment relating to indicators of impairment We obtained managements analysis of the asset derecognition costs and discussed with management the methods applied to allocate costs and assess enduring values of the assets We tested a sample of supporting information including breakdowns of costs incurred and documentation relating to process design and specification to evidence the key judgements made by management in calculating the asset derecognition charge We reperformed managements calculation of the derecognition charge to test for arithmetical accuracy We tested whether the amounts retained in noncurrent assets reflected items that have a continuing use in the business by agreeing to supporting documentation on a sample basis We agreed whether disclosures made both in the respect of the consideration of impairment and of the derecognition charge are in accordance with IFRS.
We concluded that the assessment performed by management to identify any impairment indicators is appropriate.
We concur with managements conclusion that no indicators exist at the balance sheet date.
We concluded that based on the evidence obtained we concur with the approach adopted and the charge recorded in the income statement.
Valuation of landfill related provisions
Refer to the Audit Committee report page 63 accounting policies page 119 and note 32 of the consolidated financial statements page 157 Landfill related provisions of 183.8 million 2016 182.1 million are disclosed in note 32 and consist of aftercare restoration and remediation provisions.
Calculation of the aftercare provision involves significant judgement in respect of the expected period of aftercare the level of costs to be incurred and the discount rate to be used.
Key areas of estimation for the restoration provision include the expected restoration costs the void space to be filled and timing of site closure.
Judgement over the remedial action required to comply with current environmental legislation is a key estimate for the remediation provision.
There is a risk that provisions could be misstated due to the complexity of factors to be assessed and if assumptions applied by management are inappropriate including the impact of any management bias.
Our procedures include We evaluated the forecast costs in the models agreeing these to supporting evidence such as budgets and current performance We assessed the material estimates made for evidence of management bias including agreeing anticipated cost savings to detailed plans and current performance We benchmarked the discount and inflation rates applied using our internal valuation experts to assist in our review of whether managements assumptions are within an acceptable range based on comparative market data We performed sensitivity analysis on these key assumptions We tested the aftercare restoration and remediation provision models and verified that the models are arithmetically accurate We compared the key assumptions used in the current models to those used in the prior year and obtained evidence to corroborate that changes were appropriate.
This included obtaining evidence to support the impact of future planned technological changes We tested the appropriateness of journal entries impacting landfill related provisions particularly those raised close to the balance sheet date.
We concluded that the assumptions supporting the landfill related provisions reflect managements best estimates informed by latest external and internal data and consider that the provisions are within an acceptable range.
Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Pennon Group plc continued Risk Risk direction Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Revenue recognition across the Groups operations Refer to the Audit Committee report page 63 accounting policies page 119 and note 2 of the consolidated financial statements page 120 The Groups material revenue streams relate to the provision of water and sewerage services by South West Water and revenue generated from the renewable energy recycling and waste management services provided by Viridor.
ISAs UK and Ireland presume there is a risk of fraud relating to revenue recognition.
For the Group given targets associated to financial performance and pressures to meet market expectations there is an incentive to overstate revenue.
This risk over revenue recognition specifically arises in the following judgemental areas where there is opportunity to overstate revenue South West Water Income from measured water services requires an estimation of the amount of unbilled charges at the year end.
This is calculated using a combination of system generated information based on previous customer volume usage together with management judgements as to the likely impact on usage of factors such as recent weather patterns.
The accrued income balance at 31 March 2017 is 72.2 million 2016 67.8 million For unmeasured revenue the bills for each calendar year are raised in advance for the next financial year.
There is a risk that revenues are recorded in the incorrect period if the advance billing element is not properly excluded and carried forward in the balance sheet.
Our procedures include South West Water We obtained an understanding of the process for the supply of measured services meter reading and related billing in order to challenge the completeness of adjustments to reflect the accrual or deferral of revenue We tested key controls linked to system generated information relating to the estimation process for measured revenue We compared the accrued income to bills raised post year end for a sample of customers and compared managements history of estimating the accrued income balance to bills raised in the subsequent year We performed a walkthrough of the process for unmeasured revenue and the annual billing cycle We performed controls testing related to the calculation of system generated billing for unmeasured revenue We obtained details of the billing runs in February and March and assessed whether there were any other billing runs for unmeasured revenue that should be excluded from 201617 total revenue We corroborated the key assumptions and estimates made by management in recognising revenue by obtaining internal and external data on factors that influence demand from customers We tested whether revenue was recognised at the correct time in accordance with IFRS We performed analytical procedures by comparing revenue balances for the year against expectation and obtaining support for significant variances We tested a sample of transactions to underlying bills for both types of revenue In performing our journal testing we paid increased attention to entries impacting revenue focusing on nonsystem postings and those raised in the last two weeks of the year.
South West Water We concluded that the basis of calculation of the measured income accrual is appropriate.
Management assumptions in respect of customer demand are within an acceptable range.
Amounts identified as advance billing have been correctly recorded.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Risk Risk direction Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee
Calculations of accrued income on waste management contracts and powergen revenue to be received involve estimation by management Accounting for revenue from longterm service concession arrangements under IFRIC12 requires revenue to be recognised based on appropriate assessment of the margin earned during the construction period and during the operational period.
The determination of the margin allocated during the different phases of each service concession may involve management judgement Recognising revenue in the correct period for invoices raised close to the balance sheet date may involve management judgement.
Viridor
We compared the key assumptions and estimates to those made by management in recognising revenue in the prior year.
We analysed revenue trends and corroborated unusual movements.
We obtained customer confirmations for a sample of revenue For material items within accrued income we reperformed the calculation of the income that had been earned on waste management contracts and powergen revenue to confirm the accuracy of the accrued income recorded by management We tested the application of IFRIC12 in respect of construction revenue recognised and whether margins used to recognise revenue are reasonable based on the models used for each contract and comparing the margins to those generated in prior years and to latest projections for future years We agreed whether the revenue recognition policies adopted comply with IFRSs We performed cut off testing of invoices raised prior to and after the balance sheet date to ensure revenue has been recognised in the correct period In performing our journal testing we paid increased attention to entries impacting revenue particularly those raised close to the balance sheet date.
Viridor
We concluded that revenue has been recorded in the correct accounting period accrued income has been appropriately recognised and IFRIC 12 appropriately applied.
Valuation of the provision for doubtful debts South West Water Refer to the Audit Committee report page 63 accounting policies page 119 and note 22 of the consolidated financial statements page 145 As shown in note 22 there is a provision of 102.6 million 2016 95.6 million at the year end against gross trade debtors of 326.1 million 2016 303.6 million.
The South West Water provision is calculated using a combination of system generated information on historic debt recovery rates and managements judgement of the future likely recovery rates.
During the year management has performed a data mining exercise to refresh the detailed collection data by category of debt.
There is a risk that the assumptions used by management in calculating the bad debt provision may be susceptible to management bias and the valuation of the provision against trade receivables may be misstated.
Our procedures include We performed a walkthrough of the process for calculating the bad debt provision and assessed the design effectiveness of key controls.
We tested the operating effectiveness of key controls over the integrity of data and the report utilised to generate the ageing and categorisation of debt within South West Waters billing system We tested historic data on collection rates and evaluated how this data was used in the preparation of the bad debt provision We corroborated the assumptions used by management in determining the amounts provided against the different categories and age of debt by comparing these assumptions to historic collection rates and by considering the impact of changes in the methods adopted operationally by management to collect debt and in the external environment We utilised collection information over the past three years to determine a range of the likely ultimate collection of debts existing at the balance sheet date and compared this to the provision recorded by management including assessing assumptions for evidence of management bias We tested the appropriateness of journal entries and adjustments impacting the doubtful debt provision particularly those raised close to the balance sheet date.
We concluded that the doubtful debt provision is within an acceptable range and reflects recent history of collection of outstanding debts.
Financial statements Risk Risk direction Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Completeness of provisions for uncertain tax positions and related tax disclosures Group including SWW and Viridor Refer to the Audit Committee report page 63 accounting policies page 119 and note 27 of the consolidated financial statements page 148 The Groups current tax liability of 26.8 million 2016 37.1 million shown in note 27 includes 18.6 million 2016 37.1 million in respect of open tax computations relating to prior years where liabilities are yet to be agreed with HM Revenue and Customs HMRC.
Pennon has a number of open periods with HMRC as a result of ongoing enquiries into the interpretation of tax legislation regarding transactions undertaken by the Group.
In prior periods significant management judgement has been required in estimating tax expected to be paid in respect of these open periods.
However during the year the Group has reached resolution with HMRC on a number of areas.
This has reduced the level of uncertainty over the year end tax liability and therefore the risk of material misstatement has reduced.
Our procedures include We inspected the latest correspondence between the Group and HMRC We read legal advice or opinions management was obtained in the period in relation to uncertain tax positions in order to verify whether the level of provision is based on up to date legal advice in response to HMRCs challenges We obtained an updated view from our internal tax specialists as to HMRCs current position on open matters We assessed the level of provision maintained for uncertain tax positions in light of the settlement proposal agreed with HMRC and consideration of other open uncertain tax positions We tested whether the tax accounting and disclosures in note 9 and 27 complied with the requirements of IAS12 Income Taxes We read the tax disclosures in the Annual Report and Accounts and evaluated the adequacy of these.
We concluded that the Group has recorded an appropriate provision for uncertain tax positions.
We concluded that the tax amounts and disclosures in the Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 are appropriate.
Independent auditors report to the members of Pennon Group plc continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 In the prior year our auditors report included a risk of material misstatement in relation to valuation of goodwill.
In the current year we concluded the likelihood of material misstatement has reduced as a further year of experience has provided management with more confidence that the business plan will be met and the impairment test is less sensitive to changes in assumptions.
The scope of our audit Tailoring the scope Our assessment of audit risk our evaluation of materiality and our allocation of performance materiality determine our audit scope for each entity within the Group.
Taken together this enables us to form an opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
We take into account size risk profile the organisation of the group and effectiveness of groupwide controls changes in the business environment and other factors such as recent internal audit results when assessing the level of work to be performed at each entity.
In assessing the risk of material misstatement to the Group financial statements and to ensure we had adequate quantitative coverage of significant accounts in the financial statements of the five reporting components of the Group we performed an audit of the complete financial information of three components full scope components which were selected based on their size or risk characteristics.
These components include Pennon Group plc Viridor and South West Water and represent the principal business units within the Group.
For the current year the full scope components contributed 100% 2016 100% of the Groups profit before taxation before nonunderlying items 100% 2016 100% of the Groups Revenue and 96% 2016 95% of the Groups Total assets.
The remaining two components individually and in aggregate represent less than 1% of the Groups profit before taxation before nonunderlying items.
For these components which include Peninsula Insurance and Peninsula Leasing we performed other procedures including analytical review procedures testing of consolidation journals and intercompany eliminations for each component to respond to potential risks of material misstatement to the Group financial statements.
Changes from the prior year There were two changes in scope from the prior year.
The first was that Bournemouth Water which was acquired by Pennon Group plc in April 2015 has merged with South West Water and therefore balances are included within the South West Water component which was designated as full scope for the current year audit.
The second change was that the scope determined for Peninsula Insurance was changed from review scope to other procedures reflecting the fact that with the growth in Group activities including profit before taxation before nonunderlying items this component is less than 1% of the Group.
Involvement with component teams We perform audit procedures for the Group and its components at the South West Water and Viridor locations.
The audit teams of Pennon Group plc and South West Water are led by the same audit partner.
A separate team audits Viridor and is led by a separate audit partner.
The Group team interacted regularly with all teams during various stages of the audit including review of key working papers review of work performed to address the risks of material misstatement and attendance at key meetings with management.
Our application of materiality We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
Materiality
The magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 12.5 million 2016 10 million which is 5% 2016 5% of profit before taxation before nonunderlying items.
We believe that profit before taxation before nonunderlying items provides us with an appropriate measure of the underlying performance of the Group.
We excluded nonunderlying items on the basis that these are infrequent in occurrence and profit before taxation after nonunderlying items is not indicative of the underlying performance of the Group.
We also note that market and analyst commentary on the performance of the Group uses the same measure.
We therefore considered profit before taxation before nonunderlying items to be the most relevant performance metric on which to base our materiality calculation.
Starting basis Reported profit before taxation 210.5 million 2016 206.3 million.
Adjustments Nonunderlying items  increase basis by 39.5 million 2016 5.0 million.
Materiality Totals 250.0 million 2016 211.3 million profit before taxation before nonunderlying items.
Materiality of 12.5 million 5% of profit before taxation before nonunderlying items.
Performance materiality The application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgement was that performance materiality was 75% 2016 75% of our planning materiality namely 9.4 million 2016 7.5 million.
This is based on our assessment of the Groups internal control environment and the extent and nature of audit findings identified in the prior period and is consistent with the prior year.
Audit work at component locations for the purpose of obtaining audit coverage over significant financial statement accounts is undertaken based on a percentage of total performance materiality.
The performance materiality set for each component is based on the relative scale and risk of the component to the Group as a whole and our assessment of the risk of misstatement at that component.
In the current year the range of performance materiality allocated to components was 4.4 million to 8.4 million 2016 1.5 million to 7.1 million.
Reporting threshold An amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all uncorrected audit differences in excess of 0.6 million 2016 0.5 million which is set at 5% of planning materiality as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the Parent Companys circumstances and have been Financial statements consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report and Accounts to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 103 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception ISAs UK and Ireland reporting We are required to report to you if in our opinion financial and nonfinancial information in the annual report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to report whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired in the course of performing the audit and the directors statement that they consider the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the entitys performance business model and strategy and whether the annual report appropriately addresses those matters that we communicated to the audit committee that we consider should have been disclosed.
We have no exceptions to report.
Companies Act 2006 reporting In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have identified no material misstatements in the Strategic Report or Directors Report.
We are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have no exceptions to report.
Listing Rules review requirements We are required to review the directors statement in relation to going concern set out on page 103 and longerterm viability set out on page 51 and the part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the companys compliance with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review.
We have no exceptions to report.
Independent auditors report to the members of Pennon Group plc continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 ISAs UK and Ireland reporting We are required to give a statement as to whether we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to the directors confirmation in the annual report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures in the annual report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors statement in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements and the directors explanation in the annual report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the entity will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
Debbie OHanlon Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
23 May 2017
The maintenance and integrity of the Pennon Group plc website is the responsibility of the directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the web site.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Financial statements Consolidated income statement For the year ended 31 March 2017
Before nonunderlying items
Total
Before nonunderlying items
Total
Revenue 5 1353.1  1353.1 1352.3  1352.3 Operating costs 7 Employment costs 179.7 1.1 180.8 180.0 8.6 188.6 Raw materials and consumables used 115.8  115.8 114.7  114.7 Other operating expenses 571.6 9.6 581.2 609.2 1.6 610.8 Earnings before interest tax depreciation and Depreciation and amortisation 7 181.4  181.4 186.6  186.6 Finance income 8 36.3 16.0 52.3 42.1 5.2 47.3 Finance costs 8 95.1 44.8 139.9 96.2  96.2 Net finance costs 8 58.8 28.8 87.6 54.1 5.2 48.9 Share of posttax profit from joint ventures 20 4.2  4.2 3.6  3.6 Profit before tax 5 250.0 39.5 210.5 211.3 5.0 206.3 Taxation chargecredit 9 58.4 28.4 30.0 72.1 34.1 38.0 Profit for the year 191.6 11.1 180.5 139.2 29.1 168.3 Attributable to Ordinary shareholders of the parent 175.4 11.1 164.3 123.0 29.1 152.1 Perpetual capital security holders 16.2  16.2 16.2  16.2 Earnings per ordinary share pence per share 11 Basic 39.8 37.0 Diluted 39.6 36.9 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income For the year ended 31 March 2017
Before nonunderlying items
Total
Before nonunderlying items
Total
Profit for the year 191.6 11.1 180.5 139.2 29.1 168.3 Other comprehensive loss income Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement of defined benefit obligations 30 23.6  23.6 2.6  2.6 Income tax on items that will not be reclassified 9 31 4.7 1.4 3.3 0.6 3.0 2.4 Total items that will not be reclassified to profit Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Share of other comprehensive income from joint ventures 20 0.3  0.3 2.4  2.4 Cash flow hedges 4.9  4.9 5.0  5.0 Income tax on items that may be reclassified 9 31 1.0 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.8 1.8 Total items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss 4.2 0.3 3.9 6.4 0.8 5.6 Other comprehensive loss income for the year net of tax 36 14.7 1.7 16.4 4.4 3.8 0.6 Total comprehensive income for the year 176.9 12.8 164.1 143.6 25.3 168.9 Total comprehensive income attributable to Ordinary shareholders of the parent 160.7 12.8 147.9 127.4 25.3 152.7 Perpetual capital security holders 16.2  16.2 16.2  16.2 The notes on pages 119 to 172 form part of these financial statements.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Balance sheets At 31 March 2017 Group Company
Assets
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 15 385.0 385.0 Other intangible assets 16 67.1 63.8 Property plant and equipment 17 4103.2 3897.3 0.2 0.1 Other noncurrent assets 19 308.0 267.8 1011.6 905.5 Deferred tax assets 31   2.3 2.2 Derivative financial instruments 23 73.6 62.7 3.1 1.3 Investments in subsidiary undertakings 20   1624.2 1628.3 Investments in joint ventures 20 0.1 0.1 4937.0 4676.7 2641.4 2537.4 Current assets Inventories 21 21.3 20.6 Trade and other receivables 22 340.8 323.5 127.3 77.4 Derivative financial instruments 23 14.1 9.5 1.1 0.5 Cash and cash deposits 25 598.1 632.2 372.5 429.7
Current liabilities Financial liabilities at fair value through profit 24 2.4 2.2 Derivative financial instruments 23 17.3 17.4 2.1 2.7 Trade and other payables 26 286.5 264.6 6.3 5.9 Current tax liabilities 27 26.8 37.1 37.9 53.5 Provisions 32 40.4 50.4 Net current assets 454.4 549.1 96.8 158.3 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 28 3116.5 3051.6 848.2 877.1 Other noncurrent liabilities 29 180.7 113.2 53.0 8.7 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit 24 48.4 51.0 1.4 1.6 Derivative financial instruments 23 25.2 38.5 1.3 9.1 Retirement benefit obligations 30 68.0 40.9 4.1 3.0 Deferred tax liabilities 31 269.6 272.0 Provisions 32 173.8 171.0 3882.2 3738.2 908.0 899.5 Net assets 1509.2 1487.6 1830.2 1796.2 Shareholders Equity Share capital 33 168.4 167.8 168.4 167.8 Share premium account 34 217.4 213.3 217.4 213.3 Capital redemption reserve 35 144.2 144.2 144.2 144.2 Retained earnings and other reserves 36 684.4 667.5 1005.4 976.1 Total shareholders equity 1214.4 1192.8 1535.4 1501.4 Perpetual capital securities 37 294.8 294.8 294.8 294.8 Total equity 1509.2 1487.6 1830.2 1796.2 The profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders equity dealt within the accounts of the parent Company is 162.9 million 2016 91.4 million.
The notes on pages 119 to 172 form part of these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 114 to 172 were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 23 May 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Chris Loughlin Chief Executive Officer Pennon Group plc Registered Office Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter Devon England EX2 7HR.
Registered in England Number .
Financial statements Statements of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March 2017
Share premium account note 34
Retained earnings and other reserves note 36
Total equity
At 1 April 2015 162.4 118.6 144.2 634.1 294.8 1354.1 Profit for the year    152.1 16.2 168.3 Other comprehensive income for the year    0.6  0.6 Total comprehensive income for the year    152.7 16.2 168.9 Transactions with equity shareholders Dividends paid    129.5  129.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative 0.3 0.3  6.3  6.3 Adjustment in respect of sharebased payments net of tax    2.5  2.5 Equity issuance 4.9 95.4    100.3 Equity issuance related costs  2.3    2.3 Distributions to perpetual capital security holders     20.3 20.3 Current tax relief on distributions to perpetual capital security holders     4.1 4.1 Own shares acquired by the Pennon Employee Share Trust in respect of share options granted    1.1  1.1 Proceeds from treasury shares reissued    2.5  2.5 Proceeds from shares issued under the Sharesave Scheme 0.2 1.9    2.1 Total transactions with equity shareholders 5.4 94.7  119.3 16.2 35.4 Profit for the year    164.3 16.2 180.5 Other comprehensive loss for the year    16.4  16.4 Total comprehensive income for the year    147.9 16.2 164.1 Transactions with equity shareholders Dividends paid    138.5  138.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative 0.3 0.3  6.9  6.9 Adjustment in respect of sharebased payments net of tax    3.2  3.2 Distributions to perpetual capital security holders     20.3 20.3 Current tax relief on distributions to perpetual capital security holders     4.1 4.1 Own shares acquired by the Pennon Employee Share Trust in respect of share options granted 0.1 1.2  2.6  1.3 Proceeds from shares issued under the Executive Share Option Scheme  0.2    0.2 Proceeds from shares issued under the Sharesave Scheme 0.2 3.0    3.2 Total transactions with equity shareholders 0.6 4.1  131.0 16.2 142.5 The notes on pages 119 to 172 form part of these financial statements.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Share capital note 33
Capital redemption reserve note 35
Perpetual capital securities note 37
Company
At 1 April 2015 162.4 118.6 144.2 1005.9 294.8 1725.9 Profit for the year note 10    91.4 16.2 107.6 Other comprehensive loss for the year    0.4  0.4 Total comprehensive income for the year    91.0 16.2 107.2 Transactions with equity shareholders Dividends paid    129.5  129.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative 0.3 0.3  6.3  6.3 Equity issuance 4.9 95.4    100.3 Equity issuance related costs  2.3    2.3 Distributions to perpetual capital security holders     20.3 20.3 Current tax relief on distributions to perpetual capital security holders     4.1 4.1 Adjustment in respect of sharebased payments net of tax    0.7  0.7 Charge in respect of share options vesting    0.8  0.8 Proceeds from treasury shares reissued    2.5  2.5 Proceeds from shares issued under the Sharesave Scheme 0.2 1.9    2.1 Total transactions with equity shareholders 5.4 94.7  120.8 16.2 36.9 Profit for the year note 10    162.9 16.2 179.1 Other comprehensive loss for the year    1.1  1.1 Total comprehensive income for the year    161.8 16.2 178.0 Transactions with equity shareholders Dividends paid    138.5  138.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative 0.3 0.3  6.9  6.9 Distributions to perpetual capital security holders     20.3 20.3 Current tax relief on distributions to perpetual capital security holders     4.1 4.1 Adjustment in respect of sharebased payments net of tax    1.2  1.2 Charge in respect of share options vesting    2.1  2.1 Own shares acquired by the Pennon Employee Share Trust in respect of share options granted  0.2    0.2 Proceeds from shares issued under the Executive Share Option Scheme 0.1 1.2    1.3 Proceeds from shares issued under the Sharesave Scheme 0.2 3.0    3.2 Total transactions with equity shareholders 0.6 4.1  132.5 16.2 144.0 At 31 March 2017 168.4 217.4 144.2 1005.4 294.8 1830.2 The notes on pages 119 to 172 form part of these financial statements.
Financial statements Cash flow statements For the year ended 31 March 2017 Group Company
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generatedoutflow from operations 38 431.5 371.3 159.0 41.7 Interest paid 38 76.4 79.1 39.1 35.3 Net cash generatedoutflow from operating activities 318.7 247.2 206.5 87.7 Cash flows from investing activities Interest received 14.5 14.9 49.6 51.3 Dividends received 44 4.5 6.0 247.0 140.7 Investments in subsidiary undertakings    100.3 Loan repayments received from joint ventures 0.3 27.5 Acquisitions net of cash acquired  91.0 Purchase of property plant and equipment 354.1 283.7 0.2 0.1 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 4.1 6.8 0.1 Net cash used inreceived from investing activities 330.7 319.5 296.5 91.6 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from treasury shares reissued 33  2.5  2.5 Proceeds from issuance of ordinary shares 4.7 100.1 4.7 100.1 Purchase of ordinary shares by the Pennon Employee Share Trust 2.6 1.1 Return deposit of restricted funds 2.7 30.3 9.7 9.7 Proceeds from new borrowing 130.0 80.0  1.0 Repayment of borrowings 39.0 96.5  66.8 Finance lease sale and lease back 60.7 30.4 Finance lease principal repayments 24.0 38.4 Dividends paid 131.6 123.2 131.6 123.2 Perpetual capital securities periodic return 37 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 Net cash used in financing activities 19.4 96.8 137.5 116.4 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 31.4 169.1 47.5 112.5 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the year 25 405.7 574.8 420.0 532.5 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year 25 374.3 405.7 372.5 420.0 The notes on pages 119 to 172 form part of these financial statements.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the financial statements General information Pennon Group plc is a company registered in the United Kingdom under the Companies Act 2006.
The address of the registered office is given on page During 201617 Pennon Groups business was operated through two main subsidiaries.
South West Water Limited includes the merged water companies of South West Water and Bournemouth Water providing water and wastewater services in Devon Cornwall and parts of Dorset and Somerset and water only services in parts of Dorset Hampshire and Wiltshire.
Viridor Limiteds business is recycling energy recovery and waste management.
Principal accounting policies The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to the years presented.
These financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost accounting basis except for fair value items principally acquisitions transfers of assets from customers and certain financial instruments as described in accounting policy notes b w and o respectively and in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and interpretations of the IFRS Interpretations Committee as adopted by the European Union and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
A summary of the principal accounting policies is set out below together with an explanation where changes have been made to previous policies on the adoption of new accounting standards and interpretations in the year.
The going concern basis has been adopted in preparing these financial statements as stated by the Directors on page 103.
The new standards or interpretations which were mandatory for the first time in the year beginning 1 April 2016 did not have a material impact on the net assets or results of the Group.
It is anticipated that adoption of the following standard could impact the Groups future results as set out below IFRS 16 Leases no longer distinguishes between an on the balance sheet finance lease and an off the balance sheet operating lease.
Instead for virtually all lease contracts the lessee recognises a lease liability reflecting future lease payments and a rightofuse asset.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and is subject to EU endorsement.
The Directors anticipate that the adoption of IFRS 16 on 1 April 2019 will affect primarily the accounting for the Groups operating leases.
As at the reporting date the group has noncancellable operating lease commitments of 143 million see note 41.
The Group is assessing the extent to which these commitments will result in the recognition of an asset and a liability for future payments and how this will affect the groups profit and classification of cash flows.
Existing borrowing covenants are not impacted by changes in accounting standards.
Other new standards or interpretations in issue but not yet effective including IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers and IFRS 9 Financial instruments are not expected to have a material impact on the Groups net assets or results.
The Group financial statements include the results of Pennon Group plc and its subsidiaries joint ventures and associate undertakings.
The results of subsidiaries joint ventures and associate undertakings are included from the date of acquisition or incorporation and excluded from the date of disposal.
The results of subsidiaries are consolidated where the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
The results of joint ventures and associate undertakings are accounted for on an equity basis.
Intragroup trading loan balances and transactions are eliminated on consolidation.
The acquisition method of accounting is used to account for the purchase of subsidiaries.
The excess of the value transferred to the seller in return for control of the acquired business together with the fair value of any previously held equity interest in that business over the Groups share of the fair value of the identifiable net assets is recorded as goodwill.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Principal accounting policies continued c Revenue recognition Revenue represents the fair value of consideration receivable in the ordinary course of business for the provision of goods and services to customers and is recognised to the extent that it can be reliably measured and that it is probable that economic benefits will flow to the Group.
Revenue excludes value added tax trade discounts and revenue arising from transactions between Group companies.
Revenue includes landfill tax.
In respect of ongoing continuous services to customers such as the provision of drinking water and wastewater services revenue is recognised in line with the customer using those services.
Where applicable this includes both billed amounts for estimated usage and an estimation of the amount of unbilled usage at the period end.
Revenue in respect of construction services on longterm contracts including the provision of service concession arrangements is recognised based on the fair value of work performed during the year with reference to the total sales value and the stage of completion of those services.
Where a contract with a customer includes more than one service such as a longterm service concession arrangement revenue for each service is recognised in proportion to a fair value assessment of the total contract value split across the services provided.
Revenue in respect of goods such as recyclate is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer.
For other services encompassing waste management services revenue is recognised once the services have been provided to the customer.
Revenue from the sale of electricity from our generating assets is measured based upon metered output delivered at rates specified under contract terms or prevailing market rates as applicable.
Payments received in advance of services provided are held within liabilities.
Landfill tax is recognised in both revenue and operating costs at the point waste is disposed of at a licensed landfill site.
Each of the Groups business segments provides services which are subject to risks and returns which are different from those of the other business segments.
The Groups internal organisation and management structure and its system of internal financial reporting are based primarily on business segments.
The reportable business segments comprise the water business which includes the regulated water and wastewater services undertaken by South West Water and the waste management business of Viridor.
Segmental revenue and results include transactions between businesses.
Intersegmental transactions are eliminated on consolidation.
Goodwill arising on consolidation from the acquisition of subsidiary undertakings represents the excess of the purchase consideration over the fair value of net assets acquired less any subsequent impairment charges.
Goodwill is recognised as an asset and reviewed for impairment at least annually.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the income statement and is not subsequently reversed.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to each of the cash generating units or group of cash generating units that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Each unit or group of units to which goodwill is allocated represents the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for internal reporting purposes.
Goodwill is allocated and monitored at the reportable operating segment level.
Further details are contained in accounting policy j.
When a subsidiary undertaking is sold the profit or loss on disposal is determined after including the attributable amount of unamortised goodwill.
Other intangible assets are recognised in relation to longterm service concessions contracts to the extent that future amounts to be received are not contracted.
Other intangible assets include assets acquired in a business combination and are capitalised at fair value at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition finite life intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives with the expense charged to the income statement through operating costs.
Infrastructure assets were included at fair value on transition to IFRS and subsequent additions are recorded at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment charges.
Expenditure to increase capacity or enhance infrastructure assets is capitalised where it can be reliably measured and it is probable that incremental future economic benefits will flow to the Group.
The cost of daytoday servicing of infrastructure components is recognised in the income statement as it arises.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Infrastructure assets are depreciated evenly over their useful economic lives and are principally Dams and impounding reservoirs 200 years Water mains 40  120 years Sewers 40  120 years Assets in the course of construction are not depreciated until commissioned.
Landfill sites are included within land and buildings at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Cost includes acquisition and development expenses.
The cost of a landfill site is depreciated to its residual value which is linked to gas production at the site postclosure over its estimated operational life taking account of the usage of void space.
Where the obligation to restore a landfill site is an integral part of its future economic benefits a noncurrent asset within property plant and equipment is recognised.
The asset recognised is depreciated based on the usage of void space.
Other assets are included at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Freehold land is not depreciated.
Other assets are depreciated evenly to their residual value over their estimated economic lives and are principally Land and buildings  freehold buildings 30  60 years Land and buildings  leasehold buildings Over the estimated economic lives or the finance lease period whichever is the shorter Operational properties 40  80 years Energy recovery facilities including major refurbishments 25  40 years Fixed plant 20  40 years Vehicles mobile plant and computers 3  10 years Assets in the course of construction are not depreciated until commissioned.
The cost of assets includes directly attributable labour and overhead costs which are incremental to the Group.
Borrowing costs directly attributable to the construction of a qualifying asset an asset necessarily taking a substantial period of time to be prepared for its intended use are capitalised as part of the asset.
Assets transferred from customers are recognised at fair value as set out in accounting policy v.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed annually.
Gains and losses on disposal are determined by comparing sale proceeds with carrying amounts.
These are included in the income statement.
Assets held under finance leases are included as property plant and equipment at the lower of their fair value at commencement or the present value of the minimum lease payments and are depreciated over their estimated economic lives or the finance lease period whichever is the shorter.
The corresponding liability is recorded as borrowings.
The interest element of the rental costs is charged against profits using the actuarial method over the period of the lease.
Rental costs arising under operating leases are charged against profits on a straightline basis over the life of the lease.
Assets with an indefinite useful life are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment or whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Assets subject to amortisation or depreciation are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which an assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows cash generating units.
Value in use represents the present value of projected future cash flows expected to be derived from a cash generating unit discounted using a pretax discount rate which reflects an assessment of the market cost of capital of the cash generating unit.
Impairments are charged to the income statement in the year in which they arise.
Nonfinancial assets other than goodwill that have been impaired are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date.
Where a previously impaired asset or cash generating units recoverable amount is in excess of its carrying amount previous impairments are reversed to the carrying value that would have expected to be recognised had the original impairment not occurred.
Investments in subsidiary undertakings are initially recorded at cost being the fair value of the consideration paid.
Subsequently investments are reviewed for impairment on an individual basis annually or if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be fully recoverable.
Joint ventures are entities over which the Group exercises joint control.
Investments in joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method of accounting.
Any excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups share of the fair values of the identifiable net assets of the joint venture at the date of acquisition is recognised as goodwill and is included in the carrying value of the investment in the joint venture.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Principal accounting policies continued The carrying value of the Groups investment is adjusted for the Groups share of postacquisition profits or losses recognised in the income statement and statement of comprehensive income.
Losses of a joint venture in excess of the Groups interest are not recognised unless the Group has a legal or constructive obligation to fund those losses.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
The cost of finished goods and work in progress includes raw materials and the cost of bringing stocks to their present location and condition.
It excludes borrowing costs.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price less cost to sell.
Cash and cash deposits comprise cash in hand and shortterm deposits held at banks.
Bank overdrafts are shown within current borrowings.
The Group classifies its financial instruments in the following categories i Loans and receivables All loans and borrowings are initially recognised at fair value net of transaction costs incurred.
Following initial recognition interestbearing loans and borrowings are subsequently stated at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Gains and losses are recognised in the income statement when instruments are derecognised or impaired.
Premia discounts and other costs and fees are recognised in the income statement through the amortisation process.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the balance sheet date.
Trade receivables do not carry any interest receivable and are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due in accordance with the original terms of the receivables.
Trade payables are not interestbearing and are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Where the provision of waste management services is performed through a contract with a public sector entity which controls a significant residual interest in asset infrastructure at the end of the contract then consideration is treated as contract receivables split between profit on the construction of assets operation of the service and the provision of finance which is recognised in notional interest within finance income.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments principally interest rate swaps foreign exchange forward contracts and crosscurrency interest rate swaps to hedge risks associated with interest rate and exchange rate fluctuations.
Derivative instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date the derivative contract is entered into and subsequently remeasured at fair value for the reported balance sheet.
The Group designates certain hedging derivatives as either a hedge of a highly probable forecast transaction or change in the cash flows of a recognised asset or liability a cash flow hedge or a hedge of the exposure to change in the fair value of a recognised asset or liability a fair value hedge.
The gain or loss on remeasurement is recognised in the income statement except for cash flow hedges which meet the conditions for hedge accounting when the portion of the gain or loss on the hedging instrument which is determined to be an effective hedge is recognised directly in equity and the ineffective portion in the income statement.
The gains or losses deferred in equity in this way are subsequently recognised in the income statement in the same period in which the hedged underlying transaction or firm commitment is recognised in the income statement.
In order to qualify for hedge accounting the Group is required to document in advance the relationship between the item being hedged and the hedging instrument.
The Group is also required to document and demonstrate an assessment of the relationship between the hedged item and the hedging instrument which shows that the hedge will be highly effective on an ongoing basis.
This effectiveness testing is reperformed at the end of each reporting period to ensure that the hedge remains highly effective.
Where a nonderivative transaction or series of transactions with the same counterparty has the aggregate effect in substance of a derivative instrument the transaction or series of transactions shall be recognised as a single derivative instrument at fair value with associated movements recorded in the income statement.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 The full fair value of a hedging derivative is apportioned on a straightline basis between noncurrent and current assets and liabilities based on the remaining maturity of the hedging derivative.
Derivative financial instruments deemed held for trading which are not subject to hedge accounting are classified as a current asset or liability with any change in fair value recognised immediately in the income statement.
The Group uses crosscurrency swaps for some of its foreign currency denominated private placement borrowings.
The swaps either have the effect of i converting variable rate foreign currency borrowings into fixed rate sterling borrowings ii converting fixed rate foreign currency borrowings into fixed rate sterling borrowings or iii converting fixed rate foreign currency borrowings into floating rate sterling borrowings.
Financial instruments at fair value through profit reflect the fair value movement of the hedged risk on a hedged item which has been designated in a fair value hedging relationship.
The fair values of these financial instruments are initially recognised on the date the hedging relationship is entered into and thereafter remeasured at each subsequent balance sheet date.
The gain or loss on remeasurement for the period is recognised in the income statement.
The tax charge for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in the statement of comprehensive income or directly in equity.
In this case the tax is also recognised in the statement of comprehensive income or directly in equity as appropriate.
Current tax is calculated on the basis of tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Management periodically evaluates tax items subject to interpretation and establishes provisions on individual tax items where in the judgement of management the position is uncertain.
The Group includes a number of companies including the parent company which are part of a tax group for certain aspects of the tax legislation.
One of these aspects relates to group relief whereby current tax liabilities can be offset by current tax losses arising in other companies within the same tax group.
Payments for group relief are included within the current tax disclosures.
Deferred tax is provided in full on temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the tax base except where they arise from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the assets can be realised.
Deferred tax is determined using the tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and expected to apply when the deferred tax liability is settled or the deferred tax asset is realised.
Provisions are made where there is a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that there will be an outflow of economic benefits to settle this obligation and a reliable estimate of this amount can be made.
Where the effect of the time value of money is material the current amount of a provision is the present value of the expenditures expected to be required to settle obligations.
The unwinding of the discount to present value is included as notional interest within finance costs.
The Groups policies on specific provisions are i Landfill restoration costs Provisions for the cost of restoring landfill sites are made when the obligation arises.
Where the obligation recognised as a provision gives access to future economic benefits an asset in property plant and equipment is recognised.
Provisions are otherwise charged against profits based on the usage of void space.
Environmental control and aftercare costs are incurred during the operational life of each landfill site and for a considerable period thereafter.
Provision for all such costs is made over the operational life of the site and charged to the income statement on the basis of the usage of void space at the site.
Further provisions required after the operational life of a site are recognised immediately in the income statement.
Where the unavoidable costs of meeting a contracts obligations exceed the economic benefits derived from that contract the unavoidable costs less revenue anticipated under the terms of the contract are recognised as a provision and charged to the income statement.
An impairment loss on any assets dedicated to that contract is also recognised as described in accounting policy j.
Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Where the Company purchases the Companys equity share capital treasury shares the consideration paid including any directly attributable costs is deducted from equity until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently reissued any consideration received net of any directly attributable transaction costs is included in equity.
The Group balance sheet includes the shares held by the Pennon Employee Share Trust relating to employee sharebased payments which have not vested at the balance sheet date.
These are shown as a deduction from shareholders equity until such time as they vest.
Dividend distributions are recognised as a liability in the financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when paid final dividends when approved by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
The Group operates defined benefit and defined contribution pension schemes.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Principal accounting policies continued Defined benefit pension schemes The liability recognised in the balance sheet in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the year less the fair value of plan assets.
If the value of a plans assets exceeds the present value of its obligations the resulting surplus is only recognised if the Group has an unconditional right to that surplus.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated by independent actuaries who advise on the selection of Directors best estimates using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of high quality corporate bonds and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension obligation.
The increase in liabilities of the Groups defined benefit pension schemes expected to arise from employee service in the year is charged against operating profit.
Changes in benefits granted by the employer are recognised immediately as past service cost in the income statement.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to equity in the statement of comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
Defined contribution scheme Costs of the defined contribution pension scheme are charged to the income statement in the year in which they arise.
The Group has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
The Group operates a number of equitysettled sharebased payment plans for employees.
The fair value of the employee services required in exchange for the grant is recognised as an expense over the vesting period of the grant.
Fair values are calculated using an appropriate pricing model.
Nonmarketbased vesting conditions are adjusted for in assumptions as to the number of shares which are expected to vest.
Precontract and development costs including bid costs are expensed as incurred except where it is probable that the contract will be awarded or the development completed in which case they are recognised as an asset which is amortised to the income statement over the life of the contract.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is based on the market price to transfer the asset or liability at the balance sheet date in an ordinary transaction between market participants.
The fair values of shortterm deposits loans and overdrafts with a maturity of less than one year are assumed to approximate to their book values.
In the case of noncurrent bank loans and other loans the fair value of financial liabilities for disclosure purposes is estimated by discounting the future contractual cash flows at the current market interest rate available to the Group for similar financial instruments.
Where an item of property plant and equipment that must be used to connect customers to the network is received from a customer or where cash is received from a customer for the acquisition or construction of such an item that asset is recorded and measured on initial recognition at its fair value.
The credit created by the recognition of the asset is recognised in the income statement.
The period over which the credit is recognised depends upon the nature of the service provided as determined by the agreement with the customer.
Where the service provided is solely a connection to the network the credit is recognised at the point of connection.
If the agreement does not specify a period revenue is recognised over a period no longer than the economic life of the transferred asset used to provide the ongoing service.
The fair value of assets on transfer from customers is determined using a cost valuation approach allowing for depreciation.
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency are translated at the closing balance sheet rate.
The resulting gain or loss is recognised in the income statement.
Perpetual capital securities are issued securities that qualify for recognition as equity.
Accordingly any periodic returns are accounted for as dividends and recognised directly in equity and as a liability at the time the Company becomes obligated to pay the periodic return.
This reflects the nature of the periodic returns and repayment of principal being only made at the Companys discretion.
Any associated tax impacts are recognised directly in equity.
Nonunderlying items are those that in the Directors view are required to be separately disclosed by virtue of their size nature or incidence to enable a full understanding of the Groups financial performance.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 3.
Financial risk management a Financial risk factors The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks liquidity risk market risk interest rate and foreign currency risk and credit risk.
The Groups treasury function seeks to ensure that sufficient funding is available to meet foreseeable needs and to maintain reasonable headroom for contingencies and manages inflation and interest rate risk.
The principal financial risks faced by the Group relate to liquidity interest rate and credit counterparty risk.
These risks and treasury operations are managed by the Chief Financial Officer in accordance with policies established by the Board.
Major transactions are individually approved by the Board.
Treasury activities are reported to the Board and are subject to review by internal audit.
Financial instruments are used to raise finance manage risk optimise the use of surplus funds and manage overall interest rate performance.
The Group does not engage in speculative activity.
The Group actively maintains a mixture of longterm and shortterm committed facilities which are designed to ensure the Group has sufficient available funds for operations and planned expansions equivalent to at least one years forecast requirements at all times.
Details of undrawn committed facilities and shortterm facilities are provided in note 28.
Refinancing risk is managed under a Group policy that requires that no more than 20% of Group net borrowings should mature in any financial year.
The Group and Water Business have entered into covenants with lenders.
While terms vary these typically provide for limits on gearing primarily based on the Water Businesss Regulatory Capital Value and Viridor Limiteds EBITDA plus interest receivable on service concession arrangements and interest cover.
Existing covenants are not impacted by subsequent changes to accounting standards.
Contractual undiscounted cash flows including interest payments at the balance sheet date were Due within 1 year Due between 1 and 2 years Due between 2 and 5 years
5 years
Group
31 March 2017 Nonderivative financial liabilities Borrowings excluding finance lease liabilities 116.0 181.5 258.5 1322.7 1878.7 Interest payments on borrowings 49.5 49.3 131.4 679.5 909.7 Finance lease liabilities including interest 44.3 43.0 202.3 2021.3 2310.9 Trade and other payables 286.5 44.3   330.8 Guarantees 187.5    187.5 Derivative financial liabilities Derivative contracts  net paymentsreceipts 8.6 7.0 4.1 74.8 66.3 31 March 2016 Nonderivative financial liabilities Borrowings excluding finance lease liabilities 39.0 116.1 327.5 1293.4 1776.0 Interest payments on borrowings 47.9 47.3 137.7 687.7 920.6 Finance lease liabilities including interest 41.1 45.0 175.5 2130.7 2392.3 Trade and other payables 264.6    264.6 Guarantees 159.7    159.7 Derivative financial liabilities Derivative contracts  net paymentsreceipts 8.3 6.1 2.2 67.0 50.4
31 March 2017 Nonderivative financial liabilities Borrowings excluding intercompany borrowings 74.9 149.5 148.1 511.5 884.0 Intercompany borrowings 282.9 39.1   322.0 Interest payments on borrowings 29.2 28.8 70.6 94.0 222.6 Trade and other payables 6.3 44.3   50.6 Guarantees 743.4    743.4 Derivative financial liabilities Derivative contracts  net payments 1.3 1.1   2.4 31 March 2016 Nonderivative financial liabilities Borrowings excluding intercompany borrowings  74.6 225.8 576.7 877.1 Intercompany borrowings 287.2    287.2 Interest payments on borrowings 30.4 29.7 76.7 122.4 259.2 Trade and other payables 5.9    5.9 Guarantees 580.8    580.8 Derivative financial liabilities Derivative contracts  net payments 1.1 1.0 0.7  2.8 No liability is expected to arise in respect of the guarantees noted above.
Guarantees are analysed in note 42.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Financial risk management continued ii Market risk The Group has a policy of maintaining at least 50% of interestbearing liabilities at fixed rates.
The Group uses a combination of fixed rate and indexlinked borrowings and fixed rate interest swaps as cash flow hedges of future variable interest payments to achieve this policy.
At the yearend 69% 2016 67% of Group net borrowings were at fixed rates including at least 50% of South West Waters borrowings after the impact of financial derivatives.
The notional principal amounts of the interest rate swaps are used to determine settlement under those swaps and are not therefore an exposure for the Group.
These instruments are analysed in note 23.
20% 2016 22% of the Groups net borrowings are RPI indexlinked.
The interest rate for indexlinked debt is based upon an RPI measure which is also used in determining the amount of income from customers in South West Water.
The Group has no significant interestbearing assets upon which the net return fluctuates from market risk.
Deposit interest receivable is expected to fluctuate in line with interest payable on floating rate borrowings.
Consequently the Groups income and cash generated from operations note 38 are independent of changes in market interest rates.
For 2017 if interest rates on variable net borrowings had been on average 0.5% higherlower with all other variables held constant posttax profit for the year and equity would have increaseddecreased by 0.3 million 2016 0.1 million for the equity sensitivity fair value with derivative impacts excluded.
For 2017 if RPI on indexlinked borrowings had been on average 0.5% higherlower with all other variables held constant posttax profit for the year and equity would have decreasedincreased by 1.9 million 2016 1.9 million.
Foreign currency risk occurs at transactional and translation level from borrowings and transactions in foreign currencies.
These risks are managed through forward contracts which provide certainty over foreign currency risk.
Credit counterparty risk arises from cash and cash deposits derivative financial instruments and exposure to customers including outstanding receivables.
Further information on the credit risk relating to trade receivables is given in notes 19 and 22.
Counterparty risk arises from the investment of surplus funds and from the use of derivative financial instruments.
The Board has agreed a policy for managing such risk which is controlled through credit limits counterparty approvals and rigorous monitoring procedures.
The Group has no other significant concentration of credit risk.
The Groups surplus funds are managed by the Groups treasury function and are usually placed in shortterm fixed interest deposits or the overnight money markets.
Deposit counterparties must meet board approved minimum criteria based on their shortterm credit ratings and therefore of good credit quality.
The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal capital structure to minimise the cost of capital.
The Groups policy is to have a minimum of 12 months prefunding of projected capital expenditure.
At 31 March 2017 the Group had cash and facilities including restricted funds of 1.4 billion meeting this objective.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group seeks to maintain a balance of returns to shareholders through dividends and an appropriate capital structure of debt and equity for each business segment and the Group.
The Group monitors capital on the basis of the gearing ratio.
This ratio is calculated as net borrowings divided by total capital.
Net borrowings are analysed in note 39 and calculated as total borrowings less cash and cash deposits.
Total capital is calculated as total shareholders equity plus net borrowings.
The gearing ratios at the balance sheet date were Net borrowings note 39 2664.9 2484.4 Total equity 1509.2 1487.6 Total capital 4174.1 3972.0 Gearing ratio 63.8% 62.5% Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 The Water segment is also monitored on the basis of the ratio of its net borrowings to Regulatory Capital Value RCV.
Ofwats optimum gearing for the K6 20152020 regulatory period is set at 62.5%.
Water Business Regulatory Capital Value 3290.6 3150.2 Net borrowings 2033.8 1880.0 Net borrowingsRegulatory Capital Value 61.8% 59.7% The Group has entered into covenants with lenders and while terms vary these typically provide for limits on gearing and interest cover.
The Group has been in compliance with its covenants during the year.
The Group uses the following hierarchy for determining the fair value of financial instruments by valuation technique quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities level 1 inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices level 2 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data that is unobservable inputs level 3.
The Groups financial instruments are valued principally using level 2 measures as analysed in note 23.
The fair value of financial instruments not traded in an active market for example overthecounter derivatives is determined by using valuation techniques.
A variety of methods and assumptions are used based on market conditions existing at each balance sheet date.
Quoted market prices or dealer quotes for similar instruments are used for longterm debt.
Other techniques such as estimated discounted cash flows are used to determine fair value for the remaining financial instruments.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is calculated as the present value of the estimated future cash flows.
The carrying values less impairment provision of trade receivables and payables are assumed to approximate to their fair values.
The fair value of financial liabilities principally environmental provisions is calculated as the present value of the estimated future cash flows.
Critical accounting judgements and estimates The Groups principal accounting policies are set out in note 2.
Management is required to exercise significant judgement and make use of estimates and assumptions in the application of these policies.
Estimates are based on factors including historical experience and expectations of future events that management believe to be reasonable.
However given the judgemental nature of such estimates actual results could be different from the assumptions used.
Estimates
Environmental and landfill restoration provisions Environmental control and aftercare costs are incurred during the operational life of each landfill site and for a considerable period thereafter.
The period of aftercare postclosure and the level of costs expected are uncertain and can vary significantly from site to site.
Key factors are the type of waste the speed at which it decomposes the volume of leachate requiring treatment and regulatory requirements specific to the site.
The amounts expected to be incurred are based on landfill site operating lives taking account of the anticipated decline in landfill activity.
The provisions are based on latest assumptions reflecting recent historic data and future cost estimates.
The aftercare provision is particularly sensitive to the estimated volumes of leachate and their associated cost together with the discount rate used to establish the provision.
The provisions are recognised in the financial statements at the net present value of the estimated future expenditure required to settle the Groups obligations.
A discount rate is applied to recognise the time value of money and is unwound over the life of the provision.
This is included in the income statement as a financial item within finance costs.
As at 31 March 2017 the Groups environmental and landfill restoration provisions were 183.8 million 2016 182.1 million note 32.
Where a restoration provision gives access to future economic benefits an asset is recognised and depreciated in accordance with the Groups depreciation policy.
As at 31 March 2017 these assets had a net book value of 14.3 million 2016 11.7 million note 17.
Retirement benefit obligations The Group operates defined benefit pension schemes for which actuarial valuations are carried out as determined by the trustees at intervals of not more than three years.
The last such valuation of the main scheme was as at 31 March 2016.
The pension cost and liabilities under IAS 19 are assessed in accordance with Directors best estimates using the advice of an independent qualified actuary and assumptions in the latest actuarial valuation.
The assumptions are based on member data supplied to the actuary and market observations for interest rates and inflation supplemented by discussions between the actuary and management.
The mortality assumption uses a schemespecific calculation based on CMI 2015 actuarial tables with an allowance for future longevity improvement.
The principal assumptions used to measure schemes liabilities sensitivities to changes in those assumptions and future funding obligations are set out in note 30.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Critical accounting judgements and estimates continued Estimates continued
The Groups current tax provision of 26.8 million reduced from 37.1 million in 201516 includes 18.6 million related to prior year tax items 2016 37.1 million.
In 201516 the Group reported significant judgement around uncertain tax items related to the interpretation of tax legislation regarding financial arrangements entered into in the normal course of business which could have resulted in a range of outcomes of additional liabilities of c20 million to a reduction in liabilities of 52 million.
Following engagement and subsequently resolution with HMRC across a number of areas achieved through a process designed to expedite outstanding tax matters these items are no longer an area of significant judgement and there is no such range related to ongoing uncertain tax items.
The Group has a small number of ongoing uncertain tax items related to capital allowances for expenditure incurred in the normal course of business where the Group has paid in full the tax HMRC interpret as due and therefore would receive up to 20 million 201516 70 million should these tax items be concluded in the Groups favour.
Service concession arrangements Consideration from public sector entities for the operation of waste management service concessions is treated as contract receivables or other intangible assets depending upon the right to receive cash from the asset.
At the balance sheet date the Group recognised contract receivables of 217.6 million 2016 201.9 million and other intangible assets of 61.3 million 2016 55.0 million in relation to its service concession arrangements.
Consideration relating to contract receivables is split between profit on the construction of assets operation of the service and provision of finance recognised as interest receivable.
Managements judgement is used in the allocation between these three elements this assessment reflects external market conditions according to the type of service provided and project specific cash flow expectations including the recovery of costs from the original contractor on our Glasgow concession.
Revenue recognition The Group recognises revenue at the time of delivery of services.
Payments received in advance of services delivered are recorded as liabilities.
South West Water raises bills and recognises revenue in accordance with its entitlement to receive revenue in line with the limits established by the Periodic Review pricesetting process.
For water and wastewater customers with water meters revenue recognised is dependent upon the volume supplied including an estimate of the sales value of units supplied between the date of the last meter reading and the yearend.
Estimated usage is based on historic data judgement and assumptions.
The accrued income balance in this area at the balance sheet date was 77.7 million 2016 67.8 million.
Viridor estimates income from certain contractual revenue streams based on tonnages cost and historic data which are dependent on agreement with the customer after the delivery of the service.
Revenue is accrued from the sale of electricity from our generating assets based upon metered output delivered at rates specified under contract terms or prevailing market rates as applicable.
The total accrued income balance in relation to these areas at the balance sheet date was 42.8 million 2016 37.8 million.
Provision for doubtful debts At the balance sheet date each subsidiary evaluates the collectability of trade receivables and records provisions for doubtful debts based on experience including comparisons of the relative age of accounts and consideration of actual writeoff history.
The actual level of debt collected may differ from the estimated levels of recovery.
As at 31 March 2017 the Groups current trade receivables were 321.6 million 2016 303.6 million against which 98.1 million 2016 95.6 million had been provided for impairment note 22.
Judgements
Impairment of nonfinancial assets In order to determine whether impairments or reversals of previous impairments are required for nonfinancial assets the Group assesses whether there are any indicators for further impairment or reversal during the year.
The assessment includes a review of changes in markets and discount rates over the year together with a review of CGU business performance against expectations.
The 201617 review concluded there were no indicators of further impairment or reversal.
Nonunderlying items In establishing which items are disclosed separately as nonunderlying to enable a full understanding of the Groups financial performance the Directors exercise their judgement in assessing the size nature or incidence of specific items.
See note 6 for further details.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 5.
Segmental information Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with internal reporting provided to the Chief Operating DecisionMaker which has been identified as the Pennon Group plc Board.
The earnings measures below are used by the Board in making decisions.
The water business comprises the regulated water and wastewater services undertaken by South West Water.
The waste management business is the recycling energy recovery and waste management services provided by Viridor.
Segment assets include goodwill and other intangible assets property plant and equipment inventories trade and other receivables and cash and cash deposits.
Segment liabilities comprise operating liabilities and borrowings and exclude taxation.
The other segment liabilities include the Companys financing arrangements and Group taxation liabilities.
Capital expenditure comprises additions to property plant and equipment including additions resulting from acquisitions through business combinations.
Revenue
Waste management 793.5 806.2 Other 12.8 12.0 Less intrasegment trading 14.2 12.9 1353.1 1352.3 Segment result Operating profit before depreciation amortisation and nonunderlying items EBITDA Waste management 138.3 116.5 Other 1.4 3.3 Operating profit before nonunderlying items Waste management 71.1 40.9 Other 1.9 3.6 Profit before tax and nonunderlying items Waste management 60.4 30.7 Other 15.7 14.9 Profit before tax Waste management 50.2 25.7 Other 27.1 20.1 Intrasegment transactions between and to different segments is under normal market based commercial terms and conditions.
Intrasegment revenue of the other segment is at cost.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Segmental information continued
Waste management
Eliminations
Group
Balance sheet 31 March 2017 Assets excluding investments in joint ventures 3495.0 2099.9 1856.8 1540.5 5911.2 Investments in joint ventures  0.1   0.1 Total assets 3495.0 2100.0 1856.8 1540.5 5911.3 Liabilities 2667.2 1697.4 1578.0 1540.5 4402.1 Net assets 827.8 402.6 278.8  1509.2 31 March 2016 Assets excluding investments in joint ventures 3385.8 1911.1 1715.9 1350.4 5662.4 Investments in joint ventures  0.1   0.1 Total assets 3385.8 1911.2 1715.9 1350.4 5662.5 Liabilities 2502.4 1513.2 1509.7 1350.4 4174.9 Net assets 883.4 398.0 206.2  1487.6 Segment liabilities of the water and waste management segments comprise of operating liabilities and borrowings.
The other segment liabilities include the Group taxation liabilities.
Notes
Water
Waste management
Group
Other information 31 March 2017 Amortisation of other intangible assets 7 0.5 2.7  3.2 Capital expenditure 17 190.9 186.5 0.1 377.5 Depreciation 7 113.5 64.6 0.1 178.2 Finance income before nonunderlying items 8 1.5 26.3 8.5 36.3 Finance costs before nonunderlying items 8 62.3 12.3 20.5 95.1 31 March 2016 Amortisation of other intangible assets 7 0.7 3.0  3.7 Capital expenditure including acquisitions 220.6 154.5 0.1 375.2 Depreciation 7 110.3 72.5 0.1 182.9 Finance income before nonunderlying items 8 3.0 28.2 10.9 42.1 Finance costs 8 61.8 12.3 22.1 96.2
United Kingdom 1287.6 1296.1 Rest of European Union 10.3 10.5 China 45.1 38.8 Rest of World 10.1 6.9 1353.1 1352.3 The Groups country of domicile is the United Kingdom and is the country in which it generates the majority of its revenue.
The Groups noncurrent assets are all located in the United Kingdom.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 6.
Nonunderlying items Nonunderlying items are those that in the Directors view are required to be separately disclosed by virtue of their size nature or incidence to enable a full understanding of the Groups financial performance in the year and business trends over time.
This presentation of results is consistent with internal performance monitoring.
Notes
Operating costs Restructuring costs Total operating costs 10.7 10.2 Remeasurement of fair value movement in derivatives Unwind of synthetic derivative Deferred tax change in rate Tax credit arising on nonunderlying items 9 7.1 1.0 Net nonunderlying charge credit 11.1 29.1 During the year a oneoff charge of 10.7 million was made relating to restructuring costs associated with the Groupwide Shared Services Review.
The 10.7 million charge consists of a 9.5 million noncash charge to other operating expenses relating to a rationalisation of systems leading to an asset derecognition and a 1.1 million charge to manpower costs and a 0.1 million charge to other operating costs in relation to restructuring provisions.
The charge is considered nonunderlying due to its size and nonrecurring nature.
Last year a oneoff charge of 10.2 million was made to the restructuring provision reflecting announced reorganisations across the Group.
In the year a credit of 16.0 million was recognised relating to noncash derivative fair value movements associated with derivatives that are not designated as being party to an accounting hedge relationship.
These movements are nonunderlying due to the nature of the item being market dependant and potentially can be significant in value size.
Since 2011 the Group has received a fixed interest rate on a 200 million financial asset and paid an indexlinked interest rate on a 200 million loan designed to improve the Groups overall interest rate performance.
The counterparty to both instruments was Peninsula MB Limited PMB.
In combination these instruments were accounted for as a derivative with a net interest income of 8 million p. c7 million in 201617 cash settled.
In periods of index underperformance losses arose in PMB which were group relieved with the Group.
Following a change in legislation which saw the value of the derivative to the Group moving from a liability of 4 million to a liability of c.
40 million the Group made the decision to exit the transaction.
On 10 February 2017 the Company unwound this transaction.
The derivative had been due to end in 2027 however following a change in the economic benefit of this derivative due to a change in legislation which impacted the derivatives future cash flows the Company exercised its option to unwind the transaction early.
The process for unwinding the derivative resulted in the Group acquiring a financial asset for 283 million and a financial liability for 239 million from Nomura Structured Holdings plc.
The counterparty to both these transactions was PMB.
Simultaneously the Company also acquired the remaining 25% of PMBs share capital from Nomura Structured Holdings plc for a consideration of 36000 with all PMBs liabilities being due to the Company from that point.
The Company has since settled these liabilities through intercompany transactions with PMB.
PMB has ceased all operating activities and will be liquidated in due course.
The net consideration due to Nomura Structured Holdings plc in respect of these transactions is 44 million with an agreed payment date of June 2018.
The impact for the Group is a net cost of 35 million post tax.
PMB is a private limited company incorporated in England and Wales on 5 December 2011 as a subsidiary of Nomura Structured Holdings plc part of the Nomura Group.
Prior to the transaction on 10 February 2017 PMBs share capital was 75% owned by the Company and 25% owned by Nomura Structured Holdings plc who had control of PMB for accounting purposes.
The group relief claimed by the Group has been treated as an uncertain tax item and has been substantially provided for over recent years.
Following the conclusion of discussions with HMRC no further amounts are required to be recognised by the Group.
A tax credit of 8 million relates to the overall cost to unwind this derivative transaction.
Post the unwind of the transaction the Groups interest will no longer include the c8 million p. charge will reduce by a similar amount.
The liability recognised is nonunderlying by its size and nature.
Following the enactment during the year the rate of corporation tax reduced from 18% to 17% from April 2020 resulting in a oneoff credit of 21.3 million being recognised in the income statement.
In addition a charge of 1.7 million has been recognised in the statement of comprehensive income and a credit of 0.1 million was recognised directly in equity.
Last year the rate of corporation tax reduced from 20% to 19% from April 2017 reducing further to 18% from April 2020 resulting in a oneoff credit of 33.1 million recognised in the income statement.
In addition a charge of 3.8 million was recognised in the statement of comprehensive income and a charge of 0.1 million was recognised directly in equity.
These movements are nonunderlying as are dependent on changes in UK tax law and are nonunderlying due to their size.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Operating costs
Employment costs before nonunderlying items 13 179.7 180.0 Raw materials and consumables 115.8 114.7 Other operating expenses before nonunderlying items include Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 7.5 4.3 Operating lease rentals payable Plant and machinery 17.2 16.9 Property 8.8 9.0 Research and development expenditure 0.2 0.1 Trade receivables impairment 22 7.4 8.4 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Owned assets 136.5 140.0 Under finance leases 41.7 42.9 Amortisation of other intangible assets 16 3.2 3.7 Operating costs include a 10.7 million charge 2016 10.2 million charge relating to nonunderlying items as detailed in note 6.
Fees payable to the Companys auditors in the year were Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for the audit of parent Company and consolidated financial statements 91 94 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for other services The audit of Companys subsidiaries 583 635 Audit related assurance services 50 50 Other nonaudit services 77 122 Total fees 801 901 Fees payable to the Companys auditors in respect of Pennon Group pension schemes Audit 32 30 Expenses reimbursed to the auditors in relation to the audit of the Group were 51000 2016 45000.
A description of the work of the Audit Committee is set out in its report on pages 63 to 66 which includes an explanation of how the auditors objectivity and independence are safeguarded when nonaudit services are provided by the auditors firm.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 8.
Net finance costs 2017 2016
Finance cost
Total
Finance cost
Total
Cost of servicing debt Bank borrowing and overdrafts 49.4  49.4 48.7  48.7 Interest element of finance lease rentals 31.9  31.9 33.5  33.5 Other finance costs 3.5  3.5 2.8  2.8 Interest receivable  3.2 3.2  6.3 6.3 Interest receivable on shareholder loans to joint ventures  10.2 10.2  10.7 10.7 Notional interest Interest receivable on service concession arrangements  16.1 16.1  16.7 16.7 Retirement benefit obligations 30 1.2  1.2 1.8  1.8 Unwinding of discounts in provisions 32 9.1  9.1 9.4  9.4 Net gains on derivative financial instruments arising from the combination of nonderivative instruments  6.8 6.8  8.4 8.4 Net finance cost before nonunderlying items 95.1 36.3 58.8 96.2 42.1 54.1 Nonunderlying items Fair value remeasurement of nondesignated derivative financial instruments providing commercial hedges 6  16.0 16.0  5.2 5.2 Unwind of synthetic derivative 6 44.8  44.8 Net finance cost after nonunderlying items 139.9 52.3 87.6 96.2 47.3 48.9 In addition to the above finance costs of 12.9 million 2016 9.4 million have been capitalised on qualifying assets included in property plant and equipment and other intangible assets.
Taxation
Notes
Before nonunderlying items 2017
Total 2017
Nonunderlying items note 6 Total 2016 Analysis of charge in year Current tax charge 39.5 9.4 30.1 32.9 1.7 31.2 Deferred tax  other 18.9 2.3 21.2 39.2 0.7 39.9 Deferred tax arising on change of rate of corporation tax  21.3 21.3  33.1 33.1 Total deferred tax charge credit 31 18.9 19.0 0.1 39.2 32.4 6.8 Tax charge for year 58.4 28.4 30.0 72.1 34.1 38.0 UK corporation tax is calculated at 20% 2016 20% of the estimated assessable profit for the year.
UK corporation tax is stated after a credit relating to prior year current tax of 1.8 million 2016 credit of 1.4 million and a prior year deferred tax charge of 1.1 million 2016 charge of 15.9 million.
The 2017 deferred tax credit includes a credit of 21.3 million 2016 charge includes a credit of 33.1 million reflecting a reduction in the rate of UK corporation tax.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Taxation continued The tax for the year differs from the theoretical amount which would arise using the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK 20% from Profit before tax 210.5 206.3 Profit before tax multiplied by the standard rate of UK corporation tax of 20% 2016 20% 42.1 41.3 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 1.3 1.6 Financial transaction deemed ineligible 10.7 12.0 Joint ventures profits not taxed 0.9 0.7 Change in rate of corporation tax 21.3 33.1 Adjustments to tax charge in respect of prior years 0.7 14.5 Depreciation charged on nonqualifying assets 1.9 2.4 Other 0.5 Tax charge for year 30.0 38.0 The average applicable tax rate for the year before nonunderlying items was 23% 2016 34%.
The reduction from 2016 reflects a higher charge for uncertain tax items in 2016.
The average applicable tax rate for the year after nonunderlying items was 14% 2016 18%.
In addition to the amounts recognised in the income statement the following tax charges and credits were also recognised Amounts recognised directly in other comprehensive income Deferred tax credit charge on defined benefit pension schemes 3.3 2.4 Deferred tax charge on cash flow hedges 1.3 1.8 Amounts recognised directly in equity Deferred tax credit charge on sharebased payments 0.3 0.3 Current tax credit on perpetual capital securities periodic return 4.1 4.1 Profit of the Parent Company Profit attributable to ordinary shareholders equity dealt within the accounts of the parent company 162.9 91.4 As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 no income statement or statement of comprehensive income is presented for the Company.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 11.
Earnings per share Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year excluding those held in the employee share trust note 36 which are treated as cancelled.
For diluted earnings per share the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue is adjusted to include all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The
Group has two types of dilutive potential ordinary shares  those share options granted to employees where the exercise price is less than the average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year and the contingently issuable shares under the Groups Performance and Coinvestment Plan and the deferred shares element of the Annual Incentive Bonus Plan to the extent that the performance criteria for vesting of the awards are expected to be met.
The weighted average number of shares and earnings used in the calculations were 2017 2016 Number of shares millions For basic earnings per share 413.0 410.9 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares from share options 1.9 1.8 For diluted earnings per share 414.9 412.7 Basic and diluted earnings per ordinary share Earnings per ordinary share before nonunderlying items and deferred tax are presented as the Directors believe that this measure provides a more useful comparison on business trends and performance since deferred tax reflects distortive effects of changes in corporation tax rates and the level of longterm capital investment.
Earnings per share have been calculated 2017 2016
Earnings per share Profit after tax Earnings per share
Diluted
Basic
Diluted
Statutory earnings 164.3 39.8 39.6 152.1 37.0 36.9 Deferred tax charge before nonunderlying items 18.9 4.5 4.6 39.2 9.5 9.5 Nonunderlying items net of tax 11.1 2.7 2.6 29.1 7.0 7.1 Earnings before nonunderlying items and deferred tax 194.3 47.0 46.8 162.2 39.5 39.3
Amounts recognised as distributions to ordinary equity holders in the year Interim dividend paid for the year ended 31 March 2016 10.46p 2015 9.98p per share 43.1 39.8 Final dividend paid for the year ended 31 March 2016 23.12p 2015 21.82p per share 95.4 89.7 Proposed dividends Proposed interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 11.09p per share 45.9 Proposed final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 24.87p per share 103.6 The proposed interim and final dividends have not been included as liabilities in these financial statements.
The proposed interim dividend for 2017 was paid on 4 April 2017 and the proposed final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
Financial statements 13.
Employment costs
Wages and salaries 157.1 158.0 Social security costs 16.6 15.3 Pension costs 30 18.8 20.1 Sharebased payments 33 2.9 2.8 Nonunderlying items 6 30 1.1 8.6 Total employment costs 196.5 204.8
Employment costs excluding nonunderlying items  consolidated income statement 179.7 180.0 Nonunderlying items  consolidated income statement 6 1.1 8.6 Capital schemes  property plant and equipment 15.7 16.2 Total employment costs 196.5 204.8 Details of Directors emoluments are set out in note 14.
There are no personnel other than Directors who as key management exercise authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Group.
2017 2016 Employees average full time equivalent number The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was Water 1589 1706 Waste management 3153 3230 Other 57 51 Group totals 4799 4987 The total number of employees at 31 March 2017 was 4788 2016 5033.
Directors emoluments Executive Directors Salary 1205 1152 Performancerelated bonus paid or payable 381 416 Sharebased payments 421 555 Other emoluments including payments in lieu of pension provision 312 258 NonExecutive Directors 471 529 2790 2910 The cost of sharebased payments represents the amount charged to the income statement as described in note 33.
The aggregate gains on vesting of Directors sharebased awards amounted to a total of 102000 2016 220000.
Total gains made by Directors on the exercise of share options were 17000 2016 2000.
Total emoluments include 476000 2016 1200000 payable to Directors for services as directors of subsidiary undertakings.
At 31 March 2017 one Director 2016 one is accruing retirement benefits under defined benefit pension schemes in respect of which the Group contributed 35000 2016 29000.
At 31 March 2017 no Director 2016 one is a member of the Groups defined contribution pension scheme in respect of which the Group contributed 40000 2016 52000.
At 31 March 2017 two Directors received payments in lieu of pension provision 2016 three.
More detailed information concerning Directors emoluments including pensions and the highest paid Director and share interests is shown in the Directors remuneration report on pages 74 to 99.
Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 15.
Goodwill
Cost
At 1 April 2015 339.3 Recognised on acquisition of subsidiaries 45.7 At 31 March 2016 385.0 At 31 March 2017 385.0 Carrying amount At 1 April 2015 339.3 At 31 March 2016 385.0 At 31 March 2017 385.0 Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the cash generating unit CGU expected to benefit from that business combination.
342.7 million of the goodwill balance is allocated to the waste management business with the remaining 42.3 million allocated to the water business representing the lowest levels at which goodwill is monitored and tested.
The acquisition of Peninsula MB Limited as detailed in note 6 did not give rise to the recognition of goodwill.
Impairment testing of goodwill The Group tests goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently if there are any indications that impairment may have arisen.
The recoverable amount of the water business segment for which goodwill was recognised on acquisition of Bournemouth Water in 2016 is assessed using level 2 fair value hierarchy techniques with reference to the market value of the merged water business using a market based observable premium to Regulated Capital Value.
The recoverable amount of the waste management segment to which the majority of goodwill is allocated is determined based on valueinuse calculations which under IAS 36 Impairment of Assets require the use of base cash flow projections that reflect reasonable and supportable assumptions with specific restrictions on the estimates to be used.
These include limitations on reflecting cash flows to take account of future cost restructuring or improvement or enhancement of asset performance.
Uncommitted projects are excluded.
Discount rates are required to be derived independently of the Groups capital structure and those used reflect managements prudent estimate of a rate that investors would require if they were to choose a similar investment ranging from 69% across the CGUs business activities.
The base cash flow projections have been derived from the Groups detailed budget and strategic plan projections.
These cover a period of seven years and are prepared as part of the annual planning cycle.
This period is believed to lead to a more realistic estimate of future cash flows than five years.
Longterm growth rates of 3% based on forecast of growth in waste management markets and the UK economy are applied to cash flows beyond the seven year period with overheads expected to grow at 1% based on ongoing efficiency expectations of 2% per annum.
These plans are based on detailed marketbymarket forecasts of projected volumes prices and costs for each business activity.
These forecasts reflect on an individual operational site basis numerous assumptions and estimates.
The key assumptions include anticipated changes in market size and volumes recyclate prices energy selling prices gate fees the level of future landfill tax and cost inflation.
Management has determined the value assigned to each assumption based on historical experience market surveys industry analysis and current legislation.
For business activities with an indefinite life a terminal growth rate has been used.
The results of tests performed during the year demonstrate significant headroom in all CGUs and it is judged that no reasonable change in the key assumptions would cause the carrying amount of the CGUs to exceed the recoverable amount.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Other intangible assets
Customer contracts
Other
Total
Acquired intangible assets
At 1 April 2015 48.1 32.7 0.2  81.0 Additions 6.9   0.3 7.2 Recognised on acquisition of subsidiaries  1.6  2.3 3.9 At 31 March 2016 55.0 34.3 0.2 2.6 92.1 Additions 6.5    6.5 At 31 March 2017 61.5 34.3 0.2 2.6 98.6 Accumulated amortisation At 1 April 2015  24.5 0.1  24.6 Charge for year  3.0 0.1 0.6 3.7 At 31 March 2016  27.5 0.2 0.6 28.3 Charge for year 0.2 2.4  0.6 3.2 At 31 March 2017 0.2 29.9 0.2 1.2 31.5 Carrying amount At 1 April 2015 48.1 8.2 0.1  56.4 At 31 March 2016 55.0 6.8  2.0 63.8 At 31 March 2017 61.3 4.4  1.4 67.1 Service concession arrangements once available for use are amortised over the useful life of each contract.
The average remaining life is 23 years 2016 24 years.
Customer contracts are amortised over the useful life of each contract which at acquisition ranged between two and 15 years.
The weighted average remaining life is two years 2016 three years.
Patents are amortised over their estimated useful lives which at acquisition was 13 years.
The average remaining life is nil years 2016 two years.
Other including computer software is amortised over the useful life of the assets which at acquisition was three years.
The average remaining life is two years 2016 two years.
The carrying values of other intangible assets are reviewed annually or when events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying amounts may not be fully recoverable.
During the year borrowing costs of 2.1 million 2016 2.1 million have been capitalised on qualifying assets at an average borrowing rate of 3.5% 2016 4.2%.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 17.
Property plant and equipment Land and buildings
Operational
Fixed and mobile plant vehicles and computers
Construction in progress
Group
Cost
At 1 April 2015 493.7 1641.5 649.6 2151.6 67.4 435.6 5439.4 Arising on acquisition 41.5 121.1 27.4 35.2  3.8 229.0 Assets adopted at fair value  6.6 0.8    7.4 Grants and contributions  5.5     5.5 Transfersreclassifications 7.5 43.1 14.8 425.9  491.3 At 31 March 2016 524.4 1824.9 693.5 2629.9 64.6 166.1 5903.4 Assets adopted at fair value  5.4 14.1 5.1   24.6 Grants and contributions  1.6     1.6 Transfersreclassifications 8.7 14.6 2.2 62.9  84.0 At 31 March 2017 539.4 1854.8 706.4 2734.2 71.7 372.3 6278.8 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2015 335.3 201.3 215.1 1059.4 49.5  1860.6 Charge for year 21.2 23.6 12.4 123.5 4.6  185.3 Impairment charge reversal for the year 36.0   36.0 At 31 March 2016 372.2 223.7 227.4 1129.9 52.9  2006.1 Charge for year 13.5 24.4 12.8 126.1 4.5  181.3 Disposals 1.0 1.3 0.2 9.3   11.8 At 31 March 2017 384.7 246.8 240.0 1246.7 57.4  2175.6 Net book value At 1 April 2015 158.4 1440.2 434.5 1092.2 17.9 435.6 3578.8 At 31 March 2016 152.2 1601.2 466.1 1500.0 11.7 166.1 3897.3 At 31 March 2017 154.7 1608.0 466.4 1487.5 14.3 372.3 4103.2 Of the total depreciation charge of 181.3 million 2016 185.3 million 1.6 million 2016 1.4 million has been charged to capital projects 1.5 million 2016 1.0 million has been offset by deferred income and 178.2 million 2016 182.9 million has been charged against profits.
Asset lives and residual values are reviewed annually.
During the year borrowing costs of 10.8 million 2016 7.3 million have been capitalised on qualifying assets at an average borrowing rate of 3.5% 2016 4.1%.
Groups of assets forming cash generating units are reviewed for indicators of impairment.
No indicators of impairment were identified during the year.
In 2016 an impairment of nonstrategic landfill sites of 60.9 million and a 60.9 million reversal of assets was recognised.
Asset lives are reviewed annually.
No significant changes were required in 201617.
In 201516 the annual review encompassing internal assessments and external benchmarking resulted in upper end of the range of useful lives for water mains and sewers increasing from 100 to 120 years and for Energy Recovery Facilities from 30 to 40 years.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Property plant and equipment continued Assets held under finance leases included above were
Operational
Fixed and mobile plant vehicles and computers
Total
Cost
At 31 March 2016 409.5 439.8 515.9 0.2 1365.4 At 31 March 2017 409.0 436.7 574.8 0.2 1420.7 Accumulated depreciation Net book amount Fixed and mobile plant vehicles and computers
Cost
At 1 April 2015 0.3 Additions 0.1 Disposals 0.1 At 31 March 2016 0.3 Additions 0.2 Disposals 0.2 At 31 March 2017 0.3 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2015 0.2 Charge for year 0.1 Disposals 0.1 At 31 March 2016 0.2 Charge for year Disposals 0.1 At 31 March 2017 0.1 Net book value At 1 April 2015 0.1 At 31 March 2016 0.1 At 31 March 2017 0.2 Asset lives and residual values are reviewed annually.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 18.
Financial instruments by category The accounting policies for financial instruments that have been applied to line items are Fair value Amortised cost
Derivatives used for fair value hedging
Derivatives not in a hedge accounting relationship Loans and receivables
Total
Group
31 March 2017 Financial assets Trade receivables 22     223.5 223.5 Other receivables 1922    314.3  314.3 Derivative financial instruments 23 6.2 2.8 78.7   87.7 Cash and cash deposits 25    598.1  598.1 Financial liabilities Borrowings 28    3263.0  3263.0 Derivative financial instruments 23  40.0 2.5   42.5 Trade payables 26     107.4 107.4 Other payables 2629     48.5 48.5 Total  40.0 2.5 3263.0 155.9 3461.4 31 March 2016 Financial assets Trade receivables 22     208.0 208.0 Other receivables 1922    283.0  283.0 Derivative financial instruments 23 1.8 3.4 67.0   72.2 Cash and cash deposits 25    632.2  632.2 Financial liabilities Borrowings 28    3116.6  3116.6 Derivative financial instruments 23  46.9 9.0   55.9 Trade payables 26     95.9 95.9 Total  46.9 9.0 3116.6 95.9 3268.4
31 March 2017 Financial assets Amounts owed by subsidiaries 1922    1137.7  1137.7 Other receivables 22    0.3  0.3 Derivative financial instruments 23 2.9 1.3    4.2 Cash and cash deposits 25    372.5  372.5 Total 2.9 1.3  1510.5  1514.7 Financial liabilities Amounts due to subsidiaries 26    0.8  0.8 Borrowings 28    1206.0  1206.0 Derivative financial instruments 23  3.4    3.4 Trade payables 26     0.2 0.2 Other payables 29     44.3 44.3 Total  3.4  1206.8 44.5 1254.7 31 March 2016 Financial assets Amounts owed by subsidiaries 1922    974.2  974.2 Other receivables 22    7.4  7.4 Derivative financial instruments 23 1.8     1.8 Cash and cash deposits 25    429.7  429.7 Total 1.8   1411.3  1413.1 Financial liabilities Amounts due to subsidiaries 26    0.3  0.3 Borrowings 28    1164.3  1164.3 Derivative financial instruments 23  7.6 4.2   11.8 Trade payables 26     0.3 0.3 Total  7.6 4.2 1164.6 0.3 1176.7 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Other noncurrent assets Noncurrent receivables Group Company Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   1011.6 905.1 Amounts owed by related parties note 44 87.2 78.3 Service concession arrangements 210.1 179.4 Other receivables 10.7 10.1  0.4 Noncurrent receivables were due Group Company Between 1 and 2 years 19.4 36.7 85.8 66.4 Over 2 years and less than 5 years 23.7 29.4 269.9 250.4 The fair values of noncurrent receivables were Group Company Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   1115.7 1000.5 Amounts owed by related parties 156.9 145.4 Service concession arrangements 210.1 179.4 Other receivables 10.7 10.1  0.4 377.7 334.9 1115.7 1000.9 The Group has a number of service concession arrangements with local authority clients in the waste management sector to build and operate recycling assets and energy recovery facilities.
The terms of the contracts including pricing and performance obligations are established at the outset and the contracts are typically for a duration of 25 years.
The assets revert to the local authority at the end of the contract.
At 31 March 2017 the average remaining duration of the service concession arrangements was 22 years.
The fair value of amounts owed by related parties is based on cash flows using a rate based on the borrowings rate of 2.25% 2016 2.50%.
The discount rate is equal to London Interbank Offered Rate plus an allowance to reflect an appropriate credit margin.
The effective interest rate on amounts owed by related parties was 12.5% 2016 12.3%.
Other receivables include site development and precontract costs of 4.1 million 2016 9.6 million.
There is no concentration of risk in noncurrent receivables.
A significant proportion of the debt is due from local government authorities or joint venture companies which principally operate under longterm local government authority contracts.
Investments
Subsidiary undertakings
At 1 April 2015 1523.6 Additions 104.7 At 31 March 2016 1628.3 Additions 100.0 Disposals 104.1 At 31 March 2017 1624.2 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 On 1 April 2016 the Company sold the entire share capital of Bournemouth Water Investments Limited to South West Water Limited for 104 million.
The consideration was satisfied through the Company subscribing for an additional 100 million of new share capital in South West Water Limited and transferring a 4 million loan due to Bournemouth Water Limited to South West Water Limited.
On 10 February 2017 the Company acquired the controlling interest in Peninsula MB Limited for 36000 bringing its shareholding of Peninsula MB Limiteds issued share capital to 100%.
The acquisition was a component of a wider transaction to unwind a historic derivative position as set out in note 6 to the financial statements.
Joint ventures
Group
At 1 April 2015 0.1 Share of posttax profit 3.6 Share of other comprehensive profit 2.4 Dividends received 6.0 At 31 March 2016 0.1 Share of posttax profit 4.2 Share of other comprehensive profit 0.3 Dividends received 4.5 At 31 March 2017 0.1 The recoverable amount of investments is determined based on valueinuse calculations which are set out in note 15.
Details of the Groups principal subsidiary joint venture and unconsolidated structured entity undertakings are set out in note 40.
The Groups joint ventures and associate listed below all have share capital consisting solely of ordinary shares which is held directly by the Group.
Name of Entity Place of business country of incorporation % of ownership
Lakeside Energy from Waste Holdings Limited England 50 Equity Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Holdings Limited England 50 Equity INEOS Runcorn TPS Holdings Limited England 20 Equity 1 Lakeside Energy from Waste Holdings Limited provides energy recovery facility services.
2 Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Holdings Limited is delivering the 25 year Greater Manchester Waste PFI contract which is a combined energy and renewable energy project.
3 INEOS Runcorn TPS Holdings Limited provides energy recovery facilities.
The Groups economic interest is 37.5% as set out in note 40.
The Groups joint ventures and associate are all private companies and there are no quoted market prices available for their shares.
Summarised financial information for the Groups joint ventures and associate Summarised balance sheet 2017 2016
Energy from Waste
Limited
Viridor Laing
Manchester
Holdings
Limited
INEOS
Runcorn
TPS
Holdings
Limited
Lakeside
Energy from Waste
Limited
Viridor Laing
Manchester
Holdings
Limited
INEOS
Runcorn
TPS
Holdings
Limited
Current
Cash and cash equivalents 13.5 63.2 40.0 14.4 61.2 24.3 Other current assets 10.5 4.2 6.7 9.5 27.4 17.5 Total current assets 24.0 67.4 46.7 23.9 88.6 41.8
Other current liabilities 4.6 35.9 13.8 3.7 43.2 11.4 Total current liabilities 4.6 35.9 13.8 3.7 43.2 11.4
Other liabilities 32.9 48.4 44.2 38.0 43.2 53.6 Total noncurrent liabilities 138.4 370.3 363.9 152.0 374.6 375.7 Net liabilities 1.3 34.9 47.5 9.2 40.4 55.6 Associated shareholder loans 17.1 80.3 100.9 17.8 73.6 94.6 Net debt excluding shareholder loans 74.9 178.4 178.8 81.8 196.6 203.2 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Investments continued Summarised statement of comprehensive income 2017 2016
Energy from Waste
Limited
Viridor Laing
Manchester
Holdings
Limited
INEOS
Runcorn
TPS
Holdings
Limited
Lakeside
Energy from Waste
Limited
Viridor Laing
Manchester
Holdings
Limited
INEOS
Runcorn
TPS
Holdings
Limited
Depreciation and amortisation 8.1 1.3 12.4 7.9 1.2 10.7 Interest receivable on service concession arrangements  22.5   23.4 Other net interest charge 8.2 27.5 29.7 9.0 29.6 30.0 Pretax profitloss 13.1  1.9 14.4 1.2 6.4 Income tax expenseincome 2.2 2.5 1.9 1.2 1.1 1.4 Posttax profitloss 10.9 2.5  13.2 0.1 7.8 Other comprehensive incomeloss 6.0 8.0 8.1 1.1 4.5 0.2 Total comprehensive incomeloss 16.9 5.5 8.1 14.3 4.4 8.0 Dividends paid by joint venture 9.0   12.0 The information above reflects the amounts presented in the financial statements of the joint ventures and associate adjusted for differences in accounting policies between the Group and the joint ventures and associate.
The information reflects 100% of the joint ventures and associate results and net liabilities.
Reconciliation of summarised financial information Reconciliation of the summarised financial information presented to the carrying amount of its interest in the joint ventureassociate.
2017 2016
Energy from Waste
Limited
Viridor Laing
Manchester
Holdings
Limited
INEOS
Runcorn
TPS
Holdings
Limited
Lakeside
Energy from Waste
Limited
Viridor Laing
Manchester
Holdings
Limited
INEOS
Runcorn
TPS
Holdings
Limited
Opening net liabilities 1 April 9.2 40.4 55.6 11.5 44.8 47.6 Profitloss for the year 10.9 2.5  13.2 0.1 7.8 Other comprehensive incomeloss 6.0 8.0 8.1 1.1 4.5 0.2 Dividends paid 9.0   12.0 Closing net liabilities 1.3 34.9 47.5  9.2 40.4 55.6 Interest in joint venture 0.7 17.4 17.8 4.6 20.2 20.9 Share of net liabilities not recognised 0.8 17.4 17.8 4.7 20.2 20.9 Carrying value 0.1   0.1 Net liabilities in excess of the Groups interest are not recognised unless the Group has a legal or constructive obligation to fund those liabilities.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 21.
Inventories
Group Company Raw materials and consumables 21.3 20.6 Trade and other receivables  current Group Company Trade receivables 321.6 303.6 Less provision for impairment of receivables 98.1 95.6 Net trade receivables 223.5 208.0 Amounts owed by related parties 17.0 17.9 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   126.1 69.1 Other receivables 15.6 14.3 0.4 7.4 Prepayments and accrued income 84.7 83.3 0.8 0.9 Trade receivables include accrued income relating to customers with water budget plans.
The Directors consider that the carrying amounts of trade and other receivables approximate to their fair value.
There is no concentration of credit risk in trade receivables.
The Group has a large number of customers who are dispersed and there is no significant loss on trade receivables expected that has not been provided for.
The Group has created IAS 39 portfolio provisions but cannot practicably identify which receivables specifically are the ones impaired.
It is Group policy to consider a receivable in a portfolio to which an impairment has been allocated on a collective basis as not being impaired for the purposes of IFRS 7 disclosures until the loss can be specifically identified with the receivable.
The ageing of trade receivables which are past due but not specifically impaired was
Past due 1  30 days 34.1 37.8 Past due 31  120 days 26.6 18.7 More than 120 days 148.2 148.8 The aged trade receivables above are taken directly from aged sales ledger records before deduction of credit balances and other adjustments.
The Groups operating businesses specifically review separate categories of debt to identify an appropriate provision for impairment.
South West Water Limited has a duty under legislation to continue to provide domestic customers with services regardless of payment.
The movement in the allowance for impairment in respect of trade receivables was At 1 April 95.6 86.8 Arising on acquisition  1.0 Provision for receivables impairment 7.4 8.4 Receivables written off during the year as uncollectable 4.9 0.6 At 31 March 98.1 95.6 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Derivative financial instruments Group Company Derivatives used for cash flow hedging Noncurrent assets 1.4 2.4 0.9 Current assets 4.8 1.0 0.4 Current liabilities 16.0 14.7 2.1 2.7 Noncurrent liabilities 24.0 32.2 1.3 4.9 Derivatives used for fair value hedging Noncurrent assets 2.2 1.3 2.2 1.3 Current assets 0.6 0.5 0.7 0.5 Current liabilities Noncurrent liabilities Derivatives not in a hedge accounting relationship Noncurrent assets 70.0 59.0 Current assets 8.7 8.0 Current liabilities 1.3 2.7 Noncurrent liabilities 1.2 6.3  4.2 The fair value of derivatives is split between current and noncurrent assets or liabilities based on the maturity of the cash flows.
The ineffective portion recognised in the income statement arising from hedging relationships was nil 2016 nil.
During the year a 10.8 million charge 2016 7.9 million was recognised in profit and loss relating to cash flow hedges previously recognised through other comprehensive income and recorded in the hedging reserve.
Interest rate swaps primarily cash flow hedges and fixed rate borrowings are used to manage the mix of fixed and floating rates to ensure at least 50% of Group net borrowings are at fixed rate.
At 31 March 2017 69% of Group net borrowings were at fixed rate 2016 67%.
At 31 March 2017 the Group had interest rate swaps to swap from floating to fixed rate and hedge financial liabilities with a notional value of 1078.0 million and a weighted average maturity of 2.9 years 2016 1078.0 million with 3.9 years.
The weighted average interest rate of the swaps for their nominal amount was 2.0% 2016 2.0%.
Derivatives deemed held for trading at 31 March 2016 included a derivative with a fair value of 4.2 million which did not qualify for hedge accounting under IAS 39 but was designed to improve the Groups overall interest rate performance.
During the year this derivative position was unwound as set out in note 6.
The periods for which cash flow hedges are expected to affect future profit or loss are as follows Due within 1 year Due between 1 and 2 years Due between 2 and 5 years Due over 5 years
Group
31 March 2017 Liabilities 16.0 12.1 11.3 0.6 40.0 31 March 2016 Liabilities 14.4 10.8 20.7 0.5 46.4
31 March 2017 Liabilities 2.1 1.3   3.4 31 March 2016 Liabilities 2.7 1.9 2.7 0.2 7.5 In addition the Group has cash flow hedges that are expected to affect future amounts recognised in property plant and equipment amounting to assets of 4.9 million 2016 2.9 million.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Valuation hierarchy The Group uses the following hierarchy for determining the fair value of financial instruments by valuation technique quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities level 1 inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices level 2 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data that is unobservable inputs level 3.
The fair value of financial instruments not traded in an active market level 2 for example overthecounter derivatives is determined by using valuation techniques.
A variety of methods and assumptions are used based on market conditions existing at each balance sheet date.
Quoted market prices or dealer quotes for similar instruments are used for longterm debt.
Other techniques such as estimated discounted cash flows are used to determine fair value for the remaining financial instruments.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is calculated as the present value of the estimated future cash flows.
The Groups financial instruments are valued principally using level 2 measures Group Company
Derivatives used for cash flow hedging 6.2 3.4 1.3 Derivatives used for fair value hedging 2.8 1.8 2.9 1.8 Derivatives not in a hedge accounting relationship 78.7 67.0 Total assets 87.7 72.2 4.2 1.8
Derivatives used for cash flow hedging 40.0 46.9 3.4 7.5 Derivatives not in a hedge accounting relationship 2.5 4.8 Total liabilities 42.5 51.7 3.4 7.5 Financial instruments valued using level 3 measures are valued by the counterparty using cash flows discounted at prevailing midmarket rates.
The fair value of such financial instruments is not significantly sensitive to unobservable inputs.
Group Company Level 3 inputs
Derivatives deemed held for trading  4.2  4.2 The following table presents the changes in level 3 financial instruments for the year Group Company Level 3 inputs At 1 April 4.2 3.6 4.2 3.6 Gains recognised in net finance costs 6.8 8.4 6.8 8.4 Unwind loss on financial instrument note 6 44.8  83.5 Amounts to be settled post unwind of financial instrument notes 6 and 29 44.3  44.3 Amounts settled during the year 2.1 9.0 36.6 9.0 At 31 March  4.2  4.2 Financial instruments at fair value through profit Group Company Current liabilities 2.4 2.2 Noncurrent liabilities 48.4 51.0 1.4 1.6 Financial instruments at fair value through profit reflect the fair value movement of the hedged risk on a hedged item which had been designated in a fair value hedging relationship.
Financial statements 25.
Cash and cash deposits Group Company Cash at bank and in hand 101.2 44.5 99.4 92.7 Shortterm bank deposits 78.0 31.1 78.0 31.1 Other deposits 418.9 556.6 195.1 305.9 Total cash and cash deposits 598.1 632.2 372.5 429.7 Group shortterm deposits have an average maturity of 1 day.
Group other deposits have an average maturity of 53 days.
Group other deposits include restricted funds of 223.8 million 2016 216.8 million to settle longterm lease liabilities note 28 and nil million 2016 9.7 million relating to letters of credit.
Restricted funds are available for access subject to being replaced by an equivalent valued security.
For the purposes of the cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents comprise Group Company Cash and cash deposits as above 598.1 632.2 372.5 429.7 Less deposits with a maturity of three months or more restricted funds 223.8 226.5  9.7 Trade and other payables  current Group Company Trade payables 107.4 95.9 0.2 0.3 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings   0.8 0.3 Amounts owed to joint ventures note 44 4.2 3.9 Other tax and social security 50.6 52.3 0.3 0.3 Accruals and other payables 124.3 112.5 5.0 5.0 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
Current tax liabilities Group Company Current year creditor 8.2 Prior year tax items 18.6 37.1 37.9 53.5 Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 28.
Borrowings
Group Company
Shortterm loans 74.9 0.3 74.9 European Investment Bank 41.1 38.7 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings note 44   282.9 287.2 Obligations under finance leases 30.5 26.0 Total current borrowings 146.5 65.0 357.8 287.2
Bank and other loans 328.8 403.2 248.6 323.3 Private placements 560.5 553.8 560.5 553.8 Bond 2040 133.6 133.3 RPI indexlinked bonds 416.4 412.2 European Investment Bank 323.4 234.5 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings note 44   39.1 1762.7 1737.0 848.2 877.1 Obligations under finance leases 1353.8 1314.6 Total noncurrent borrowings 3116.5 3051.6 848.2 877.1 Total borrowings 3263.0 3116.6 1206.0 1164.3 The Company issued a 100 million private placement in July 2007 maturing in 2022.
Interest is payable at a fixed rate of 3.3%.
South West Water Finance Plc issued a 200 million RPI indexlinked bond in July 2008 maturing in 2057 with a cash coupon of 1.99%.
South West Water Finance Plc issued a 150 million bond in July 2010 maturing in 2040 with a cash coupon of 5.875%.
Bournemouth Water Limited issued a 65 million RPI indexlinked bond in April 2005 maturing in 2033 with a cash coupon of 3.084%.
This instrument was transferred to South West Water Limited in April 2016.
The fair values of noncurrent borrowings valued using level 2 measures as set out in note 23 were 2017 2016 Book value Fair value Book value Fair value
Bank and other loans 328.8 336.4 403.2 403.2 Private placements 560.5 614.0 553.8 600.0 RPI indexlinked bond 416.4 496.2 412.2 364.6 European Investment Bank 323.4 282.3 234.5 209.3 1762.7 1927.6 1737.0 1775.5 Obligations under finance leases 1353.8 1217.3 1314.6 1163.0 3116.5 3144.9 3051.6 2938.5
Bank and other loans 248.6 256.4 323.3 323.3 Private placements 560.5 614.0 553.8 600.0 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings note 44 39.1 39.1 Where market values are not available fair values of borrowings have been calculated by discounting expected future cash flows at prevailing interest rates.
The maturity of noncurrent borrowings was Group Company Between 1 and 2 years 207.7 141.7 188.6 74.6 Over 2 year and less than 5 years 408.3 427.0 148.1 225.8 Over 5 years 2500.5 2482.9 511.5 576.7 3116.5 3051.6 848.2 877.1 The weighted average maturity of noncurrent borrowings was 20 years 2016 22 years.
Financial statements 28.
Borrowings continued Finance lease liabilities  minimum lease payments were Group Company Within 1 year 44.3 41.1 Over 1 year and less than 5 years 245.3 220.5 Over 5 years 2021.3 2130.7 2310.9 2392.3 Less future finance charges 926.6 1051.7 Present value of finance lease liabilities 1384.3 1340.6 The maturity of finance lease liabilities was Group Company Within 1 year 30.5 26.0 Over 1 year and less than 5 years 175.4 124.8 Over 5 years 1178.4 1189.8 1384.3 1340.6 Included above are accrued finance charges arising on obligations under finance leases totalling 146.3 million 2016 138.8 million of which 2.0 million 2016 1.7 million is repayable within one year.
The period for repayment of certain leases includes an agreement to deposit with the lessor group amounts equal to the difference between the original and revised payments due.
The accumulated deposits 79.3 million at 31 March 2017 2016 71.7 million are currently being held to settle the lease liability subject to rights to release by negotiation with the lessor.
The deposits are subject to a registered charge given as security to the lessor for the balance outstanding.
The period for repayment of certain other existing leases includes an agreement to deposit with the lessor group amounts equal to the difference between the original and revised payments due.
The accumulated deposits 142.4 million at 31 March 2017 2016 142.3 million are currently being held to settle the lease liability subject to rights to release by negotiation with the lessor.
The deposits are subject to a registered charge given as security to the lessor for the outstanding balance.
Undrawn committed borrowing facilities at the balance sheet date were Group Company Floating rate Expiring within 1 year 60.0 100.0 60.0 50.0 Expiring after 1 year 725.0 975.0 180.0 240.0 In addition at 31 March 2017 the Group had undrawn uncommitted shortterm bank facilities of 15.0 million 2016 25.0 million available to the Company or South West Water Limited.
Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 29.
Other noncurrent liabilities Group Company Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings   8.7 8.7 Deferred income 114.5 91.2 Other payables 66.2 22.0 44.3 Deferred income includes amounts relating to the adoption at fair value of assets transferred from customers in the water segment.
Other payables includes an amount of 44.3 million 2016 nil due to Nomura Structured Holdings plc on unwind of a synthetic derivative see note 6.
Included in other payables are amounts provided by the Group in relation to claims received which are considered by the Directors and the management of the Group to be the best estimate of the amounts that might be finally settled.
Further disclosures have not been provided in accordance with IAS 37 paragraph 92.
Retirement benefit obligations During the year the Group operated a number of defined benefit pension schemes and also a defined contribution section within the main scheme.
The principal plan within the Group is the Pennon Group Pension Scheme which is a funded defined benefit final salary pension scheme in the UK.
The Groups pension schemes are established under trust law and comply with all relevant UK legislation.
The assets of the Groups pension schemes are held in separate trustee administered funds.
The trustees of the funds are required to act in the best interest of the funds beneficiaries.
The appointment of schemes trustees is determined by the schemes trust documentation.
The Group has a policy for the main fund that onehalf of all trustees other than the Chairman are nominated by members of the schemes including pensioners.
Defined contribution schemes Pension costs for defined contribution schemes were 5.3 million 2016 7.5 million.
Defined benefit schemes
The principal actuarial assumptions at 31 March were % % % Rate of increase in pensionable pay 3.2 2.9 2.9 Rate of increase for current and future pensions 2.0 2.9 2.9 Rate used to discount schemes liabilities and expected return on schemes assets 2.55 3.30 3.35 Inflation 3.2 2.9 2.9
Assumptions regarding future mortality experience are set based on actuarial advice in accordance with published statistics and experience.
The mortality assumption uses a schemespecific calculation based on CMI 2015 actuarial tables with an allowance for future longevity improvement.
The average life expectancy in years of a member having retired at age 62 on the balance sheet date is projected astel Female 27.2 27.3 27.2 The average life expectancy in years of a future pensioner retiring at age 62 20 years after the balance sheet date is projected astel Female 29.5 29.6 29.5 The sensitivities regarding the principal assumptions used to measure the schemes liabilities are Change in assumption Impact on schemes liabilities Rate of increase in pensionable pay  0.5%  0.6% Rate of increase in current and future pensions  0.5%  6.2% Rate used to discount schemes liabilities  0.5%  9.3% Inflation  0.5%  6.4% Life expectancy  1 year  4.5% The sensitivity analysis shows the effect of changes in the principal assumptions used for the measurement of the pension liability.
The method used to calculate the sensitivities is approximate and has been determined taking into account the duration of the liabilities and the overall profile of each schemes membership.
This is the same approach as has been adopted in previous years.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Retirement benefit obligations continued The amounts recognised in the balance sheet were Group Company Present value of financial obligations 956.0 826.0 58.0 50.7 Fair value of plan assets 903.4 792.7 53.9 47.7 Deficit of funded plans 52.6 33.3 4.1 3.0 Impact of minimum funding asset ceiling 15.4 7.6 Net liability recognised in the balance sheet 68.0 40.9 4.1 3.0 The movement in the net defined benefit obligation over the accounting period is as follows 2017 2016 Present value of obligation Fair value of plan assets
Present value of obligation Fair value of plan assets
Arising on acquisition    86.6 88.5 1.9 Current service cost 12.0  12.0 12.6  12.6 Past service cost and gains and losses on settlements 1.5  1.5 Interest expenseincome 27.4 26.2 1.2 27.3 25.5 1.8
Return loss on plan on assets excluding amounts included in interest expense  106.0 106.0  19.7 19.7 Gain from change in demographic assumptions 12.2  12.2 Loss gain from change in financial assumptions 133.1  133.1 2.7  2.7 Experience gains 8.7  8.7 14.4  14.4
Employers  11.2 11.2  33.8 33.8 Plan participants 1.1 1.1  1.1 1.1 Payments from plans Benefit payments 33.8 33.8  29.2 29.2 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 The movement in the Companys net defined benefit obligation over the accounting period is as follows 2017 2016 Present value of obligation Fair value of plan assets
Present value of obligation Fair value of plan assets
Current service cost 0.2  0.2 0.3  0.3 Interest expenseincome 1.8 1.7 0.1 1.7 1.5 0.2
Return loss return on plan on assets excluding amounts included in interest expense  6.0 6.0  0.9 0.9 Gain from change in demographic assumptions 1.0  1.0 Loss from change in financial assumptions 9.0  9.0 Experience gains 0.5  0.5 0.3  0.3
Employers  0.7 0.7  2.3 2.3 Payments from plans Benefit payments 2.2 2.2  1.8 1.8 Changes in the effect of the asset ceiling during the year were Group Company Irrecoverable asset at start of the year 7.6 10.1 Interest on irrecoverable surplus 0.2 0.3 Actuarial gains losses 7.6 2.8 The Group has two smaller pension schemes which are in surplus.
One of these surpluses is deemed to have irrecoverable assets in accordance with IFRIC 14 The Limit on Defined Benefit Asset Minimum Funding Requirements and their Interaction.
The schemes assets were 2017 2016 Quoted prices in active market Prices not quoted in active market
Quoted prices in active market Prices not quoted in active market
Government bonds 168.8  19 87.2  11 Other bonds 170.0  19 134.2  17 Diversified growth 96.8  11 170.8  22 Property 52.1 8.8 7 50.4 8.3 7 Insurance linked security 47.2  5 Other including cash funds 100.2 13.9 12 80.0 13.9 12 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Retirement benefit obligations continued Other assets at 31 March 2017 represented principally cash contributions received from the Group towards the year end which were invested during the subsequent financial year.
The Companys share of the schemes assets at the balance sheet date was 2017 2016 Quoted prices in active market Prices not quoted in active market
Quoted prices in active market Prices not quoted in active market
Equities 13.0  24 14.3  30 Government bonds 10.5  19 8.0  17 Other bonds 10.1  19 9.7  20 Diversified growth 6.2  12 5.6  12 Property 4.2  8 4.0  8 Insurance linked security 3.8  7 Through its defined benefit pension plan the Group is exposed to a number of risks the most significant of which are detailed below Asset volatility The liabilities are calculated using a discount rate set with reference to corporate bond yields if assets underperform this yield this will create a deficit.
The schemes hold a significant proportion of growth assets equities and diversified growth funds which are expected to outperform corporate bonds in the longterm but can give rise to volatility and risk in the shortterm.
The allocation to growth assets is monitored such that it is suitable with the schemes longterm objectives.
Changes in bond yields A decrease in corporate bond yields will increase the schemes liabilities although this will be partially offset by an increase in the value of the schemes bond holdings.
Inflation risk The majority of the schemes benefit obligations are linked to inflation and higher inflation will lead to higher liabilities although in most cases caps on the level of inflationary increases are in place to protect against extreme inflation.
The majority of the assets are either unaffected by or loosely correlated with inflation meaning that an increase in inflation will also increase the deficit.
Life expectancy The majority of the schemes obligations are to provide benefits for the life of the member so increases in life expectancy will result in an increase in the liabilities.
In conjunction with its investment advisers the trustees have structured the schemes investments with the objective of balancing investment returns and levels of risk.
The asset allocation for the main scheme has three principal elements holding of cash funds and bonds which are expected to be less volatile than most other asset classes and reflects market movements in the schemes liabilities a proportion of equities with fund managers having freedom in making investment decisions to maximise returns investment of a proportion of the schemes assets in alternative asset classes which give the potential for diversification currently property and diversified growth.
The liabilities of the defined benefit schemes are measured by using the projected unit credit method which is an accrued benefits valuation method in which the scheme liabilities make allowance for projected increases in pensionable pay.
The future cash flows arising from the payment of the defined benefits are expected to be settled primarily in the period between 15 and 40 years from the balance sheet date.
The 2016 triennial actuarial valuation of the principal defined benefit scheme has been agreed with the actuarial valuation deficit and schedule of contributions being in line with the 2013 triennial actuarial valuation requiring deficit recovery contributions of c.
12 million per annum from 2019 to 2022.
The Group has made a deficit recovery contribution of 0.5 million to the main scheme during the year 2016 23.7 million.
The Group monitors funding levels on an annual basis and expects to pay total contributions of around 10 million during the year ended 31 March 2018.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 31.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is provided in full on temporary differences under the liability method using enacted tax rates.
Movements on deferred tax were Group Company Liabilitiesassets at 1 April 272.0 235.9 2.2 3.0 Charged to the income statement 18.9 39.2  0.5 Creditedcharged to equity 2.3 4.5  0.5 Change of rate in income statement  nonunderlying 21.3 33.1 0.1 0.2 Other nonunderlying charges in the income statement 2.3 0.7 Arising on acquisition  24.8 Liabilitiesassets at 31 March 269.6 272.0 2.3 2.2 Deferred tax assets have been recognised in respect of all temporary differences giving rise to deferred tax assets because it is probable that these assets will be recovered.
The majority of the Groups deferred tax liability is expected to be recovered over more than one year.
The majority of the Companys deferred tax asset is expected to be recovered over more than one year.
All deferred tax assets and liabilities within the same jurisdiction are offset.
The deferred tax balance has been reduced by a credit of 19.7 million to recognise the change in the rate of corporation tax enacted on 15 September 2016 to reduce the rate at 1 April 2020 from 18% to 17%.
This credit includes a credit of 21.3 million recognised in the income statement and a debit of 1.6 million recognised in equity.
The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities were
Deferred tax liabilities Accelerated tax depreciation Fair value adjustments Revenue on service concession arrangements
Total
At 1 April 2015 235.0 9.9 37.3 0.3 282.5 Arising on acquisition 18.3 19.1   37.4 Chargedcredited to the income statement 16.3 1.7 7.5  22.1 Nonunderlying creditcharge to the income statement 25.9 2.7 5.1 0.6 33.1 Chargedcredited to the income statement 15.8 1.9 4.8 0.4 18.3 Nonunderlying creditcharge to the income statement 17.6 0.6 2.8 0.1 21.1 Reclassifications 0.1    0.1 Deferred tax assets Long term liabilities including provisions
Derivatives
Share based payments Tax losses Fair value adjustment
Total
Arising on acquisition 0.1 0.4    12.9  12.6 Chargedcredited to the income statement 14.0 3.7   0.7 0.7 0.6 17.1 Nonunderlying chargecredit to the income statement 1.1 2.1   0.2 1.2 0.3 0.7 Creditedcharged to equity  0.6 1.0 0.2    0.6 Nonunderlying charge to equity  3.0 0.8 0.1    3.9 Creditedcharged to the income statement 1.2 0.6   0.1 0.5 1.8 0.6 Nonunderlying creditcharge to the income statement 0.1 0.2 2.6  0.1 0.5 0.8 2.1 Creditedcharged to equity  4.7 1.0 0.2    3.9 Nonunderlying chargecredit to equity  1.4 0.3 0.1    1.6 Reclassifications 0.2  0.9    0.6 0.1 Net liability At 31 March 2016 272.0 At 31 March 2017 269.6 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Deferred tax continued
Deferred tax assets
Derivatives
Share based payments
Total
At 1 April 2015 0.8 1.6 0.3 0.3 3.0 Charged to the income statement 0.3   0.1 0.4 Nonunderlying credit to income statement 0.2    0.2 Creditedcharged to equity 0.1 0.2 0.1  0.2 Nonunderlying charge to equity 0.3 0.1   0.4 At 31 March 2016 0.5 1.3 0.2 0.2 2.2 Credited charged to the income statement   0.1 0.1 Nonunderlying credit to income statement 0.1    0.1 Creditedcharged to equity 0.3 0.1 0.1  0.3 Nonunderlying charge to equity 0.2 0.1   0.3 At 31 March 2017 0.7 1.1 0.4 0.1 2.3 Deferred tax chargedcredited to equity during the year was Group Company Remeasurement of defined benefit obligations 3.3 2.4 0.1 0.2 Cash flow hedges 1.3 1.8 0.2 0.3 Deferred tax on other comprehensive lossgain 2.0 4.2 0.1 0.5 Sharebased payments 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.1 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 32.
Provisions
Environmental and landfill restoration
Other
Total
Group
At 1 April 2016 182.1 11.7 27.6 221.4 Charged to the income statement 6.2  0.6 6.8 Nonunderlying charge note 6  1.2  1.2 Capitalised 7.1   7.1 Utilised 11.6 6.4 4.3 22.3 At 31 March 2017 183.8 6.5 23.9 214.2 The amount charged to the income statement includes 9.1 million 2016 9.4 million charged to finance costs as the unwinding of discounts in provisions.
The analysis of provisions between current and noncurrent is Current 40.4 50.4 Noncurrent 173.8 171.0 Environmental and landfill restoration provisions are incurred during the operational life of each landfill site and for a considerable period thereafter.
The period of aftercare postclosure and the level of costs expected are uncertain and can vary significantly from site to site.
Key factors are the type of waste the speed at which it decomposes the volume of leachate requiring treatment and regulatory requirements specific to the site.
Environmental and landfill restoration provisions are expected to be substantially utilised throughout the operational life of a site and for landfill sites within 60 years of closure.
The provisions have been established assuming current waste management technology based upon estimated costs at future prices which have been discounted to present value.
The Group has applied a discount rate of 4.75% 2016 4.75% and an inflation rate of 2.5% 2016 2.5%.
The restructuring provision relates principally to severance costs and will be utilised within one year.
Other provisions include underperforming contracts of 11.1 million 2016 15.6 million which are provided for at the net present value of the operating losses of the underperforming contracts and are to be utilised over the remaining period of the contract to which they relate.
The weighted average contract life of underperforming contracts is 3 years.
Financial statements 33.
Share capital Allotted calledup and fully paid Number of shares Treasury shares Ordinary shares m Group and Company At 1 April 2015 ordinary shares of 40.7p each 389515 398720708 162.4 Shares issued in respect of equity issuance  12084337 4.9 Shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative  760626 0.3 For consideration of 1.1 million shares reissued to the Pennon Employee Share Trust 143538 143538 For consideration of 0.1 million shares reissued under the Executive Share Option Scheme 8305 8305 For consideration of 1.3 million shares reissued under the Companys Sharesave Scheme 227316 227316 For consideration of 2.1 million shares issued under the Companys Sharesave Scheme  395767 0.2 At 31 March 2016 ordinary shares of 40.7p each 10356 412340597 167.8 Shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative  771563 0.3 For consideration of 1.3 million shares issued to the Pennon Employee Share Trust  143479 0.1 For consideration of 0.2 million shares issued under the Executive Share Option Scheme  24457 For consideration of 0.0 million shares reissued under the Executive Share Option Scheme 1913 1913 For consideration of 3.2 million shares issued under the Companys Sharesave Scheme  611284 0.2 At 31 March 2017 ordinary shares of 40.7p each 8443 413893293 168.4 The 12084337 share issuance last year was on a non preemptive basis to replenish cash resources following the acquisition of Bournemouth Water in April 2015.
The discount achieved was 0.5% and proceeds raised net of discount and costs were 98 million.
The percentage increase in issued share capital due to the issuance was 3%.
Shares held as treasury shares may be sold or reissued for any of the Companys share schemes or cancelled.
Employee share schemes The Group operates a number of equitysettled share plans for the benefit of employees.
Details of each plan are i Sharesave Scheme An allemployee savings related plan is operated that enables employees including Executive Directors to invest up to a maximum of 500 per month for three or five years.
These savings can then be used to buy ordinary shares at a price set at a 17% discount to the market value at the start of the savings period at the third fifth or seventh year anniversary of the option being granted.
Options expire six months following the exercise date and except for certain specific circumstances such as redundancy lapse if the employee leaves the Group before the option exercise period commences.
Outstanding options to subscribe for ordinary shares of 40.7p each under the Companys share option schemes are Date granted and subscription price fully paid Period when options normally exercisable Thousands of shares in respect of which options outstanding at 31 March 2017 2016 6 July 2009 386p 2012  2016  44 28 June 2010 431p 2013  June 2011 536p 2014  June 2012 588p 2015  July 2013 538p 2016  tel14 July 2014 611p 2017  tel24 June 2015 683p 2018  2020 1132 1291 29 June 2016 709p 2019  2021 748 2753 2856 Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 The number and weighted average exercise price of Sharesave options are 2017 2016 Number of ordinary shares thousands
Number of ordinary shares thousands
At 1 April 2856 619 2330 561 Granted 798 709 1364 683 Forfeited 205 661 170 622 Exercised 610 533 623 545 Expired 86 639 45 596 At 31 March 2753 660 2856 619 The weighted average price of the Companys shares at the date of exercise of Sharesave options during the year was 878p 2016 779p.
The options outstanding at 31 March 2017 had a weighted average exercise price of 660p 2016 619p and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 1.9 years 2016 2.1 years.
The aggregate fair value of Sharesave options granted during the year was 0.9 million 2016 1.7 million determined using the BlackScholes valuation model.
The significant inputs into the valuation model at the date of issue of the options were 2017 2016 Weighted average share price 854 854 Weighted average exercise price 709 683 Expected volatility 18.0% 17.0% Expected life 3.4 years 3.4 years Riskfree rate 0.3% 0.8% Expected dividend yield 4.2% 4.0% Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the previous three years.
Executive Directors and senior management receive a conditional award of ordinary shares in the Company and are also required to hold a substantial personal shareholding in the Company.
The eventual number of shares if any which vest is dependent upon the achievement of conditions of the plan over the restricted period being not less than three years.
The number and price of shares in the Performance and Coinvestment Plan are 2017 2016 Number of ordinary shares thousands
Number of ordinary shares thousands
At 1 April 1198 761 1195 744 Granted 37telVested 128 653 At 31 March 1021 850 1198 761 The awards outstanding at 31 March 2017 had a weighted exercise price of 850p 2016 761p and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 1.3 years 2016 1.3 years.
Financial statements 33.
Share capital continued The aggregate fair value of awards granted during the year was 1.7 million 2016 1.7 million determined using a MonteCarlo simulation model.
The significant inputs into the valuation model at the date of the share awards were 2017 2016 Weighted average share price 920p 811p Expected volatility 18.0% 17.0% Riskfree rate 0.3% 0.8% Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the previous three years.
Awards under the plan to Executive Directors and senior management involve the release of ordinary shares in the Company to participants.
There is no performance condition since vesting is conditional upon continuous service with the Group for a period of three years from the award.
The number and weighted average price of shares in the Annual Incentive Bonus Plan are 2017 2016 Number of ordinary shares thousands
Number of ordinary shares thousands
At 1 April 30telGranted 14telVested 122 745 152 790 Lapsed 6 701 11 776 At 31 March 32telThe awards outstanding at 31 March 2017 had a weighted average exercise price of 848p 2016 759p and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 1.4 years 2016 1.6 years.
The Companys share price at the date of the awards ranged from 791p to 950p.
The aggregate fair value of awards granted during the year was 1.3 million 2016 1.2 million determined from market value.
No option pricing methodology is applied since dividends paid on the shares are receivable by the participants in the scheme.
Further details of the plans and options granted to Directors included above are shown in the Directors remuneration report.
Share premium account Group and Company At 1 April 2015 118.6 Equity placing 95.4 Equity issuance related costs 2.3 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative 0.3 Shares issued under the Sharesave Scheme 1.9 At 31 March 2016 213.3 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative 0.3 Shares issued under the Sharesave Scheme 3.0 Shares issued to the Pennon Employee Share Trust 1.2 Shares issued under the Executive Share Option Scheme 0.2 At 31 March 2017 217.4 Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 35.
Capital redemption reserve The capital redemption reserve represents the redemption of B shares and cancellation of deferred shares arising from a capital return to shareholders undertaken during 2006.
Group and Company At 1 April 2015 144.2 At 31 March 2016 144.2 At 31 March 2017 144.2 Retained earnings and other reserves Own shares
Retained earnings
Group
At 1 April 2015 1.8 35.0 670.9 634.1 Profit for the year   152.1 152.1 Other comprehensive loss for the year  0.2 2.6 2.8 Transfer from hedging reserve to property plant and equipment  3.4  3.4 Dividends paid relating to 2015   129.5 129.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative   6.3 6.3 Credit to equity in respect of sharebased payments net of tax   2.5 2.5 Charge in respect of share options vesting 0.8  0.8 Own shares acquired by the Pennon Employee Share Trust in respect of share options granted 1.1   1.1 Proceeds from treasury shares reissued   2.5 2.5 At 31 March 2016 2.1 31.8 701.4 667.5 Profit for the year   164.3 164.3 Other comprehensive loss for the year  5.1 20.0 14.9 Transfer from hedging reserve to property plant and equipment  1.5  1.5 Dividends paid relating to 2016   138.5 138.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative   6.9 6.9 Credit to equity in respect of sharebased payments net of tax   3.2 3.2 Charge in respect of share options vesting 2.1  2.1 Own shares acquired by the Pennon Employee Share Trust in respect of share options granted 2.6   2.6 At 31 March 2017 2.6 28.2 715.2 684.4 The own shares reserve represents the cost of ordinary shares in Pennon Group plc issued to or purchased in the market and held by the Pennon Employee Share Trust to satisfy awards under the Groups Annual Incentive Bonus Plan.
The market value of the 330000 ordinary shares 2016 309000 ordinary shares held by the trust at 31 March 2017 was 2.9 million 2016 2.5 million.
Financial statements 36.
Retained earnings and other reserves continued
Retained earnings
Company
At 1 April 2015 5.5 1011.4 1005.9 Profit for the year  91.4 91.4 Other comprehensive loss for the year 0.5 0.9 0.4 Dividends paid relating to 2015  129.5 129.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative  6.3 6.3 Credit to equity in respect of sharebased payments net of tax  0.7 0.7 Charge in respect of share options vesting  0.8 0.8 Proceeds from treasury shares reissued  2.5 2.5 At 31 March 2016 5.0 981.1 976.1 Profit for the year  162.9 162.9 Other comprehensive loss for the year 0.3 1.4 1.1 Dividends paid relating to 2016  138.5 138.5 Adjustment for shares issued under the Scrip Dividend Alternative  6.9 6.9 Credit to equity in respect of sharebased payments net of tax  1.2 1.2 Charge in respect of share options vesting  2.1 2.1 At 31 March 2017 4.7 1010.1 1005.4 Perpetual capital securities Group and Company At 1 April 2015 294.8 Distributions to perpetual capital security holders 20.3 Current tax relief on distributions to perpetual capital security holders 4.1 Profit for the year attributable to perpetual capital security holders 16.2 At 31 March 2016 294.8 Distributions to perpetual capital security holders 20.3 Current tax relief on distributions to perpetual capital security holders 4.1 Profit for the year attributable to perpetual capital security holders 16.2 At 31 March 2017 294.8 On 8 March 2013 the Company issued 300 million perpetual capital securities.
Costs directly associated with the issue of 5.2 million are set off against the value of the issuance.
They have no fixed redemption date but the Company may at its sole discretion redeem all but not part of these securities at their principal amount on 8 March 2018 or any subsequent periodic return payment date after this.
The Company has the option to defer periodic returns on any relevant payment date as long as a dividend on the ordinary shares has not been paid or declared in the previous 12 months.
Deferred periodic returns shall be satisfied only on redemption or payment of dividend on ordinary shares all of which only occur at the sole discretion of the Company.
As the Company paid a dividend in the 12 months prior to the periodic return date of 8 March 2017 a periodic return of 20.3 million was paid during the year.
Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 38.
Analysis of cash flows given in the statement of cash flows Reconciliation of profit for the year to cash generated from operations Cash generated from operations Group Company Continuing operations Profit for the year 180.5 168.3 179.1 107.6 Adjustments for Sharebased payments 2.9 2.8 1.1 0.8 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 7.5 4.3 Depreciation charge 178.2 182.9 0.1 0.1 Amortisation of intangible assets 3.2 3.7 Nonunderlying provision charge 10.7 10.2 Nonunderlying remeasurement of fair value movement in derivatives 16.0 5.2 Nonunderlying unwind of synthetic derivative 44.8  83.5 Share of posttax profit from joint ventures 4.2 3.6 Finance income before nonunderlying items 36.3 42.1 51.1 52.3 Finance costs before nonunderlying items 95.1 96.2 37.1 37.2 Dividends receivable   247.0 140.7 Taxation chargecredit 30.0 38.0 3.3 44.9 Changes in working capital Increase in inventories 0.7 5.5 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 13.1 10.5 158.1 37.4 Increase in service concession arrangements receivable 22.2 15.6 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 8.5 27.0 0.1 0.3 Increasedecrease in retirement benefit obligations from contributions 2.3 21.2 0.5 2.2 Decrease in provisions 24.7 16.8 Cash generatedoutflow from operations 431.5 371.3 159.0 41.7 Reconciliation of total interest paid Group Company Interest paid in operating activities 76.4 79.1 39.1 35.3 Interest paid in investing activities 12.9 9.4 Total interest paid 89.3 88.5 39.1 35.3 Financial statements 39.
Net borrowings Group Company Cash and cash deposits 598.1 632.2 372.5 429.7 Borrowings  current Bank and other loans 74.9 Other current borrowings 41.1 39.0 Finance lease obligations 30.5 26.0 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings   357.8 287.2 Total current borrowings 146.5 65.0 357.8 287.2 Borrowings  noncurrent Bank and other loans 1439.3 1502.5 848.2 877.1 Other noncurrent borrowings 323.4 234.5 Finance lease obligations 1353.8 1314.6 Total noncurrent borrowings 3116.5 3051.6 848.2 877.1 Total net borrowings 2664.9 2484.4 833.5 734.6 Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 40.
Subsidiary joint venture and associate undertakings at 31 March 2017 Principal subsidiary companies Registered office address Country of incorporation registration and principal operations
South West Water Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England South West Water Finance Plc Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Source Contact Management Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Water Services Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Waste management Viridor Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Exeter Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Suffolk Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste West Sussex Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Management Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor EnviroScot Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Viridor Resource Management Limited First Floor Offices Riverside House Sir Thomas Longley Road Medway City Rochester ME2 4FN England Viridor Waste Kent Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Oxfordshire Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor EfW Runcorn Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Landfill Restoration Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Somerset Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Thames Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Greater Manchester Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Polymer Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Trident Park Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Glasgow Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Viridor Lancashire Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Peterborough Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor South London Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Clyde Valley Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland
Peninsula Insurance Limited Level 5 Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port GY1 1EJ Guernsey 1 Captive insurance company established with the specific objective of financing risks emanating from within the Group.
2 80% of share capital owned by Pennon Group plc.
All shares in issue are ordinary shares.
Financial statements 40.
Subsidiary joint venture and associate undertakings at 31 March 2017 continued Other trading companies Registered office address Country of incorporation Dragon Waste Limited 81% Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Peninsula Leasing Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Peninsula Properties Exeter Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Peninsula Trustees Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Defined Contribution Pension Trustee Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Pension Trustees Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Share Plans Guernsey Limited Albert House South Esplanade St Peter Port GY1 1AW Guernsey Pennon Share Schemes Trustees Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Trustee Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Raikes Lane Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Source Collections Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Source for Business Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England SSWB Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Somerset Pension Scheme and Life Assurance Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Other dormant companies Registered office address Country of incorporation
Best and Sons Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Acetip Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Albion Water Shotton Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Alderney Water Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Analaq Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Aquacare BWH Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Astley Minerals Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Avon Valley Water Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Basecall Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Bournemouth Water Investments Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Bournemouth Water Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England BWH Enterprises Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Centre for Environmental Research Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England City Reclamation Services Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Corby Skip Hire Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England DMP Holdings Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England ELE Datasystems Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Exe Continental Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Greater Manchester Sites Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Greenhill Environmental Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Other dormant companies Registered office address Country of incorporation Handside Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Haul Waste Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Hodgejoy Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Industrial Waste Disposals Sheffield Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Lavelle and Sons Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England MacGlass Recycling Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Oakley Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Oakley Skip Hire Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Parkwood Environmental Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Parkwood Group Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Parkwood Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pearsons Group Holdings Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Peninsula Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Peninsula MB Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Peninsula Water Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Power Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon South West Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pennon Waste Management Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England pHOX Systems Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pilsworth Forest  Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Pilsworth Forest Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Roseland Plant Co.
Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Rydon Properties Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Seal Security Systems Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Sheffield Waste Disposal Company Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Shore Recycling Ozone Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England SWW Pension Trustees Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Thames Incineration and Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Thames Incineration Services Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Thames Tankering Services Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Thames Waste Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England The Metropolitan Water Company Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Tokenmarch Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Cheshire Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Community Recycling MK Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Community Recycling MKH Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Erith Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Martock Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Winsford Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Contracting Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Electrical Recycling Holdings Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Viridor Electrical Recycling Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Viridor Enterprises Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Glass Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor London Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor New England EfW Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Resource Peterborough Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Resource Transport Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Financial statements Other dormant companies Registered office address Country of incorporation Viridor South Lanarkshire Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Viridor South West Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Adapt Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Allwaste Disposal Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Atherton Holdings Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Atherton Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Bristol Holdings Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Bristol Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Bury  Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Corby Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Earls Barton Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste East Anglia Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Medway Holdings Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Medway Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Sheffield Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Thetford Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Wastenot Recycling Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste 2 Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Disposal Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Hampshire Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Viridor Waste Wootton Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England VWM Scotland Limited 1 Exchange Crescent Conference Square Edinburgh EH3 8UL Scotland Waste Treatment Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Water West Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England West Hampshire Water Limited Peninsula House Rydon Lane Exeter EX2 7HR England Indicates the shares are held directly by Pennon Group Plc the Company.
The subsidiary undertakings are wholly owned unless stated otherwise and all shares in issue are ordinary shares.
All companies above are consolidated in the Group financial statements.
Notes to the financial statements continued Subsidiary joint venture and associate undertakings at 31 March 2017 continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Joint ventures and associate All joint ventures the associate and the subsidiary undertakings of Lakeside Energy from Waste Holdings Limited Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Holdings Limited INEOS Runcorn TPS Holdings Limited and Shelford Composting Limited are incorporated and registered in England which is also their country of operation.
Share capital in issue Percentage held Principal activity Joint ventures Lakeside Energy from Waste Holdings Limited 1000000 A ordinary shares 1000000 B ordinary shares 100% Lakeside Energy from Waste Limited Waste management Shares in Lakeside Energy from Waste Holdings Limited are held by Viridor Waste Management
Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Holdings Limited 12000 ordinary shares 50% Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Limited Waste management Shares in Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Holdings Limited are held by Viridor Waste Management Limited Shelford Composting Limited 50 A ordinary shares 50 B ordinary shares 100% Waste management
INEOS Runcorn TPS Holdings Limited 1000 A ordinary shares 20% 186750 B1 ordinary shares 50% 62250 B2 ordinary shares INEOS Runcorn TPS Limited Waste management Shares in INEOS Runcorn TPS Holdings Limited are held by Viridor Waste Management Limited.
The Groups economic interest in INEOS Runcorn TPS Holdings Limited is 37.5% as returns from the investment are based on holdings of B1 and B2 ordinary shares.
Operating lease commitments Group Company The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are Within 1 year 10.6 10.7 Over 1 year and less than 5 years 28.2 29.2 Over 5 years 104.5 80.0 The Group leases various offices depots and workshops under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have various terms escalation clauses and renewal rights.
Property leases are negotiated for an average term of 42 years and rentals are reviewed on average at fiveyearly intervals.
The Group also leases plant and machinery under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
Financial statements 42.
Contingent liabilities Group Company
Borrowing facilities of subsidiary undertakings   555.9 421.1 Performance bonds 187.5 159.7 187.5 159.7 Other  4.0  4.0 Guarantees in respect of performance bonds are entered into in the normal course of business.
No liability is expected to arise in respect of the guarantees.
Other contingent liabilities relate to a possible obligation last year to pay further consideration in respect of a previously acquired business when the outcome of planning applications was known.
In connection with the application of the audit exemption under Section 479A of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has guaranteed all the outstanding liabilities as at 31 March 2017 of certain subsidiaries Peninsula Leasing Limited and Viridor Waste 2 Limited since these companies qualify for the exemption.
Other contractual and litigation uncertainties The Group establishes provisions in connection with contracts and litigation where it has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events and where it is more likely than not an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Matters where it is uncertain that these conditions are met are The Groups joint venture Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Ltd is party to a PFI contract with the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority the
The authority has announced its intention to terminate this contract.
The Group is in negotiation with the Authority with the aim of delivering an orderly exit from the contract.
The Group is subject to litigation from time to time as a result of its activities including a prosecution from the Health and Safety Executive in relation to the fatality of a Viridor employee at Derriford Plymouth in 2015.
Uncertain tax items Management judgement is required to estimate the tax provisions relating to uncertain tax items that remain to be agreed with HMRC.
In 201516 the Group reported significant judgement around uncertain tax items related to the interpretation of tax legislation regarding financial arrangements entered into in the normal course of business which could have resulted in a range of outcomes of additional liabilities of c20 million to a reduction in liabilities of 52 million.
Following engagement and subsequently resolution with HMRC across a number of areas achieved through a process designed to expedite outstanding tax matters these items are no longer an area of significant judgement and there is no such range related to ongoing uncertain tax items.
The Group has a small number of ongoing uncertain tax items related to capital allowances for expenditure incurred in the normal course of business where the Group has paid in full the tax HMRC interpret as due and therefore would receive up to 20 million 201516 70 million should these tax items be concluded in the Groups favour.
Capital commitments Group Company Contracted but not provided 401.1 374.4 Notes to the financial statements continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 44.
Related party transactions During the year Group companies entered into the following transactions with joint ventures and associate related parties who are not members of the Group Sales of goods and services Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Limited 80.1 87.3 INEOS Runcorn TPS Limited 15.8 18.5 Purchase of goods and services Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Limited  0.3 Lakeside Energy from Waste Limited 10.4 12.1 INEOS Runcorn TPS Limited 6.6 4.3 Dividends received Lakeside Energy from Waste Holdings Limited 4.5 6.0 Y earend balances Receivables due from related parties Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Limited loan balance 40.2 36.8 Lakeside Energy from Waste Limited loan balance 8.6 8.9 INEOS Runcorn TPS Limited loan balance 37.8 35.5 Viridor Laing Greater Manchester Limited trading balance 15.3 11.3 Lakeside Energy from Waste Limited trading balance 1.0 1.0 INEOS Runcorn TPS Limited trading balance 1.3 2.7 Payables due to related parties Lakeside Energy for Waste Limited trading balance 2.7 2.3 INEOS Runcorn TPS Limited trading balance 1.5 1.6 The 86.6 million 2016 81.2 million receivable relates to loans to related parties included within receivables and due for repayment in instalments between 2017 and 2033.
Interest is charged at an average of 13.0% 2016 13.0%.
Company
The following transactions with subsidiary undertakings occurred in the year Sales of goods and services management fees 11.2 10.5 Purchase of goods and services support services 0.5 0.4 Interest receivable 39.6 38.6 Interest payable 0.1 0.1 Dividends received 247.0 140.7 Sales of goods and services to subsidiary undertakings are at cost.
Purchases of goods and services from subsidiary undertakings are under normal commercial terms and conditions which would also be available to unrelated third parties.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued Related party transactions continued Y earend balances Receivables due from subsidiary undertakings Loans 1124.3 965.6 Trading balances 13.4 8.6 Interest on 70.0 million of the loans has been charged at a fixed rate of 4.5% on 428.0 million at a fixed rate of 5.0% and on 28.0 million at a fixed rate of 6.0% 2016 70.0 million at 4.5% 373.6 million nil at 5.0% 28.0 million at 6.0% and 0.5 million at 1.4%.
Interest on 497.8 million of the loans is charged at 12 month LIBOR 1.0% 2016 443.5 million and on 0.5 million at base rate 1.0%.
These loans are due for repayment in instalments over the period 2016 to 2043.
Interest on 100.0 million of the loans has been charged at 1 month LIBOR  1.0% 2016 50.0 million.
This loan is expected to be repaid in 201718.
During the year there were no provisions 2016 nil in respect of loans to subsidiaries not expected to be repaid.
Payables due to subsidiary undertakings Trading balances 9.5 14.6 The loans from subsidiary undertakings are unsecured and interestfree without any terms for repayment.
Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Fiveyear financial summary Income statement Revenue 1353.1 1352.3 1357.2 1321.2 1201.1 Operating profit before nonunderlying items 304.6 261.8 246.6 257.5 245.6 Net finance costs before nonunderlying items 58.8 54.1 40.8 53.9 61.4 Share of profit in joint ventures 4.2 3.6 4.9 3.7 5.8 Profit before tax and nonunderlying items 250.0 211.3 210.7 207.3 190.0 Net nonunderlying items before tax 39.5 5.0 13.7 48.6 176.4 Taxation chargecredit 30.0 38.0 54.7 0.6 7.0 Profit for the year 180.5 168.3 142.3 158.1 20.6 Attributable to Ordinary shareholders of the parent 164.3 152.1 126.3 142.5 20.6 Perpetual capital security holders 16.2 16.2 16.0 15.6 Dividends proposeddeclared 149.5 138.5 129.5 117.0 103.9 Earnings per ordinary share basic From continuing operations Earnings per share 39.8p 37.0p 32.3p 38.8p 5.7p Deferred tax before nonunderlying items 4.5p 9.5p 4.7p 7.0p 4.0p Nonunderlying items net of tax 2.7p 7.0p 2.8p 10.8p 38.6p Earnings per share before nonunderlying and deferred tax 47.0p 39.5p 39.8p 42.6p 40.3p Declared dividends per share 35.96p 33.58p 31.80p 30.31p 28.46p Capital expenditure Acquisitions  91.0   14.8 Property plant and equipment 377.5 284.2 301.4 360.8 410.1 Balance sheet Noncurrent assets 4937.0 4676.7 4325.9 4076.6 3846.0 Net current assets 454.4 549.1 586.0 241.9 378.5 Noncurrent liabilities 3882.2 3738.2 3557.8 3120.9 3152.4 Net assets 1509.2 1487.6 1354.1 1197.6 1072.1 Number of employees average for year Water 1589 1706 1408 1356 1354 Waste management 3153 3230 3101 3044 3180 Other businesses 4799 4987 4558 4451 4584 Financial statements Shareholder information Financial calendar Financial year end 31 March 28th Annual General Meeting 6 July 2017 Exdividend date for 2017 final dividend 6 July 2017 Record date for 2017 final dividend 7 July 2017 2017 final dividend payable 1 September 2017 201718 halfyearly results announcement 29 November 2017 2018 interim dividend payable April 2018 2018 final results announcement 25 May 2018 29th Annual General Meeting 5 July 2018 2018 final dividend payable September 2018 Scrip dividend alternative Ordinary shares quoted exdividend 6 July 2017 Record date for final dividend 7 July 2017 Posting of scrip dividend offer 21 July 2017 Final date for receipt of forms of mandate 14 August 2017 Posting of dividend cheques and share certificates 31 August 2017 Final cash dividend payment date 1 September 2017 First day of dealing in the new ordinary shares 1 September 2017 Subject to obtaining shareholder approval at the 2017 Annual General Meeting to the payment of a final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Shareholder analysis at 31 March 2017 Holding of shares Number of shareholders % of total shareholders % of ordinary shares 1100 2418 12.17 0.02 1011000 8354 42.03 1.07 10015000 7614 38.31 4.04 500150000 1111 5.59 3.03 50001100000 95 0.48 1.64 Number of accounts % of total accounts % of total shares Individuals 17474 87.92 6.59 Companies 135 0.68 0.30 Trust companies pension funds etc.
Banks and nominees 2256 11.35 93.09 Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 Major shareholdings The net position on 31 March 2017 of investors who have notified interests in the issued share capital of the Company pursuant to the Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules is as follows Number of voting rights direct and indirect % of voting rights Lazard Asset Management LLC 33187671 8.02% Pictet Asset Management SA 25599217 6.18% Ameriprise Financial Inc.
20.328154 4.91% The Capital Group Companies Inc.
20106888 4.86% RARE Infrastructure Limited 19366782 4.68% AXA Investment Managers SA 18088394 4.37% Invesco Limited 17212959 4.16% UBS Investment Bank 16610004 4.01% No changes to interests in the Companys issued share capital have been disclosed to the Company between 31 March 2017 and 22 May 2017 being a date not more than one month prior to the date of the Companys Notice of Annual General Meeting.
Registrar
All enquiries concerning shareholdings including notification of change of address loss of a share certificate or dividend payments should be made to the Companys registrar Capita Asset Services who can be contacted as follows Capita Asset Services Pennon Group Share Register The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU Telephonetel calls are charged at standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Lines are open 8.30am5.30pm MondayFriday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Overseas telephone 44tel calls outside the United Kingdom will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Websitesite
Share dealing service The telephone share dealing service offered by Stocktrade enables shareholders to buy and sell shares in the Company on a lowcost basis.
For further details of this service contact Stocktrade on 44 0tel and quote Pennon Group Dial and Deal Service.
Commission is 1% subject to a minimum charge of 25.00.
ShareGift service Through ShareGift an independent charity share donation scheme shareholders who only have a small number of shares with a value that makes it uneconomical to sell them can donate such shares to charity.
Donations can be made by completion of a simple share transfer form which is available from the Companys registrar Capita Asset Services or by contacting ShareGift ontel www. haregift. ite.
Individual savings accounts Shareholders may gain tax advantages by holding their shares in the Company in an Individual Savings Account ISA.
Scrip dividend alternative Subject to obtaining shareholder approval at the 2017 Annual General Meeting for the payment of a final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 full details of the scrip dividend alternative and how to participate will be sent to shareholders on 21 July 2017.
The full timetable for offering the scrip dividend alternative is given on the opposite page.
The scrip dividend alternative provides shareholders with an opportunity to invest the cash dividend they receive on their Pennon Group plc shares to buy further shares in the Company without incurring stamp duty or dealing expenses.
Online portfolio service The online portfolio service provided by Capita Asset Services gives shareholders access to more information on their investments.
Details of the portfolio service are available online at site Financial statements Electronic communications The Company has passed a resolution which allows it to communicate with its shareholders by means of its website.
Shareholders currently receiving a printed copy of the annual report who now wish to sign up to receive all future shareholder communications electronically can do so by registering with Capita Asset Services share portal.
Go to site to register select Account Registration and then follow the onscreen instructions by inputting your surname your Investor Code which can be found on your proxy form and your postcode as well as entering an email address and selecting a password.
By registering to receive your shareholder communications electronically you will also automatically receive your dividend confirmations electronically.
Electronic proxy voting Shareholders also have the opportunity to register the appointment of a proxy for any general meeting of the Company once notice of the meeting has been given and may do so via site Shareholders who register an email preference will not receive a paper proxy form.
Instead they will receive an email alert advising them of general meetings of the Company with links to the notices of meetings and annual reports.
Pennons website site provides news and details of the Companys activities plus links to its subsidiaries websites.
The Investor Information section contains uptodate information for shareholders including detailed share price information financial results dividend payment dates and amounts and stock exchange announcements.
There is also a comprehensive shareholder services section which includes information on buying selling and transferring shares and how to notify a change in personal circumstances for example a change of address.
Beware of share fraud The following is taken from the ScamSmart section of the Financial Conduct Authoritys website www. camsmart. ca. ite.
Fraudsters use persuasive and highpressure tactics to lure investors into scams.
They may offer to sell shares that turn out to be worthless or nonexistent or to buy shares at an inflated price in return for an upfront payment.
While high profits are promised if you buy or sell shares in this way you will probably lose your money.
How to avoid share fraud Keep in mind that firms authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA are unlikely to contact you out of the blue with an offer to buy or sell shares.
Do not get into a conversation note the name of the person and firm contacting you and then end the call.
Check the Financial Services Register from www. ca. the FCA.
Beware of fraudsters claiming to be from an authorised firm copying its website or giving you false contact details.
Use the firms contact details listed on the Register if you want to call it back.
Call the FCA ontel if the firm does not have contact details on the Register or you are told they are out of date.
Search the FCA Warning List of unauthorised firms at www. camsmart. ca.
Compensation Scheme.
Seek impartial advice from a financial adviser before you make an investment.
Remember if it sounds too good to be true it probably is 5000 people contact the Financial Conduct Authority about share fraud each year with victims losing an average of 20000 Report a scam If you are approached by fraudsters please tell the FCA using the share fraud reporting form at www. ca. find out more about investment scams.
You can also call the FCA Consumer Helpline ontel.
If you have already paid money to share fraudsters you should contact Action Fraud ontel.
Shareholder information continued Pennon Group plc Annual Report 2017 This report is printed on material derived from sustainable sources and printed using vegetable based inks.
Both the manufacturing paper mill and printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO 14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council FSC chainofcustody certified.
CPI Colour is also a Carbon Neutral Printing Company and reduces its CO2 emissions to net zero in accordance with The CarbonNeutral Protocol.
This carbon offsetting supports the Uchindile Mapanda reforestation programme in Tanzania an environmental project to establish commercial forests at two locations in Africa.
This report is recyclable and biodegradable.
If you have finished with this document and no longer wish to retain it please pass it on to other interested readers or dispose of it in your recycled paper waste.
Thank you.
Designed and produced by MerchantCantos site Pennon Group plc Peninsula House Rydon Lane
Devon
