CHALLENGING
CONVENTION
RESHAPING
MARKETS
NEX Group plc Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2017 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 NEX is a financial technology company at the centre of the global financial markets.
We provide electronic trade execution platforms for the OTC markets.
We deliver transaction lifecycle management and information services to help our clients optimise their capital mitigate their risk and reduce their operational costs.
We partner with emerging technology companies to bring greater efficiency transparency and scale to the worlds capital markets.
Encouraging technological advancement to improve the markets we invest in companies that challenge convention and we operate an exchange to help entrepreneurs raise capital on the public market.
In an era of rapid regulatory and technological change we help our clients prepare for what lies ahead.
Headquartered in London NEX employs more than 1900 people in 18 offices around the world.
WHO WE ARE For the CEOsite
Strategic report Highlights 1 Our business model 2
Group Chief Executive Officers review 6
Our strategic priorities 12 Key performance indicators Resources relationships and responsibilities 16 Charity Day 18
Risk management
Principal risks 21 Results for 201617 24 Financial review 30 Governance and directors report Chairmans statement 34 Directors biographies 36 Corporate governance statement Global Executive Management Group Other statutory information 52 Remuneration report 56 Independent auditors report 73 Financial statements Index to financial statements Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 82 Consolidated and Company balance sheet 83 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 84 Company statement of changes in equity 85 Consolidated and Company statement of cash flow 86 Basis of preparation 87 Notes to the financial statements 90
Definitions 134 WHY NEX We offer a unique suite of leading financial technology services Our core investment strategy is to expand our client base increase use of our product suite and leverage our technology infrastructure and expertise We maintain a mix of mature and developing assets delivering a balance of good cash flow and growth We support our clients throughout the transaction lifecycle We are well positioned to benefit from changes in market structure We are capitallight and operationally leveraged allowing organic growth to deliver good margin expansion We understand that our success as an organisation is dependent on the calibre and skills of our people 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 restated restated restated Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
For a full list of KPIs see pages 1415 For financial results see pages 2429 For dividend information see page 31 Operational highlights IGBB sold for 1.3 billion Revenue from continuing operations increased by 18% to 543 million 201516 460 million an increase of 8% on a constant currency basis Trading operating profit from continuing operations increased by 4% to 145 million 201516 139 million an increase of 12% excluding the impact from hedging Trading EPS basic from continuing operations is marginally down at 23.2p per share 201516 23.6p per share Trading EPS basic including discontinued operations is marginally down at 42.9p per share.
On a likeforlike basis trading EPS basic increased by 22% Final dividend payment unchanged at 27 .0p per share fullyear dividend unchanged at 38.5p per share Annual cost savings identified of approximately 25 million by 201920 will be offset by incremental investment for growth Unless specifically stated all references are to continuing operations.
REVENUE
TRADING PROFIT BEFORE TAX TRADING EPS BASIC FULLYEAR DIVIDEND PER SHARE TRADING OPERATING
PROFIT BEFORE TAX TRADING EPS BASIC including discontinued NEX Group plc is incorporated as a public limited company and is registered in England and Wales with the registered number .
NEX Group plcs registered office is 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR.
The directors present the Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
References to NEX the Group the Company we or our are to NEX Group plc and its subsidiary companies where appropriate.
Pages 1 to 78 inclusive of this Annual Report comprise the strategic report governance and directors report and the remuneration report that has been drawn up and presented in accordance with English company law and the liabilities of the directors in connection with that report shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
On 15 December 2016 NEX Group plc obtained control of the entire share capital of ICAP plc via the Scheme of
There were no changes in the rights or the proportion of control exercised and therefore the financial statements reflect the continuation of the preexisting group headed by ICAP plc.
See basis of preparation on page 87.
Strategic report 1 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 INPUTS
Technology
People
Culture and reputation
Partnerships
Strategic report OUR BUSINESS MODEL NEX provides platforms services tools and expertise that enable our clients to execute efficiently and optimise resources throughout the transaction lifecycle.
The majority of our revenue is drawn from NEX Markets and NEX Optimisation products and services across transaction and subscription income.
Central limit order books
Execution management system Cash and FX liquidity management center Trade and portfolio management
Asset managers
Global regional and central banks
THE VALUE WE PROVIDE THROUGHOUT THE TRANSACTION LIFECYCLE FOR OUR CLIENTS Unique networks and deep industry knowledge A diverse mix of products and services supporting our clients throughout the transaction lifecycle A track record in innovation and success Empowering the worlds financial markets NEX MARKETS NEX OPTIMISATION 2 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 THE VALUE SHARED By running a profitable sustainable and responsible business we create value which we subsequently retain making us stronger for the benefit of all our stakeholders.
Shareholders
Suppliers and joint ventures
Clients
Governments
Communities
Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions The majority of our revenue is drawn from NEX Markets and NEX Optimisation products and services across transaction and subscription income.
Financial resource optimisation
Data insights
Professional trading firms
Sovereign wealth funds THE VALUE CREATED
Trading operating profit
Charity Day NEX OPPORTUNITIES Through NEX Opportunities we invest in exceptional financial technology companies that are transforming markets.
We partner with pioneers who are bringing new technologies sciences business models and talent to capital markets and technology.
NEX EXCHANGE NEX Exchange provides a community where entrepreneurs can raise capital develop ideas and grow.
3 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 201516 201617 229bn 234bn 201516 201617 317bn 437bn
MARKETS
Our established multilateral networks enable us to provide a suite of services to our clients to optimise their financial resources reduce their costs and simplify their workflows.
NEX Markets saw an increase in their record volume trading day with 234 billion traded in spot FX on one day in 201617 against a high of 229 billion in 201516 and 437 billion traded in US Actives in 201617 against 317 billion in 201516.
NEX MARKETS RECORD VOLUME TRADING DAY SPOT FX US ACTIVES 4 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 201516 201617 168tn 191tn Our portfolio compression service eliminated more than 191 trillion in notional principal in 201617 201516 168 trillion since launch more than 253 financial institutions have participated in eliminating 959 trillion in total notional outstanding.
NEX OPTIMISATION PORTFOLIO COMPRESSION 5 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW Were proud of where weve come from and proud of where were going.
In a combination that is unparalleled in the industry NEX will continue to build platforms and services that enable our clients to execute efficiently throughout the transaction lifecycle.
Michael Spencer
Group Chief Executive Officer
6 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions A defining transaction For more than 15 years our strategy has been based on continually investing in the development of financial technology for the trading community.
During the course of last year we took our most significant step to date with the founding of NEX.
The sale of our voice broking business to TP ICAP which closed on 30 December 2016 enabled NEX to become a focused financial technology business.
Our marketplace is in flux.
The ever evolving global regulatory environment has caused our traditional client base  the sellside  to change their strategies and business models as they seek to adapt.
Banks and other market participants rely even more on technology to support their business and their management of regulatory requirements.
An increasing focus on electronic markets and pre and post trade services has created exciting opportunities for NEX and enables the expansion of our product and service portfolio.
Becoming NEX During the last quarter of the financial year we turned our focus to the future with a spirit and perspective that confirms the decision to change our Company.
Our culture is one of our great strengths.
Only the right characteristics can propel a company into the vanguard of its industry and we have a longstanding culture of anticipating the needs of the markets and of our clients.
These are the foundations from which we will invest in the longterm growth and success of our business.
Our rebranding from ICAP to NEX was an exercise carried out with our customary attention to detail speed and professionalism.
During the last weeks of 2016 we rebranded our offices around the world with no disruption to our business and we successfully launched a new global intranet and multiple external websites across the Group.
This was accompanied by the largest external advertising campaign we have undertaken.
I am confident that NEX is now firmly anchored in the minds of our employees clients and partners.
For strategic priorities see pages 1213 THE SALE OF OUR VOICE BROKING BUSINESS ENABLED NEX TO BECOME A FOCUSED FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS Number of employees Number of offices 70 Number of regulated subsidiaries 39 Consolidated regulatory supervision
UK FCA Entity level regulatory capital required In excess of 250 million Consolidated regulatory capital required 500 million absent the waiver 4500 1900
Local regulated entity oversight only 50 million 110 million cash required for regulatory liquidity purposes
7 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report
GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW CONTINUED
Our move towards the consolidated infrastructure and interface of NEX Infinity with its unified sales and support environment that caters for both sell and buyside as well as major corporates will provide us with enormous opportunities.
As part of this consolidation process we are aligning our structure with that of our clients allowing them a clear NEX businessagnostic view of our full suite of products and services.
The transformation of the Group into a focused financial technology company and our continued investment in new product and service offerings will result in longterm growth.
Single legal agreements and a single interface will further simplify our clients ability to pick and choose multiple products either individually or in combination based on their requirements and not our own corporate structure.
An example of this is NEX Regulatory Reporting.
Launched in March this combines a suite of bestin breed services provided by multiple NEX Optimisation businesses under a single umbrella to offer our clients an extremely powerful and fully resilient crossasset and crossjurisdictional regulatory reporting solution.
At the beginning of the year we acquired ENSO Financial
We have been and continue to be impressed by ENSO who have demonstrated the ability to build a hedge fund client base to which they deliver an expanding and wellregarded product set.
In October we completed our acquisition of Abide Financial.
Since
Abide first came to our attention we knew it was a business which fitted perfectly with our strategy to serve our clients changing needs.
It is one of a very small number of companies who offer holistic regulatory reporting services which will become ever more critical as financial markets evolve.
During the period we also invested in RSRCHXchange a MiFID II marketplace for institutional research Axoni a leading provider of distributed ledger technology OpenFin a unifying operating layer for financial desktops and Cloud9 Technologies a cloudbased communication provider.
In addition we made a further investment in OpenGamma a leading provider of derivatives risk analytics.
These acquisitions and investments demonstrate how the team within our financial technology investment business NEX Opportunities is successfully building an impressive portfolio of emerging financial technology companies.
In February Per Sjberg CEO of TriOptima decided to leave the business to pursue other ventures.
I would like to record here my thanks to him for all his contributions since he founded the business in 2000.
Ready for the future NEX is in a position to change our industry.
We have a portfolio of services that no one else can offer and which gives us the ability to build our reputation and brand as the worlds leading electronic platform for OTC transactions and post trade services to all parties.
We are already expanding beyond our traditional sellside client base of banks and professional trading firms to embrace hedge funds corporates asset managers sovereign wealth funds and global regional and central banks.
NEX will become synonymous with a supermarket of services delivering worldclass products and firstrate service and support to our clients.
With NEX Markets we have the worlds leading electronic trading platform for the fixed income markets and a leading electronic FX trading business with significant market share in many currencies.
We continue to develop the next generation of financial technology for the trading community which will enable us to create the preeminent global eplatform for the FX and fixed income markets.
At the same time we are restructuring the business to be far more clientfocused.
This past year we have seen significant growth on EBS Direct our FX relationshipbased trading venue with new counterparties trading on the platform record daily volumes and the roll out of FX forwards to new client segments.
Our enhancements to the EBS central limit order book EBS Market such as the launch of EBS Live Ultra  our premium market data service  are benefiting clients and maintaining our market share and we have seen further expansion of our Asian NDF business in addition to our eFix matching service.
BrokerTec continues to be the reference point in the US Treasury market and we have seen growth in US and EU repo.
In March BrokerTec acquired a majority share in eMID  a multilateral trading platform for interbank deposits and money market instruments in Europe.
Integrating the eMID technology into our infrastructure we can offer its Italian government bond repo and interbank deposit businesses to our extensive international client base.
With access to the domestic financial community in Italy we plan to establish a money market offering for Italian corporates and are excited about contributing to the further development and evolution in this central market.
In NEX Optimisation we already have many solutions that help clients simplify and optimise their resources across the transaction lifecycle.
8 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions The event raised 8.2 million supporting over 200 charities globally which is equivalent to more than 5% of NEXs fullyear pretax trading profit.
My thanks to all involved for their tremendous spirit and support.
This years dividend and outlook for the coming year The directors recommend a final dividend of 27 .0p per share which will result in a fullyear dividend of 38.5p per share 201516 38.5p per share.
If approved the final dividend will be paid on 21 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 30 June 2017 .
The shares will be quoted exdividend from 29 June 2017 .
Our performance continues to be strong in a tough market environment while trading activity since the start of the year has been subdued as volatility remains low despite sporadic activity around political events.
In the year ahead NEX will continue to make progress on its strategy to deliver against its growth objectives and drive operational leverage.
I would like to thank our employees for their energy and commitment during this transition year.
We have much ahead of us as we create a strong identity for NEX.
I am convinced that together we have the innovation and leadership skills to enable us to build a great business.
Michael Spencer
Group Chief Executive Officer
We continue to identify and provide capital to firms delivering new platforms business models and next generation technologies with the objective of driving significant efficiency transparency and scale across the transaction lifecycle.
NEX Exchange has exactly the same regulatory legal and tax status as the alternative markets which we combine with a highquality service to help entrepreneurs raise capital on the public market.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  the Group reported revenue from continuing operations of 543 million up 18% on the prior year.
On a constant currency basis revenue from NEX Markets was up 8% and from NEX Optimisation was up 9%.
During the course of the year the Groups trading performance benefited from increases in market share across various products including BrokerTec UST Actives and Asian NDFs and new product launches such as triResolve Margin and new functionality on EBS Treasury.
This was partly offset by historically low FX volatility impacting trading activity on the EBS FX platform.
The Group reported a trading operating profit of 145 million an increase of 4% on the prior year or 12% if we exclude the impact of FX hedging.
Although the Groups trading operating profit margin reduced to 27% 201516 30% underlying profitability was higher after adjusting for FX hedging.
Charity Day Our 24th Annual Charity Day was held in December 2016.
This truly global fundraising event has become a fixed point in the financial services industry calendar.
It was a delight to welcome Prince Harry as well as the Countess of Wessex and many other celebrity patrons of our selected charities to the London office.
For the business model see pages 23 For Charity Day see pages 1819 For financial results see pages 2429 9 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 INNOVATIVE
Our investment in our people and culture supports the success of our business.
We build longterm relationships and are committed to the highest standards in everything we do.
10 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 EMPLOYEES BY LOCATION New Jersey
New York Hong Kong
Singapore
Milan
UK
London 634 Bristol 42 Tel Aviv
8tel300 By region Americas and Canada 579 Asia Pacific 143 Europe Middle East and Africa 1219 Employees in satellite offices 22 11 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report OUR STRATEGIC PRIORITIES To support the needs of a changing market To provide bestinclass financial technology solutions What weve achieved The sale of our voice broking business has transformed us into a focused financial technology company.
We have the scale financial discipline and demonstrable success of a 30year business but the mindset of a tech startup.
More than 60 clients have adopted our margin management service in anticipation of the new variation margin regulations that became effective at the beginning of March 2017 .
Our Regulatory Reporting platform brings together a suite of services under a single umbrella to offer our clients a fully resilient crossasset and crossjurisdictional regulatory reporting solution to enable them to manage the reporting challenges of today and tomorrow.
This is a key component of the various solutions we offer to enable our clients to meet the challenges of MiFID II which comes into effect on 1 January 2018.
In February 2017  we enhanced our EBS Live Ultra data feed to provide spot FX data at five millisecond intervals making it the fastest FX livestreaming data feed available from a primary market venue significantly improving price discovery and increasing market transparency efficiency and liquidity.
Our NEX Infinity platform will provide our clients with a single signon to one unified front end for distribution of our services aligning and simplifying onboarding operations technical support and integration across all NEX Optimisation businesses.
How we deliver We promote market liquidity by providing robust trading platforms for the OTC markets for a wide range of clients and products.
We provide flexible platforms and solutions which robustly integrate with our clients legacy systems.
We provide our clients with a portfolio of services which optimise their risk and capital across the whole transaction lifecycle.
We help our clients reduce their costs and automate their processes.
What weve achieved We have invested more than 100 million to date in next generation financial technology companies that are focused on leading the transformation of market structure.
As well as this years 48 million investment in ENSO and Abide Financial we have stakes in eight further portfolio companies with exposure to the fast growing areas of riskdata analytics.
One recent example is Axoni which serves the worlds largest financial institutions and capital markets service providers with full stack blockchain solutions.
How we deliver We retain a robust technology infrastructure.
We supply marketleading electronic execution platforms to the professional trading community.
We are focused on innovating and evolving the market ecology.
We build next generation cloudbased technological solutions.
We have created an ecosystem of products and services that span the transaction lifecycle.
STRATEGIC PRIORITY STRATEGIC PRIORITY 12 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions To attract and retain the best talent To grow What weve achieved On Charity Day in December 2016 our employees clients and suppliers raised 8.2 million for 200 charities around the world.
We are extending the number of senior employees who will receive part of their compensation in shares rather than cash and ensuring that the Company Sharesave scheme is made available to as wide an employee base as possible across all Group businesses.
We have a strong internal communications and engagement strategy to ensure that our employees understand NEX are proud to work for us and are motivated for the business to succeed.
This includes regular formal and informal networking events and hackathons in addition to newsletters with articles written by employees from across the Group.
We have an ongoing commitment to training and development with 190 employees over the past 12 months participating in management training programmes.
We run an active and awardwinning apprenticeship programme across all our businesses.
The client base for our portfolio reconciliation and counterparty exposure management service has increased to more than 1900 201516 1680 with 476000 partytoparty reconciliations in 2017 201516 384000.
NEX eFix the matching service that enables clients to execute against daily benchmark rates electronically on the EBS Market platform has continued to demonstrate significant growth.
Average daily volume has increased by more than 50% over the same period to more than 1.6 billion matched per day.
Our global pricing data and information solutions business NEX Data has agreed a distribution partnership with Tradition one of the worlds largest interdealer brokers in OTC commodity and financial products.
It will become a key distributor for Traditions market data and information services division.
How we deliver We understand that a strong corporate culture and a commitment to our values are fundamental to our success.
We know that a successful and rewarding working environment is achieved not only by attracting the most talented individuals but also by understanding the motivation and mindset of our employees.
We fully support our employees to enable them to pursue their personal volunteering and charitable activities.
We constantly learn from the unique challenges presented by a highly technically skilled employee base.
Our leaders work as ambassadors actively encouraging all our employees to achieve a culture of mutual respect partnership and collaboration.
We are redesigning the reward framework to drive strong corporate behaviours encourage team dynamics and widen share ownership.
We aim to break down barriers and build a seamless client and employee experience through greater crossdivisional cooperation.
We will continue to augment our services that enable clients to fulfil their constantly evolving regulatory reporting obligations.
We will consolidate our networks to streamline connectivity.
We will enhance our solutions that enable clients to manage their margin and collateral calculations against ever increasing market complexity.
We will establish new indices based on observable traded data as more trustworthy alternatives to existing benchmarks.
What weve achieved NEX Markets is working with CFETS Chinas official interbank market trading platform to deliver the underlying technology for fixed income and FX electronic execution services in mainland China in a threeyear deal worth around 65 million to NEX.
Our portfolio compression service eliminated more than 191 trillion in notional principal in 201617 201516 168 trillion.
Since launch more than 253 financial institutions have participated in eliminating 959 trillion in total notional outstanding.
STRATEGIC PRIORITY STRATEGIC PRIORITY For KPIs see pages 1415 For risk management and principal risks see pages 2023 How we deliver We will increase our share of the global bank market on EBS Market and EBS Direct.
We will enable regional banks to create unique sources of liquidity in their local markets and currencies.
We will facilitate professional trading firms becoming liquidity providers over EBS Select.
We will provide progressive technology that delivers unique workflow and trading solutions for asset managers.
13 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
CONVERSION OF TRADING PROFIT TO CASH including discontinued OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN SUBSCRIPTION REVENUE NONBANK REVENUE CLIENTS GENERATING 1M REVENUE 2016 2017 restated 118% 107% 118% 2016 2017 27% 27% 30% 2016 2017 41% 34% 41% 30% 33% 2016 2017 33%
Group revenue derived from all business segments net of the impact from hedging.
Performance
18% revenue growth in year primarily benefited from the majority of revenue being in dollars and from new businesses.
Definition
Conversion of trading profit to cash is calculated as cash generated from trading operations less cash flows from operations relating to non controlling interests interest tax and capital expenditure plus dividends received from associates and investments measured as a percentage of trading profit.
Performance
Cash conversion effected by shortterm favourability in working capital movements excluding which conversion would be around 90% in line with the mediumterm expected range of 80% to 90%.
Definition
Trading operating profit as a percentage of revenue.
Performance
The decrease in operating margin reflects ongoing investment for growth impact of hedging losses and certain oneoff costs.
Definition
Percentage of revenue generated from subscription revenue streams.
Performance
Yearonyear increase is driven mainly by new acquisitions which are subscriptionbased.
An increase in NEX Data revenue is also a key contributor.
Definition
Percentage of revenue derived from nonbank client base.
Performance
Yearonyear increase is driven primarily by new acquisition revenue which is derived mainly from nonbank clients.
Definition
Number of clients which generate more than 1 million revenue across all products.
Performance
Improved yearonyear with further growth expected in the future through increased integration and crossselling across the Group.
14 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
CONVERSION OF TRADING PROFIT TO CASH including discontinued OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN SUBSCRIPTION REVENUE NONBANK REVENUE CLIENTS GENERATING 1M REVENUE 2016 2017 restated 118% 107% 118% 2016 2017 27% 27% 30% 2016 2017 41% 34% 41% 30% 33% 2016 2017 33%
Group revenue derived from all business segments net of the impact from hedging.
Performance
18% revenue growth in year primarily benefited from the majority of revenue being in dollars and from new businesses.
Definition
Conversion of trading profit to cash is calculated as cash generated from trading operations less cash flows from operations relating to non controlling interests interest tax and capital expenditure plus dividends received from associates and investments measured as a percentage of trading profit.
Performance
Cash conversion effected by shortterm favourability in working capital movements excluding which conversion would be around 90% in line with the mediumterm expected range of 80% to 90%.
Definition
Trading operating profit as a percentage of revenue.
Performance
The decrease in operating margin reflects ongoing investment for growth impact of hedging losses and certain oneoff costs.
Definition
Percentage of revenue generated from subscription revenue streams.
Performance
Yearonyear increase is driven mainly by new acquisitions which are subscriptionbased.
An increase in NEX Data revenue is also a key contributor.
Definition
Percentage of revenue derived from nonbank client base.
Performance
Yearonyear increase is driven primarily by new acquisition revenue which is derived mainly from nonbank clients.
Definition
Number of clients which generate more than 1 million revenue across all products.
Performance
Improved yearonyear with further growth expected in the future through increased integration and crossselling across the Group.
15 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report RESOURCES RELATIONSHIPS AND RESPONSIBILITIES We value the views of our employees and will continue to increase engagement with them through our internal communications programme.
Our new global intranet and our regular employee newsletters and communications have been welcomed across the business.
Our technology Our position as a leading provider of market infrastructure to the global financial markets has been achieved through significant investment in technology over many years.
We operate technology research and development hubs in New Jersey Stockholm and T el Aviv and also work with external suppliers.
We continue to enhance the security of our global systems to mitigate the risk of cyber attack which is ever evolving in sophistication and scope.
Our relationships We build trust with our clients partners investors and regulators and we engage with our stakeholders in an open and cooperative way.
This transparency encourages the growth of mutually rewarding long term relationships.
Our people NEX employs more than 1900 people and we recognise that our success depends on their quality.
We make a significant investment in training to develop the capabilities of our people and to ensure that each employee is aware of their responsibilities.
We have traditionally brought talent into our businesses through our graduate recruitment programme internships and apprenticeships.
We continue to be passionate about hiring early career talent and are redesigning and widening the scope of our talent programme to help employees at all stages of their career to take control of their development.
Our
We recognise that a mix of backgrounds skills and experience within teams improves adaptability and agility and we aim to appeal to a broad range of people.
Gender ratio Male Female Board of directors 6 100% 0 0% Senior management 35 73% 13 27% All other employees 1215 64% 531 28% 1256 65% 544 28% 141 employees are categorised as undisclosed.
Our culture Our ability to adapt to change in our markets and in our business is a direct result of our culture underpinned by the principles of professional conduct.
The board and senior management define the cultural agenda and are engaged in ensuring that we are a valuesdriven organisation.
As part of the rebranding to NEX we are redefining our corporate values and the behaviours that support them and we have consulted with our management teams employees and clients as part of this process.
These values and behaviours are the bedrock of our organisation and are embedded through leadership governance communication talent management and compensation.
16 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Reducing environmental impact Our environmental policy is approved by the board and owned by the Group Chief Financial Officer.
Most of our greenhouse gases arise from the running of our offices and employee travel commitments and we mitigate our total carbon emissions through investment in carbon reducing projects.
Emissions associated with electricity consumption decreased from 14685 tonnes of CO e during 201516 to 11422 tonnes of CO e in 201617  a favourable drop of 22%.
Emissions from air travel decreased by 8.8% from 4930 tonnes of CO e during 201516 to 4495 tonnes of CO e in 201617 .
Tonnes of CO
Emissions from Scope 1 207 276 25% Scope 2 11422 14685 22% Scope 3 10401 12977 20% Total 22030 27938 21% Intensity metric tonnes CO e  FTE 6.06 6.3 3.8% Scope 1 includes direct greenhouse gas emissions from sources owned or controlled by the Company such as natural gas combustion and companyowned vehicles Scope 2 accounts for greenhouse gas emissions from purchased electricity heat and steam generated offsite Scope 3 includes all other indirect emissions such as waste disposal business travel and employee commuting Total emissions per fulltime employee FTE reduced from 6.3 tonnes of CO e in 201516 to 6.06 tonnes of e in 201617 .
These estimates were provided by Natural Capital Partners an environmental consultancy.
Natural Capital Partners assessment was carried out in accordance with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard.
Responsibility for emissions sources was determined using the operational control approach.
Working for society Our business performs a useful role in society by contributing to the stability and prosperity of economies by helping governments and companies to raise capital and manage risk by supporting the efficient functioning of global markets by providing transparency for clients and helping to maintain the liquidity of markets and by using our position as a leader in electronic trading in OTC markets to help make markets safer by enabling greater use of technology.
Although we have a small direct footprint in terms of social and community issues we recognise that our behaviour and activities can have a positive effect.
Our
One of our key strategic priorities is to grow expanding and diversifying our client base outside our traditional areas.
We know that client experience is ultimately the most important driver of our brand reputation and strength.
Our clients rely on us to provide them with insight into the marketplace and to use our expertise to their advantage.
They require us to be absolutely trustworthy and professional in everything we do.
We work with governments and regulatory authorities to maintain a current and detailed understanding of the legislation and regulation that affect us and our clients.
These relationships give us insight into the policy process and enable us to respond efficiently to change.
Doing business responsibly We aim to do business in a socially responsible way and to contribute to the communities of which we are part.
We are committed to the highest ethical standards in our business.
As a key part of the global financial infrastructure we adhere to the spirit and the letter of the law within our control compliance and assurance environment.
Our compliance and control risk infrastructure includes trade surveillance communications monitoring comprehensive training and a whistleblowing hotline.
We have a Code of Ethics and Business Conduct policy which is approved by the board.
Clear ethical guidelines are issued to all Group companies and compliance with these guidelines is monitored through the Groups internal control framework.
We have a zerotolerance attitude towards money laundering bribery and corruption and an ongoing programme of internal training is in place to ensure all employees are aware of these policies.
We promote equal access to jobs and promotion opportunities as we believe that differences in background and outlook are key to creating a healthy and dynamic organisation.
We expect our employees and all those who work with us to show tolerance respect and dignity for all.
No employee applicant contractor or temporary worker is treated less favourably victimised or harassed on any grounds.
Consideration is always given to human rights principles as part of our working practices.
The Groups health and safety policy is approved by the board and owned by the Global Chief Operating Officer.
Regional health and safety committees ensure there is an effective structure for delivering compliance with the policy.
It is the responsibility of managers to provide a healthy and safe working environment for employees.
As most of our employees work in office environments there are no significant areas of risk on which to report.
17 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 CHARITY DA Y On Charity Day we donate 100% of our revenue and commissions globally to charity.
Each business division and all our offices around the world participate.
The impact of the day is phenomenal.
Charity Day is a day unlike any other.
Employees swap suits for fancy dress and visiting celebrities keep spirits high and lend a hand to help close transactions.
Charity Day gets tremendous support from the market too with clients working closely with us on the day to maximise the amount of revenue and commission placed with the business and therefore the amount of money raised for charity.
This global initiative has a local focus.
We invite employees to nominate their favourite charities and each regional centre decides which charities benefit.
We prefer to work with small organisations where our contribution will make a big difference.
Our policy is to help different charities each year and in 2016 we supported 200 charities around the world.
Thanks to the efforts of our employees clients and suppliers our 2016 Charity Day raised a fantastic 8.2 million10.3 million bringing the total amount raised over 24 years to nearly 135 million.
18 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 In 1993 we held our first Charity Day.
We had no agenda at that time apart from let us give a days work totally to charitable causes but it proved to be a defining moment for our character and ethos.
We have continued each year since and in all our offices around the world to dedicate one day in early December exclusively to giving our entire revenue whether it be dollar euro pound or yen to local charities.
I am extremely proud of what we have achieved together.
Over those nearly 25 years many staff have said to me this is the best day in the year I share that sentiment.
Michael Spencer
Group Chief Executive Officer
19 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report
RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk function NEX maintains a strong and independent Group Risk function responsible for providing independent expertise challenge advice and escalation with regard to noteworthy risk issues and developments.
The Chief Risk Officer reports for governance purposes to the Risk Committee and in order to ensure continuing independence the Chairman of the Risk Committee makes recommendations to the Remuneration Committee regarding compensation of the Chief Risk Officer.
Risk culture NEX maintains a strong risk culture whereby all staff are expected to embrace their responsibility to manage risk properly and where the first line of defence business management is primarily and ultimately responsible for the identification analysis and management of the risks in its business.
Essential to the risk management programme is widespread acceptance of a no surprises culture where transparency and prompt identification and escalation of mistakes or problems are fundamental and nonnegotiable and are the foundation for constant introspection and continuous selfimprovement.
NEX seeks to generate attractive returns through informed risktaking and proper consideration of both the upside and potential downside of the risks it takes and faces.
We also strive to ensure that our risk management programme operates within a framework of transparency and continuous selfimprovement and that it effectively responds to changes in the internal and external environment and what is learned through experience.
The core nature of our approach to risk management has not changed.
The key elements of that approach are below.
Board oversight and governance The Risk Committee of the board has responsibility and oversight of our risk management and internal control systems.
It provides this oversight through approval of the risk appetite and key policies collection and review of extensive management information about key and emerging risks risk developments and risk events and regular meetings with the Chief Risk Officer and other key executives to discuss analyse and challenge risk developments.
The report from the Chairman of the Risk Committee is on page 47 .
A strong and robust risk management programme is fundamental to NEXs ability to meet its strategic objectives.
20 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Below is a description of what we view to be NEXs principal risks along with a discussion of the nature of the risk the NEX businesses affected by the risk the relevant risk appetite and whether the risk level is increasing or decreasing.
We also describe some of the controls in place to mitigate the identified risk.
While no control can guarantee that a risk event will never occur these are controls that we believe contribute to a welldesigned framework around risk management and mitigation.
Risk Nature of risk and appetite Trend Mitigating controls Liquidity risk The risk that NEX will have insufficient funds to meet its obligations under ordinary and reasonably stressed conditions.
This risk occurs within the BrokerTec US matched principal business where it serves as a fully matched counterparty to offsetting positions entered into by clients of its electronic trading platform to facilitate anonymity and access to clearing and settlement.
In the course of utilising a central clearing house as well as a third party clearing bank for the settlement of transactions BrokerTec will be required to post collateral as well as twicedaily shortterm margin based on the size of executed but unsettled transactions.
Without sufficient funds to meet its obligations BrokerTec could be exposed to breach of contract claims a reluctance of clients to continue using the platform and an inability to continue as a member of the central clearing house.
The boards risk appetite provides for NEX to maintain access to sufficient funding to meet its obligations during ordinary and reasonably stressed market conditions.
This risk has increased somewhat over the past year as both the clearing house and the Groups clearing banks have increased their margin requirements industry wide in response to more aggressive stress scenarios.
The Group seeks to mitigate and control this risk through the following periodic reviews including going concern assessments membership of the clearing house netting group 200 million swingline facility maintained centrally for same and next day utilisation contingency funding arrangements and procedures in place and daily monitoring and escalation to executive management and Group Risk of funding requirements.
Counterparty credit risk The risk of loss from the failure of a matched principal counterparty to settle its trades.
This risk occurs within the BrokerTec US matched principal business where it serves as a fully matched counterparty to offsetting positions entered into by clients of its electronic trading platform to facilitate anonymity and access to clearing and settlement.
Transactions with clearing house members are typically confirmed and novated shortly after execution at which point the clearing house assumes the risk of settlement.
For transactions with counterparties that are not members of the clearing house however settlement typically occurs on the day following execution and prior to settlement BrokerTec is exposed to the risk of loss in the event a counterparty fails to meet its obligations.
If that were to occur BrokerTec would have the right to cover or liquidate the open position but could incur a loss in doing so.
The boards risk appetite provides for the establishment and administration of counterparty credit limits and other risk management tools reasonably designed to avoid any significant credit loss.
This risk has decreased somewhat over the past year as NEX has increased its collection of collateral from clients and lowered the available trading limits for certain clients.
Moreover with the sale of the voice broking business the instruments that are the subject of settlement risk are exclusively highquality sovereign instruments and not the broader range of instruments in which the broking business used to transact.
The Group seeks to mitigate and control this risk through the following membership of the clearing house netting group establishment and administration of board approved credit limit matrix regular review of client financial position and trading activity collection of client credit enhancement e. notional limits.
PRINCIPAL RISKS The principal risks to our business model and strategic objectives are regularly identified and reviewed.
These are not the only risks NEX faces but they are those considered to be the more significant ones flowing from the business model.
21 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report PRINCIPAL RISKS CONTINUED Risk Nature of risk and appetite Trend Mitigating controls Legal and regulatory risk The risk of breaching regulatory requirements general laws andor contractual commitments.
This risk generally applies to all of NEXs businesses though in different ways.
BrokerTec
TriOptima NEX SEF previously called EBS Global Facility and NEX Exchange operate regulated introducing or trading platforms and the Abide Financial regulatory reporting service is an approved reporting entity.
These businesses are subject to extensive regulation including adherence to specific rules and standards regulatory exams and inquiries monitoring and surveillance and creation and maintenance of required records.
All of NEXs businesses utilise to a significant degree client contracts that set forth mutual obligations to be adhered to in the course of the provision of products and services.
A breach of those obligations by NEX could result in damages as well as harm to its reputation and loss of clients.
In addition to the risks associated with NEXs existing businesses it may also be exposed to legacy risks from the voice broking business sold to TP ICAP pursuant to indemnities and warranties agreed to as part of the sale.
The boards risk appetite provides for NEX to materially operate at all times in accordance with its legal regulatory and contractual obligations.
This risk has decreased in certain ways and increased in others.
With the sale of the voice broking business the Group believes that its regulatory risk while still important for certain of its businesses has decreased on an overall basis as compared with ICAP.
The Group now has significantly fewer regulated entities engages in significantly fewer regulated activities and has substantially fewer staff engaging in regulated activities.
The risk of breaching contractual commitments however has increased not because of a greater likelihood of breaches but because the consequences of a breach have become greater as the business increasingly gives rise to assisting its clients with completion of their regulatory obligations.
The Group seeks to mitigate and control this risk through the following NEX has internal legal and compliance departments which act as independent advisory and investigation functions to enable and defend the Groups strategic aims the Group seeks to utilise standard contracts for its baseline services that have been reviewed by both the legal department and commercial management to properly allocate risks advice is taken regularly from appropriately qualified external advisors and professionals documented policies and procedures are communicated to all relevant staff and training is provided to staff on an ongoing basis.
Information security risk The risk of confidential client information being improperly shared or accessed.
This risk generally applies to all of NEXs businesses.
The NEX Markets business will routinely have access to information about the trading activity of its clients on its platforms and the NEX Optimisation business provides a variety of services that necessitate access to its clients trading settlement margining and risk activity.
The failure to protect this information effectively could result in damages for breach of contract breach of data protection requirements in certain jurisdictions and a loss of client trust.
The boards risk appetite provides for the Group to maintain robust policies procedures and systems reasonably designed to protect the confidentiality of client information.
This risk has increased as the incidence and gravity of cyber security threats and attacks continue to increase in the financial sector and in the markets generally.
The risk is also likely to increase in light of two impending regulatory developments.
One is the implementation of the EU General Data Protection Regulation which takes effect on 25 May 2018 and which increases both the obligations associated with protecting confidential information and the penalties associated with failing to do so.
The other is the implementation of MiFID II which takes effect on 1 January 2018 and which will require specified new monitoring of the Groups EUbased EBS and BrokerTec trading platforms that will necessitate collection and proper handling of individual trader information.
The Group seeks to mitigate and control this risk through the following timely escalation and mitigation of risk events provision of training and guidance information security breach monitoring cyber security programme including penetration testing contractual liability limitations and restrictions on physical access to Company facilities.
22 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Risk Nature of risk and appetite Trend Mitigating controls Business resiliency risk The risk that key operating and control systems are unavailable.
This risk applies to all of NEXs businesses.
NEXs clients utilise the Group to provide essential execution and optimisation services and as such rely on the services being available and operating as intended.
A failure to maintain this availability could result in disruption and loss for clients as well as increase their interest in utilising competitor service providers.
This is a particularly significant risk for NEX Markets trading platforms which have established wellregarded levels of liquidity that encourage continued use but could face difficulty replicating those same levels of liquidity if clients were to make a significant and sustained switch to alternative venues.
Certain of the NEX Optimisation businesses also rely on the network effects of multiple participants utilising a service at the same time so a service disruption that prompted client defections could also have a pronounced negative affect on certain of these businesses.
The boards risk appetite provides for the Group to maintain robust policies procedures and systems reasonably designed to ensure the availability of key systems.
This risk has increased in recognition that cyber threats generally are increasingly targeted not only at the theft of information but at disrupting the operations of market participants.
The Group seeks to mitigate and control this risk through the following timely escalation and mitigation of risk events provision of training and guidance cyber security programme including penetration testing contractual liability limitations and documented and tested business recovery programme.
External change risk The risk that NEX does not effectively respond to significant political and regulatory changes pertinent to its business.
This risk applies to all of NEXs businesses.
NEXs businesses are either themselves regulated or serving financial institutions that are.
As such developments in the regulatory environment have the potential to significantly affect NEXs business.
Two recent examples of such developments are particularly noteworthy.
First the vote for the UK to leave the EU has the potential to change significantly the prevailing model of how financial institutions in Europe operate and how and from where they provide their services.
With UKbased regulated platforms that have relied on EU passporting notably BrokerTec Europe the Group will have to respond to changes in licensing requirements as well as decisions by its clients all of which may entail added cost and operating complexity.
Secondly with the change in presidential administration in the US the regulatory climate of the past eight years may change significantly potentially manifesting itself in reduced regulatory burdens and greater flexibility.
This would be helpful for some of the Groups businesses that are regulated but potentially unhelpful for those that provide services to financial institutions seeking to comply with regulatory obligations.
The boards risk appetite provides for sufficient resources and expertise to be allocated to the identification analysis monitoring and response to such changes.
This risk has increased given the magnitude of the change and uncertainty that both the UK vote to leave the EU and the new US administration pose to the future of financial services.
The elevated risk level is not a judgement that the eventual changes will be negative for the Group they may in fact be positive.
It is rather a judgement that the level of change and uncertainty is at an almost historic level creating a necessarily higher degree of challenge to manage the change effectively.
The Group seeks to mitigate and control this risk through the following maintenance of internal and external regulatory affairs advisors to provide updates on regulatory developments and convey the Groups perspective on legislative and regulatory issues to policymakers internal committees tasked with monitoring analysing and implementing change necessitated by regulatory developments and regular reporting and discussion of key and emerging risks at the board Risk Committee.
23 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report RESULTS FOR 201617 NEX is focused on driving revenue growth increasing its operating profit margin and delivering value to its shareholders.
Group performance Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March
Revenue 543 460 18% Trading operating profit 145 139 4% Trading profit before tax 114 110 4% Trading operating profit margin 27% 30% 3 ppt Trading EPS basic 23.2p 23.6p 2% NEX transformation programme NEX is focused on driving revenue growth increasing its operating profit margin and delivering value to its shareholders.
By the end of 201920 both divisions NEX Markets and NEX Optimisation aspire to report an operating margin of at least 40% with Group revenue compound annual growth rate CAGR at 710%.
NEXs current core cost base is expected to increase in line with inflation over the medium term.
Following the completion of the sale of ICAPs Global Broking division to TP ICAP NEX management has undertaken a review of the business and its requirements.
As a result NEX has identified cost savings of approximately 25 million to be delivered by 201920.
These savings will be derived from the reassessment of corporate functions and the streamlining of infrastructure particularly within NEX Optimisation.
The cost to achieve these savings will be approximately 10 million which will not be treated as an exceptional item.
The costs savings will be offset by continued investment in new products in addition to increased costs from potential acquisitions and special projects.
Financial performance For the year ended 31 March 2017  the Group reported revenue of 543 million an increase of 18% on a reported basis on the prior year and an increase of 8% on a constant currency basis.
On a constant currency basis revenue from NEX Markets was up 8% and from NEX Optimisation was up 9%.
During the course of the year the Groups trading performance benefited from increases in market share and volatility across European repo BrokerTec UST Actives and Asian NDFs. of triResolve Margin.
This was partly offset by low FX volatility impacting trading activity on the EBS platform and low euro interest rate volatility impacting Reset the risk mitigation product.
NEX continues to make focused investments to drive product innovation in response to evolving market needs.
Major areas of focus include products that provide clients with solutions to regulatory requirements and ones that are targeted at expanding NEXs client base.
In addition NEX Opportunities has continued to invest in new startups leveraging next generation technologies.
During the year NEX acquired ENSO and Abide Financial in which it already had minority stakes.
The Group reported a trading operating profit of 145 million an increase of 4% on the prior year.
Although the Groups trading operating profit margin reduced to 27% 201516 30% underlying profitability was higher after adjusting for FX hedging losses of 17 million 201516 loss of 6 million and oneoff costs of 5 million relating to the integration of offices in the
Moreover the newly acquired highgrowth ENSO and Abide Financial businesses added operating losses of 5 million and should reach run rate breakeven in the next 18 months.
The Groups continuing operations reported a trading profit before tax of 114 million 201516 110 million 4% up on the prior year.
Continuing trading EPS basic of 23.2p per share 201516 23.6p per share was down from the prior year as a four percentage point increase in the trading ETR offset the 4% improvement on the trading profit before tax.
24 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Geopolitical events dominated this past years news and underpinned sporadic trading in US Treasuries.
Last November the result of the US presidential election produced the second highest volume day since the launch of BrokerTec underpinned by the resilience of the platform.
Speculation around the US Presidents policies also continued to drive heightened volatility.
Additionally the Federal Reserve although keeping interest rates on hold for much of the year has now embarked on a measured agenda of raising rates providing trading opportunities.
Trading activity in the secondary market for European government bonds has steadily improved from the lows seen in the first half of the year.
Banks continue to hold less inventory and client flow is still substantially lower.
Trading activity remains concentrated around new bond issuance in addition to an uplift more generally in France and Holland in the runup to their elections.
In March 2017  BrokerTec announced that it had completed the transaction to acquire a majority stake in eMID the first Italian electronic central limit order book platform for interbank deposits and overnight indexed swaps.
The transaction offers BrokerTec Europe a strong footprint in the Italian debt and money markets.
The US repo product benefited from the uptick in market volatility that began ahead of the UK vote to leave the EU and persisted through the US presidential election.
Trading activity in the European repo market benefited from increased volatility demand for good quality collateral and a lack of supply from the buyside.
BrokerTec Direct is the relationshipbased trading platform that provides the opportunity for liquidity consumers to receive tailored streams of liquidity for US Treasury benchmarks from major liquidity providers.
The existing platform will be upgraded to deliver enhanced functionality which will enable BrokerTec to increase its existing client base and broaden the overall offering to further complement the existing core BrokerTec business.
EBS
EBS a global electronic platform for the FX markets is a reliable and trusted source of executable and genuine liquidity across major and emerging market currencies.
Both its anonymous and disclosed trading venues give its clients multiple execution and distribution options and the benefit of an established and farreaching distribution network of liquidity providers and consumers.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue is flat on a constant currency basis and increased by 13% on a reported basis to 145 million 201516 128 million contrasting with a 7% decrease in average daily volume to 83 billion.
The significant uptick in volume for the five weeks following the result of the US presidential election was unable to offset lower volumes in the first half of the year.
EBS Market the exchangelike central limit order book remains the benchmark for the professional FX trading community connecting buyers and sellers of currencies in more than 50 countries.
It has maintained its position as a primary interbank venue for the trading of the worlds most actively traded currency pairs including eurodollar and dollaryen.
There is a focused plan in place to enhance the user experience on the EBS Market platform and expand into other currency pairs.
Review of operations NEX MARKETS NEX Markets is a leading electronic trading platforms and solutions business in FX and fixed income products.
The BrokerTec and EBS platforms offer efficient and effective trading solutions to clients in more than 50 countries across a range of instruments including spot FX FX forwards US Treasuries European government bonds and EU and US repo.
These electronic platforms are built on its bespoke networks connecting participants in financial markets.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue increased by 8% on a constant currency basis and increased by 20% on a reported basis to 313 million 201516 261 million.
The trading operating profit increased to 116 million 201516 92 million and the trading operating profit margin increased two percentage points to 37%.
NEX Markets
Change % BrokerTec 155 133 17 CFETS contract 13 0 na
Trading operating profit 116 92 26 Trading operating profit margin 37% 35% 2 ppt Restated  hedging impact and NEX Exchange are now reported separately EBS is a reliable and trusted source of executable and genuine liquidity across major and emerging market currencies.
BrokerTec
BrokerTec is a global electronic platform for the trading of US Treasuries European government bonds and EU and US repo.
It facilitates trading for banks and nonbank professional trading firms.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue increased by 8% on a constant currency basis and increased by 17% on a reported basis to 155 million 133 million.
This performance reflects a 2% decrease in US Treasury average daily volume to 164 billion a 3% increase in US repo to 219 billion and a 6% increase in European repo to 186 billion.
25 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report RESULTS FOR 201617 CONTINUED EBS Select which allows nonbanks to become liquidity providers to nonbank liquidity consumers has seen a sharp increase in participants with more than 25 liquidity providers and 180 liquidity consumers now actively trading.
FX forwards and swaps volumes continue to grow and attract additional participants with more than 20 new liquidity consumers added since November 2016.
This allows access to a significant part of the FX market in which EBS has never previously participated.
During the year NEX Treasury added new FX functionality onto the platform to support the trading of FX spot forwards and swaps leveraging FX pricing from EBS Direct.
Currently there are more than 475 corporates and more than 625 funds and banks active on the platform.
CFETS contract In June 2016 NEX announced that CFETS Chinas official interbank market trading platform and infrastructure provider had chosen NEX Markets to deliver the underlying technology for fixed income and FX electronic execution services in mainland China.
The deal valued at 65 million over a threeyear period will see NEX expand into China a key growth market for the business.
During the year EBS Market has continued to develop and create liquidity in both CNH and NDFs with average daily volume growing by more than 11% and 24% respectively compared with the same period last year.
Despite the ongoing headwinds from a low interest rate environment EBS Market continues to innovate.
In February 2017  it launched EBS Live Ultra the fastest FX livestreaming data feed available from a primary FX market venue at five millisecond ms intervals.
This faster data feed is available only to market participants that meet certain trading criteria.
The slower data feeds at 100ms and 20ms have been competitively repriced to attract new client interest.
NEX eFix the matching service that enables clients to execute against daily benchmark rates electronically on the EBS Market platform has continued to demonstrate significant growth.
Average daily volume has increased by more than 50% over the same period in 201516 to more than 1.6 billion matched per day.
EBS Direct is a platform that allows liquidity providers to stream tailored prices directly to liquidity consumers.
Interest in the platform continues to grow and the platform has more than 45 liquidity providers and 400 liquidity consumers using the service.
The EBS Direct platform had a 21% increase in average daily volume over the prior year to 21 billion.
NEX Markets is a leading electronic trading platforms and solutions business in FX and fixed income products.
The
BrokerT ec and EBS platforms offer efficient and effective trading solutions to clients in more than 50 countries across a range of instruments.
These electronic platforms are built on its bespoke networks connecting participants in financial markets.
26 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
TriOptima lowers costs and mitigates risk in OTC derivatives markets primarily through the elimination and reconciliation of outstanding transactions.
It continues to benefit from the strategic alignment of its offerings with the G20 policy objectives of transparency and risk reduction in the financial system.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue increased by 6% on a constant currency basis and by 19% on a reported basis to 86 million 201516 72 million.
Revenue growth was driven by the expansion into new market segments for the portfolio compression service triReduce and the uptake of new offerings in the reconciliation service triResolve.
The stringent leverage ratio included within the Basel III rules continues to drive demand from banks for the compression service.
During the year the compression service terminated 191 trillion of gross notional outstanding 201516 168 trillion.
Since launch more than 253 financial institutions have participated in eliminating 959 trillion in total notional outstanding from the OTC derivatives market. coverage.
In April 2016 it launched the first Swedish krona swaps compression cycle in collaboration with Nasdaq in May 2016 it completed the first compression cycle for cleared euro interest rate swaps in Eurex Clearing in August 2016 the first cycle for cleared Mexican pesos at the CME Group clearing house took place and compression for NDF and nonCLS eligible currencies was launched and in October 2016 it introduced the compression for client cleared swaps at LCH SwapClear.
Initially a portfolio reconciliation service triResolve has expanded its suite of offerings during the year to include triResolve Margin for the automated calculation and agreement of variation margin allowing clients to meet the regulatory requirements for variation margin which took effect in March 2017 .
Since launch 70 subscribers have joined the triResolve Margin service.
Standard portfolio reconciliation as required by regulation continues to experience steady growth.
The number of institutions using the triResolve core service has increased from 1680 during 201516 to more than 1900 who participate in 476000 partytoparty reconciliations each month 201516 384000.
Traiana
Traiana monitors pre trade risk and automates post trade processing of financial transactions across multiple asset classes.
Its solutions have become the market standard for post trade processing of FX exchangetraded derivatives fixed income CDS and synthetic and cash equity transactions.
Traianas Harmony network connects more than 1000 global banks brokerdealers buyside firms and trading platforms.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue decreased by 5% on a constant currency basis and increased by 8% on a reported basis to 57 million 201516 53 million following a reduction in FX volumerelated services and the introduction of a new pricing structure to incentivise longterm client contracts.
This was partly offset by an increase in non FXrelated revenue.
Traiana continues to innovate grow and diversify its business into other asset classes.
In June 2016 it announced that Barclays and UBS had gone live on its Harmony CCP Connect for Equities platform.
These banks will further enhance the netting benefits already seen by the market through automated central clearing of OTC equity trades.
In February 2017  Traiana launched Swaps Centre a suite of services which enable swaps providers to electronically manage payments and confirmations in equity swaps.
Traiana has seen continued strong growth in volumes via its Harmony Equity CCP service which plays an important role in reducing counterparty risk and increasing transparency.
NEX OPTIMISATION NEX Optimisation offers a portfolio of cloudhosted services across the transaction lifecycle.
Ranging from preexecution credit checking to multilateral portfolio compression NEX Optimisations purpose is to simplify its clients workflow and help them optimise their resources by mitigating risk increasing efficiency reducing costs and streamlining increasingly complex processes.
During the year NEX Optimisation acquired ENSO Financial Analytics a treasury and portfolio finance solution business for the hedge fund industry with over 1 trillion in assets under advisory and Abide Financial which provides solutions for market participants to meet their regulatory reporting obligations.
Alongside Traiana and NEX Data Abide Financial forms a central piece of the NEX Regulatory Reporting business which provides a crossasset and crossjurisdictional regulatory reporting solution for NEXs clients.
NEX Optimisation is currently reshaping its organisational structure.
The primary focus is to organise the business in a way that clients want to use services matching the way they think about their financial regulatory and operational challenges.
This will be achieved by restructuring NEX Optimisations legal entities and products to six solutions which resonate with clients trade and portfolio management analytics regulatory reporting financial resource optimisation data insights and opportunities.
In conjunction with the restructuring NEX Optimisation continues to build the NEX Infinity platform which will provide clients with a single platform that seeks to simplify trade processing reduce costs and optimise their risk and capital across the entire transaction lifecycle.
It will be capable of delivering both NEX Optimisations suite of industryleading services and others available from third party vendors.
NEX Infinity will deliver efficiencies in the divisions operating model by reducing duplicated functions and having a single data ingestion and interface with clients.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue increased by 9% on a constant currency basis and increased by 24% on a reported basis to 240 million 201516 194 million.
The trading operating profit was marginally down at 69 million 201516 70 million and the trading operating profit margin reduced by seven percentage points to 29% driven by the consolidation of recent lossmaking acquisitions ENSO and Abide Financial and additional investment.
NEX Optimisation
Change % TriOptima 86 72 19 Traiana 57 53 8 NEX Data 48 32 50 Reset 37 37 ENSO 9 na Abide Financial 3 na
Trading operating profit 69 70 1 Trading operating profit margin 29% 36% 7 ppt 27 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report RESULTS FOR 201617 CONTINUED ENSO is looking to leverage the capabilities of the other NEX companies the first example of which is the partnership with NEX T reasury.
NEX Data NEX Data delivers independent market intelligence and price information for OTC data to financial market participants from information received from NEX Markets and third parties.
NEX Data generates subscriptionbased fees as well as licensing fees from other index administrators for the use of NEX Data in their indices.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue increased by 30% on a constant currency basis and 50% on a reported basis to 48 million 201516 32 million driven by organic growth on existing services the launch of new pricing and analytics products and electronictransaction based indices.
In addition a change to direct client billing increased both revenue and the related operating expenses.
During the year NEX Data launched the first fully electronic tradebacked CNH FX Spot benchmark following considerable interest from a number of major Chinese banks.
In addition NEX Data and ENSO released the ENSO Market Rate a reference rate which provides securities lending data from 100 of the largest asset managers.
In January 2017  NEX Data became a key distributor for Traditions market data and information services division.
The agreement includes realtime and endofday prices sourced directly from Traditions global electronic hybrid and voice broking operations in all asset classes.
By acting as a distributor to Tradition which offers complementary data services NEX Data will be able to expand its multiasset class and Asian market coverage and develop new services in pricing analytics and indices.
Reset
Reset is a provider of risk mitigation services reducing basis risk within trading portfolios in interest rate FX equity index and inflation derivatives.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  revenue decreased by 12% on a constant currency basis and was flat on a reported basis at 37 million 201516 37 million as the business continues to be affected by low shortdated interest rate volatility in Europe and further dampened volatility as a result of the ECBs quantitative easing programme.
During the year commentators speculated about the timing of an increase in US interest rates which began a period of increased demand for Resets US dollar services and continued with the US presidential election and Federal rate rises in December 2016 and March 2017 .
Related FX volatility also benefited NDF volumes.
Despite the drag of subdued Eurozone demand the business is well placed to capitalise on higher client volumes on the back of further US interest rate rises.
ENSO Financial Analytics In April 2016 ENSO was acquired by NEX through NEX Opportunities.
ENSO delivers data analytics and workflow tools that enable hedge funds and asset managers to manage their relationships with prime brokers more effectively.
ENSO provides a complete view of an individual hedge funds relationships across multiple counterparties delivering insights on counterparty credit risk collateral management portfolio financing and treasury.
During the course of the year ENSOs client base grew by 16% to 104 clients and its revenue for the year ended 31 March 2017 was 9 million.
Based on current investment plans ENSO is expected to achieve run rate break even profitability within the next 18 months.
The future expansion of ENSOS hedge fund client base is expected to be driven by sales of ENSO Edge a product which has been developed for funds with assets under management of less than 1 billion and the entry into new geographies specifically Asia.
ENSO is looking to leverage the capabilities of the other NEX companies the first example of which is the partnership with NEX Treasury that will allow ENSO clients to invest excess cash into money market funds via the NEX Treasury platform.
Abide Financial In October 2016 Abide Financial was acquired by NEX through NEX
Abide Financial is a market leader in the provision of regulatory reporting technology helping market participants ensure they are compliant with evolving reporting obligations.
The company acts as a reporting hub for EMIR and as an Approved Reporting Mechanism for MiFID.
Abide Financial is currently awaiting ESMAs approval to become a trade repository and recently submitted an application to become a MiFID II Data Reporting Services Provider.
Alongside Traiana and NEX Data Abide Financial powers the NEX Regulatory Reporting division to deliver a holistic MiFID II offering for NEXs clients.
For the period since acquisition to 31 March 2017  revenue was 3 million.
Abide Financial is expected to achieve run rate break even profitability within the next 18 months.
28 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions NEX OPPORTUNITIES Through NEX Opportunities NEX is building an investment portfolio of emerging financial technology companies.
It identifies and provides capital to companies delivering new platforms business models and next generation technologies with the objective to drive efficiencies transparency and scale across the transaction lifecycle.
NEX Opportunities has invested 35 million in eight portfolio companies.
During the period NEX Opportunities invested in RSRCHXchange a MiFID II compliant marketplace for institutional research Axoni a leading provider of distributed ledger technology OpenFin a unifying operating layer for financial desktops and Cloud9 Technologies a cloudbased communication provider.
In addition NEX Opportunities made a further investment in OpenGamma a leading provider of risk analytics.
29 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016
Discontinued
Total
Continuing
Discontinued
Total
Revenue 543 587 1130 460 741 1201 Trading operating profit Net finance incomecosts 31 2 29 29 4 25 Share of profit of joint ventures and associates after tax  4 4  7 7 Trading profit before tax Tax 28 18 46 23 20 43 Trading profit for the year Acquisition and disposal costs net of tax 7  7 58  58 Exceptional items net of tax 5 1140 1145 7 27 34 Profit for the year 98 1213 1Trading EPS basic 23.2p 19.7p 42.9p 23.6p 19.8p 43.4p Fullyear dividend per share 38.5p 38.5p The discontinued profit after tax is presented on one line in the consolidated income statement a separate discontinued income statement is presented in note 5 to the financial statements Trading EPS basic and the fullyear dividend per share have been restated for the year ended 31 March 2016 to incorporate the effect of the share consolidation Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Officer 30 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Performance review The results for the 201617 section of the strategic report pages 1 to 33 focus on the Groups divisional revenue and trading operating profit.
Management plans and reviews the financial performance of the business using trading results that exclude acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items see the basis of preparation note to the financial statements.
We choose to focus on trading results as we believe that this provides a clearer view of the business performance.
On 30 December 2016 the Group completed the disposal of IGBB to TP ICAP.
The results of the IGBB business the gain on disposal of IGBB and oneoff separation costs arising from the Transaction have been presented as discontinued operations on one line in the Group consolidated income statement net of tax.
This financial review focuses on the trading performance from continuing operations.
Trading revenue Trading revenue from continuing operations was 543 million which is 83 million 18% up on the prior year.
Revenue benefited from the weakening of pound sterling against the dollar and from new businesses.
Trading profit before tax The Group reported a 6 million 4% increase in trading operating profit from continuing operations.
The trading operating profit excluding the effects of hedging losses was 17 million 12% up on the prior year.
Trading profit before tax was 4 million 4% up on the prior year as the improved trading operating profit was partially offset by a 2 million increase in net finance costs.
Tax on trading profit The Groups tax charge of 28 million on trading profit before tax from continuing operations represents a continuing ETR of 25% 201516 21%.
The continuing ETR primarily reflects the various statutory tax rates applied to taxable profits in territories in which the Group operates.
Acquisition and disposal costs
For the year ended 31 March 2017  acquisition and disposal costs from continuing operations were a 1 million gain 201516 74 million charge before a tax credit of 6 million 201516 16 million.
The acquisition and disposal costs from continuing operations include a 19 million 201516 nil fair value gain arising from the increased investment in ENSO and an additional 2 million fair value gain arising from other transactions which were partially offset by 20 million of amortisation charges 201516 38 million on acquired intangible assets.
A more detailed breakdown of the Groups acquisition and disposal costs is given in notes 3 and 15 to the financial statements.
Exceptional items
For the year ended 31 March 2017  exceptional items from continuing operations were a 5 million gain 201516 9 million charge before tax of nil 201516 2 million tax credit.
The exceptional items from continuing operations relate to a 7 million release of onerous lease provisions as previously vacated office spaces have now been sublet proceeds from a legal expenses insurance claim of 3 million less legal expenses incurred in relation to regulatory matters of 5 million.
Discontinued
For the year ended 31 March 2017  exceptional items from discontinued operations were 1134 million 201516 31 million before a tax credit of 6 million 201516 4 million.
The exceptional items from discontinued operations represent the gain on the disposal of IGBB of 1162 million 201516 nil which is presented net of 28 million of costs of sale.
Other Transactionrelated costs include separation costs of 28 million 201516 31 million.
The proceeds from the Transaction in the form of 56% of the shares in TP ICAP were fully transferred to NEX shareholders.
For further information please see notes 4 and 5 to the financial statements.
Trading EPS and dividend Trading EPS basic is calculated based on the trading profit for the year.
Management believes that trading EPS basic is the most appropriate EPS measurement ratio for the Group as this most closely reflects the ongoing generation of cash attributable to shareholders and in turn the Groups ability to fund sustainable dividends.
In line with this the Remuneration Committee primarily considers trading EPS basic in its review of management performance and uses that metric in the remuneration of the executive directors see the remuneration report on pages 56 to 72.
Trading EPS and dividend per share have been stated for the year ended 31 March 2017 and restated for the year ended 31 March 2016 using the weighted average number of shares in the period from the date of the share consolidation to the balance sheet date.
For further details see notes 6 and 7 to the financial statements.
For more on our KPIs see pages 1415 31 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
Balance sheet highlights The Groups net assets as at 31 March 2017 were 979 million 201516 1018 million.
As at 31 March 2017 As at 31 March 2016
Continuing
Held for sale
Net assets Intangible assets arising on consolidation 1Cash and cash equivalents 32telBorrowings 507 583 81 664 Restricted funds Other net assets Total net assets 979 486 532 1018 Intangible assets arising on consolidation The Groups goodwill and other intangible assets arising from consolidation from continuing operations as at 31 March 2017 were 1026 million 201516 826 million.
During the period the Group recognised 103 million goodwill and other intangible assets in relation to its acquisitions of ENSO Abide Financial and eMID.
The remaining increase mainly resulted from the depreciation of pound sterling against the dollar and euro.
Management reviewed the Groups goodwill and other intangibles assets arising on consolidation for impairment as at 31 March 2017 and concluded that there was no impairment at the date.
The review was based on certain estimates and assumptions including future cash flow projections and discount rates.
The Audit Committee challenged managements judgements and estimates and has approved the appropriateness of management assumptions.
Please see the report of the Audit Committee on pages 44 to 46.
Trade receivables and payables NEX has changed its accounting policy for recording financial instruments relating to its matched principal business from trade date accounting to settlement date accounting.
Matched principal trade receivables and payables as at 31 March 2016 have been restated as a result of the change in accounting policy.
The Group reported a trading EPS basic from continuing operations of 23.2p per share down from the prior year 201516 23.6p per share.
This was driven by the 4% increase in trading profit before tax offset by a four percentage point increase in trading ETR.
Trading EPS basic for the Group including discontinued operations was 42.9p per share down from the prior year 201516 43.4p per share.
The current year earnings include only nine months of discontinued operations in comparison with 12 months in the prior year.
The directors recommend a final dividend of 27 .0p per share.
If approved the final dividend will be paid on 21 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 30 June 2017 .
The shares will be quoted exdividend from 29 June 2017 .
The fullyear dividend will be 38.5p per share 201516 38.5p per share including the interim dividend of 11.5p per share equivalent to the interim dividend paid of 6.6p per share on ICAP plc shares.
The 201516 fullyear dividend comparative has been restated from 22.0p per share to 38.5p per share to reflect the effect of the share consolidation.
The fullyear dividend per share is covered 1.1 times 201516 1.1 times by trading EPS basic from continuing and discontinued operations of 42.9p per share.
Free cash flow The following free cash flow conversion table and the analysis is on a total Group basis including continuing and discontinued operations.
Free cash flow Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Cash generated from operating activities 341 290 Interest and tax 64 57 Cash ow from trading activities 277 233 Capital expenditure 94 71 Dividends from associates joint ventures and investments 5 9 Trading free cash flow 188 171 Free cash flow conversion % 118% 107% Before exceptional items Free cash flow for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated to include movement in restricted funds in financing activities instead of operating activities Trading free cash flow generated during the period was 188 million a conversion rate of 118% 201516 107%.
Over the medium term free cash flow is expected to be 8090% of post tax trading profit.
The excess in cash conversion over profit for the current year was mainly as a result of working capital movements which is expected to normalise.
Excluding the effects of working capital the cash conversion would be in the order of 90%.
The underlying shortfall in cash conversion is from the excess in capital expenditures primarily IT spend over amortisation and depreciation.
Other noncash expenses such as sharebased payment charges partially offset this.
Trading free cash flow of 188 million was used to pay 142 million in dividends to shareholders.
32 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Liquidity and funding The Groups overall funding position as at 31 March 2017 remains strong.
As at 31 March 2017  the Group had committed undrawn headroom under its core credit facilities of 300 million 201516 315 million.
During the year the Group agreed an extension of the maturity date on its revolving credit facility to 31 March 2019.
The gross debt position from continuing operations decreased by 76 million 13% to 507 million as at 31 March 2017 .
The decrease primarily relates to the repayment of the RCF 201516 108 million following the receipt of 330 million cash from TP ICAP .
At 31 March 2017  the Groups longterm issuer ratings were unchanged at Baa3 stable by Moodys and BBB stable by Fitch.
Cash m Cash held in regulated trading entities 213 Cash held in unregulated entities 52 Cash held in central treasury function 159 Total cash 424 Cash includes cash and cash equivalents of 321 million and restricted funds of 103 million all of which is in regulated trading entities Longterm borrowings As at 31 March
Maturity date Fiveyear senior notes 298 4.0% March 2019 RCF  2.1% March 2019 Retail bond 125 5.5% July 2018 Tenyear senior notes 12 5.2% May 2023 Total 435 Net debt Net debt including restricted funds from continuing operations decreased by 6 million 7% in the year to 83 million as at 31 March 2017 .
During the period the Group including discontinued operations converted 188 million of free cash flow.
This was used to pay 142 million in dividends.
On disposal of IGBB on 30 December 2016 NEX received 330 million of cash from TP ICAP under the terms of the Transaction which partially offset the cash derecognised on the disposal.
During the year the Group paid 60 million in relation to various acquisitions ENSO Abide Financial eMID and other investments.
There were also 48 million of exceptional items paid during the year in connection with Transactionrelated expenses.
Strategic report approval The strategic report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Officer 15 May 2017 Net debt m including restricted funds tel89 83
Net debt as at 1 April 2016 continuing and discontinued operations
Dividends paid
Acquisitions Net cash movement on disposal FX and other Net debt as at 31 March 2017 33 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Leadership
During the year the board undertook a detailed review of its composition skills and experience in order to ensure that it is made up of members with the experience to challenge and contribute to NEXs vision.
As a result of this review I am delighted that Anna Ewing will be joining the board of NEX as a nonexecutive director in
Having previously worked for Nasdaq and Merrill Lynch she brings significant technology and operations experience to NEX which I am confident will support our development and growth as a financial technology company.
We look forward to working with Anna.
In accordance with the articles of association of NEX she is expected to stand for appointment at the annual general meeting in July.
John Sievwright was appointed to the board in July 2009 and has been Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committees and the senior independent director for much of this time.
With Johns length of service reaching nine years in July 2018 we are seeking to appoint a nonexecutive with the appropriate experience to take over in due course the chairs of both the Audit and Risk Committees.
Dear shareholders It is with great pleasure that I am introducing the first corporate governance statement and directors report as Chairman of NEX.
During the year the focus for the board and senior management was to a very large extent on ensuring a successful completion of the Transaction with TP ICAP.
This was complex and took longer than anticipated and consumed a great deal of the board and senior managements time.
The result with completion at the end of December 2016 was a very good outcome for shareholders.
This focus led to the deferment of a number of other strategic priorities which had previously been identified for action andor completion during the financial year.
Because of the importance of the Transaction the board supported the Remuneration Committees views on the impact this had on the executive directors bonus arrangements.
Further details of the outcomes relative to the performance goals for 201617 are detailed in the remuneration report.
Charles Gregson
34 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions While these recruitment processes remain ongoing we recognise that our diversity in terms of gender and ethnicity fell short of prescribed targets during the year.
All board appointments will continue to be made on merit with due regard for the benefits of diversity.
In the interim we are confident that our diversity in terms of thinking and challenge remains strong within the boardroom.
Governance
With the launch of NEX and its new position in the competitive financial technology marketplace we have started a review of our governance framework.
We recognise that in this different competitive space we must be fit for purpose with all functions appropriate to the new environment whether regulated or not.
While there is more work to be done the Risk Committee has begun its debate on its focus for 201718 and the outcome of this discussion is documented within the risk management and Risk Committees activities sections of this Annual Report.
As a result of the Transaction and the subsequent review of the governance framework for NEX we undertook internal evaluations of the board and its committees during the year focusing on the outcomes of previous reviews and the requirements for the new Group.
When our governance review has completed and the proposed changes to our board have been embedded for a suitable period during 201718 we will undertake an externally facilitated evaluation of the board and its committees.
Culture
We have always recognised the need for a strong and identifiable culture and we want everybody within the Group to feel and be part of the NEX family as our business continues to develop and grow.
As part of the rebranding to NEX we are redefining our corporate values and the behaviours that support them.
Once
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all board members for their time commitment during the year and continued commitment and enthusiasm for NEX going forward.
In the new NEX world we continue to strive to be a good investment a great employer and a valued contributor to our communities year after year.
Thank you for continuing to support these goals.
Charles Gregson
15 May 2017 For leadership Our board Our key achievements in 201617 Our executive team see pages 3640 and 5051 For relations with shareholders An overview of our shareholder engagement activities during the year Details for our 2017 annual general meeting and the outcome of ICAP plc shareholder meetings held during the year see page 41 For effectiveness Our approach to performance evaluations and update on key actions from 201516 Update on a review of our board composition skills and experience see pages 4244 For accountability Update on a review of our governance framework Our Audit Committees and Risk Committees key activities during the year see pages 4348 For remuneration Our Remuneration Committees key activities during the year Our remuneration report and directors remuneration policy see pages 49 and 5672 35 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report DIRECTORS BIOGRAPHIES
NEX Group plc was incorporated in February 2016 and pursuant to the Scheme of Arrangement became the listed holding company of ICAP plc and its subsidiaries on 15 December 2016.
Charles Gregson Michael Spencer and Stuart Bridges were appointed directors of NEX Group plc on its incorporation in February 2016.
John Sievwright Ivan Ritossa and Robert Standing were appointed to the board of NEX Group plc on 15 December 2016.
All directors will seek appointment or reelection as required under the articles of association of the Company at the 2017 annual general meeting.
NEX board NEX understands the importance of having a board with the right balance of skills experience and diversity.
All NEX directors have extensive knowledge of the financial markets regions and regulatory frameworks in which NEX operates and our nonexecutive directors have global experience of each of NEXs business divisions.
The biographies of the current directors set out their skills experience committee membership and other principal appointments.
Throughout the year more than half the board excluding the Chairman comprised independent nonexecutive directors.
The balance of the board as at 31 March 2017 is illustrated below.
Further details of the nonexecutive directors independence are provided on page 43.
BALANCE OF THE BOARD AS AT 31 MARCH 2017
Nonexecutive directors Executive directors CHAIRMAN AND NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS TENURE AS AT 31 MARCH 2017 0  3 years 3  6 years 6 years Tenure includes time spent as directors of ICAP plc Charles Gregson Chairman age 69
G N Skills and experience Charles brings considerable senior board committee and chairman level expertise.
He has a track record of progressive leadership and a good rapport with senior management teams in each of NEXs divisions.
With more than 20 years of listed company experience Charles also understands the importance of maintaining effective relationships with the institutional investor community media and regulatory bodies.
He has served on a number of boards in the financial services and media sectors including as nonexecutive chairman of St Jamess Place plc and CPP Group plc and as deputy chairman of Provident Financial plc.
Charles was chairman of ICAP plc from 1999 to 2016.
Charles holds a degree in Law from the University of Cambridge and qualified as a solicitor.
Other appointments Charles is the nonexecutive chairman of NonStandard Finance plc and the senior independent director of Caledonia Investments plc.
Michael Spencer Group Chief Executive Officer age 61
G N Skills and experience Having worked in financial services for more than 30 years Michael is well respected within the industry.
He founded Intercapital in 1986 and became its chairman and Chief Executive in October 1998.
Michael brings immense knowledge and insight of successfully growing a complex international business and a deep understanding of the markets in which NEX operates.
Michael together with IPGL and its subsidiary companies is a substantial shareholder in the Company.
He chairs the GEMG and was the Group Chief Executive Officer of ICAP plc from 1999 to 2016.
Michael holds a degree in Physics from the University of Oxford.
Other appointments Michael is chairman of IPGL and is on the boards of many of its investments.
He is the chairman of The Conservative Party Foundation Limited.
Key to board committee membership G Governance N Nomination A Audit R Risk Re Remuneration
Chairman
36 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Officer age 56
Skills and experience Stuart brings many years of listed company international and financial expertise to the board having been the chief financial officer of Hiscox Limited for 16 years.
He has a strong background in strategy and execution and brings particular focus on capital management.
Stuart chairs the GFC and is responsible for the Groups finance internal audit company secretarial investor relations and regulatory affairs functions.
He was appointed Group Finance Director of ICAP plc in 2015.
Stuart holds a degree in Engineering from the University of Cambridge and is a Chartered Accountant.
Other appointments Stuart is a nonexecutive director of Caledonia Investments plc a member of the Audit Committee of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and a member of the Finance Committee of The Royal Institution.
John Sievwright Senior independent director age 62
A R G N Re Skills and experience John has almost 30 years of broad financial services experience with significant exposure to operating at board level.
John was previously senior independent director of FirstGroup plc and chairman of its audit committee.
Following a 20year career with Bank of America Merrill Lynch formerly Merrill Lynch where he held a number of senior management positions based in New York Tokyo and London John brings significant international financial and operational experience to the board.
He was appointed a nonexecutive director of ICAP plc in 2009 and the senior independent director of ICAP plc from 2012 to 2016.
John holds a degree in Accounting and Economics from the University of Aberdeen and is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Scotland.
Other appointments John has no other appointments.
Ivan Ritossa Nonexecutive director age 55
N A R Re Skills and experience Ivan has a strong and varied global investment banking background and extensive electronic market experience in foreign exchange commodities credit prime services and equities.
He previously served on the executive committee for Barclays Investment Bank as a nonexecutive director of ABSA Group and an executive director of Barclays Saudi Arabia board.
Ivan has been a member of numerous industry committees including the New York Federal Reserve Foreign Exchange Committee the Bank of England Foreign Exchange Joint Standing Committee and the Singapore Foreign Exchange Markets Committee.
He was a nonexecutive director of ICAP plc from 2013 to 2016.
Ivan holds an honours degree in Finance from the University of New South Wales
Other appointments Ivan is a nonexecutive director of NEX SEF Limited.
Robert Standing Nonexecutive director age 57
Re G N A R Skills and experience Robert has extensive knowledge of the hedge fund industry and is a founder of the Hedge Fund Standards Board.
He also brings more than 20 years of senior management financial and product development expertise having worked in a number of roles and senior positions at Chemical Bank and JPMorgan.
Robert cofounded London Diversified Fund Management within the JPMorgan group in 1995 before its spin out in 2002.
He was a nonexecutive director of ICAP plc from 2010 to 2016.
Robert holds a degree in Engineering from the University of Cambridge.
Other appointments Robert is a director of DG Partners Services Limited and chief investment officer of Neuron Advisers LLP both part of the London Diversified Fund group.
37 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Board governance framework To ensure it maintains an appropriate level of oversight the board delegates certain roles and responsibilities to its five principal committees Governance Nomination Audit Risk and Remuneration.
Membership of these committees consists primarily of our nonexecutive directors and in some cases the Chairman.
The Nomination Committee makes recommendations for appointments to the board Audit and Risk
The board makes all other committee appointments.
The activities of the principal committees in 201617 are explained in more detail on pages 43 to 49.
Each committee chairman reports back to the board and the board reviews the minutes of previous committee meetings at its next meeting.
Each committees terms of reference are documented and agreed by the board and available to view in the corporate governance section of the Companys website site.
During the year the board began a detailed review of the Groups governance framework in order to improve the boards oversight and understanding of the Groups governance arrangements.
The initial outcomes of this review are discussed in more detail on page 43.
Group Company Secretary All directors have access to the advice and services of the Group Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring that board procedures and applicable rules are observed.
The Group Company Secretary works closely with the Chairman and the chairmen of the boards principal committees to set meeting agendas and ensure the timely presentation of highquality information to the board.
All directors have the power to propose items for discussion at board meetings and regularly did so during the year.
UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE As NEX is listed on the London Stock Exchange we apply the main principles of the Code and comply with the Codes provisions.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  and at the date of this report we complied with the 2014
A revised Code came into effect in 2016 applying to financial years beginning on or after 17 June 2016 and will apply to NEX in 201718.
Copies of the 2014 and 2016 Codes can be found on the FRCs website at www. rc.
Code principle
Role of the board The board is the principal decision making body for all significant matters affecting the Group and is accountable to shareholders for creating and delivering sustainable value.
From a commercial perspective these matters include debating and agreeing NEXs strategy longterm business objectives and risk appetite as well as approving the Groups annual budget dividend proposals and financial statements.
The board is also responsible for promoting the highest standards of corporate governance and ensuring the Group has the necessary resources processes controls and culture in place to deliver Group strategy and promote longterm growth.
Board members A clear division of responsibilities is maintained between the roles of the Chairman and the Group Chief Executive Officer.
It is the responsibility of the Chairman to lead and manage the work of the board.
Responsibility for the Groups executive leadership and daytoday management of the Groups business is delegated to the Group Chief Executive Officer.
The Group Chief Executive Officer is supported in his role by the GEMG.
Further details of the Groups executive committee structure and GEMG members are provided on pages 50 and 51.
A summary of the board members key responsibilities is set out below.
Key responsibilities Title Responsibility Chairman  Responsible for the leadership and management of the board and ensuring its overall effectiveness Encourages all directors to maximise their contributions to the board by drawing on their skills experience knowledge and where appropriate independence Promotes a culture of openness challenge and debate especially for complex and critical issues Engages and consults with major shareholders and principal stakeholders Group Chief Executive Officer  Responsible for the Groups executive leadership and daytoday management of the Groups business within the authorities delegated by the board Group Chief Financial Officer  Responsible for providing strategic financial leadership of the Group and daytoday management of the finance function Senior independent director  Acts as an experienced sounding board for the Chairman and a trusted intermediary for other board members and shareholders Leads the annual evaluation of the Chairman Nonexecutive directors  Contribute sound judgement and objectivity and provide constructive challenge to board discussions and decision making Support the Chairman and the executive directors in instilling appropriate culture and values in the boardroom and beyond Determine appropriate levels of remuneration for the executive directors and scrutinise the performance of management 38 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Board activities and discussions Throughout the year the board received regular updates and reports on the following key matters review of progress of the Transaction and updates on separation work streams Group Chief Executive Officers review of markets strategic developments and investment opportunities review of trading results and financial performance against agreed budget and plans investor reports and feedback from engagement with shareholders verbal reports by board committee chairmen of matters discussed at committee meetings legal company secretarial and regulatory updates review of progress against agreed actions and review of board and executive committee minutes.
Board meeting attendance in 201617
Number of meetings attended % of meetings attended Executive directors Stuart Bridges 6 6 100% Michael Spencer 6 6 100% Nonexecutive directors Charles Gregson 6 6 100% Ivan Ritossa 6 5 83% John Sievwright 6 6 100% Robert Standing 6 6 100% Attendance at board meetings Six scheduled board meetings were held during the year in four locations London New York Hong Kong and Singapore.
The boards of NEX Group plc and ICAP plc also convened a further six times during the year by conference call and held two ad hoc meetings principally in connection with the Transaction.
At the boards request members of the GEMG attended certain board meetings during the year to provide updates on specific developments.
Their attendance provided a valuable opportunity for the nonexecutive directors to engage directly with the executive team and challenge managements thinking on discussion items particularly strategic investment reviews and acquisition proposals.
The table below sets out the scheduled board meeting attendance of the directors who served on the board in 201617 .
Due to unavoidable circumstances Ivan Ritossa was unable to attend one board meeting of ICAP plc on 10 November 2016.
He did however receive the meeting papers and provided input to the Chairman in advance of the meeting.
39 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED
Key achievements in 201617 The boards key activities and achievements during the year are summarised below.
Topic
Linked to remuneration Board discussions and activities Achievements Growth and protection Yes  Debated and agreed a new strategy focus and vision for NEX Focused on expanding NEXs addressable market by developing new products and services which will cater for a wider client base Completed the Transaction to combine ICAPs global hybrid voice broking business with TP ICAP creating significant value for NEX shareholders Approved the acquisitions of Abide Financial eMID and ENSO People and culture Yes  Undertook a strategic review of the boards composition and skill set Discussed the importance of effective succession planning as a key component of talent management Debated the key principles of a Group reward strategy to ensure NEX remains competitive and continues to recruit retain and motivate the right talent Continued engagement with global cultural initiatives in order to provide a better and sustainable business environment in line with NEX strategy Launched a targeted recruitment process for additional nonexecutive directors based on the specific skills and experience required to complement and strengthen the board Finalised a succession plan for the board key executives and senior management Launched a remuneration review for business level executives senior management and the wider employee population Furthered the nonexecutive directors knowledge and understanding of our global operations and culture by meeting with local management in Stockholm and Tel Aviv Controls and governance Yes  Regularly reviewed the Groups risk appetite statements and principal risks Reviewed the effectiveness of the Groups external and internal audit functions risk management and internal control frameworks Commenced a detailed review of the Governance Committees activities and responsibilities in order to shape and form an improved governance framework for the Group Maintained close oversight of the Groups key and emerging risks with an increased focus on the information risk profile of the Group and potential cyber and technological threats Enhanced the Governance Committees oversight and understanding of the Groups governance arrangements including updates to the committees terms of reference Profitability Yes  Monitored and assessed the Groups financial performance in line with budget and market expectations Reviewed and approved the 2016 preliminary results halfyear results and Annual Report Regularly reviewed the Companys share price and performance metrics Challenged and approved the Groups 201718 budget Reviewed the Groups dividend policy Following completion of the Transaction delivered a revised Group structure to achieve a focused cost base and deliver savings versus the prior year
No  Regularly reviewed and discussed shareholder and investor feedback including in relation to the Transaction and executive director remuneration Provided quarterly presentations to analysts and key industry personnel regarding the Groups financial results and future vision for NEX 40 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Code principle Relations with shareholders SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT The Companys annual general meeting is a key date in the diary for the board.
Shareholders who attend the meeting will receive an update from the Group Chief Executive Officer on the activities and performance of the Group since the prior financial year end.
All directors attended the 2016 ICAP plc annual general meeting and were available to answer questions from shareholders on matters put to the meeting.
For those shareholders who are unable to attend annual general meetings particularly our overseas shareholder base NEX has put in place systems to allow for electronic proxy voting through the NEX shareholder portal website site.
The proxy votes received on annual general meeting resolutions are published on the Companys website site following the meeting.
The board gives high priority to shareholder and investor communications.
It receives regular investor reports which detail the feedback from investor meetings.
It also receives the results of investor perception studies which are undertaken by external consultants.
Subject to regulatory constraints the directors and members of senior management hold regular meetings with investors and analysts to update them on the Groups strategy and performance.
In 201617 these meetings included presentations from the Group Chief Executive Officer and other senior executives to take analysts and investors through the Groups halfyear results and future vision for NEX.
The senior independent director and nonexecutive directors are available to meet with shareholders during the year.
The Chairman and nonexecutive directors hosted an investor lunch following the 2016 ICAP plc annual general meeting.
This was a valuable opportunity for the nonexecutive directors to engage with key investors and stakeholders particularly in relation to the Groups dividend policy measurements of success and approach to executive director remuneration.
2017 NEX Group plc annual general meeting The first annual general meeting of NEX Group plc was held on 14 September 2016 prior to its listing on 15 December 2016.
The 2017 annual general meeting will be held on Wednesday 12 July 2017 at 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR.
In accordance with the Code and the Companys articles of association all directors will stand for appointment or reelection in July.
Full details of the resolutions to be proposed at the 2017 annual general meeting are set out in the notice of annual general meeting.
The notice is made available to shareholders on site or sent to them if they have elected to receive hard copies at least 20 working days before the meeting.
Details of proxy votes for and against each resolution together with votes withheld will be made available after the vote has been dealt with on a show of hands and the results of the meeting will be published on site 2016 ICAP plc annual general meeting All resolutions proposed at the 2016 annual general meeting were duly passed and the board was pleased to note that the total number of proxy votes received for all resolutions at the 2016 annual general meeting represented more than 85% of the total voting rights of ICAP plc 2015 ICAP plc annual general meeting more than 83%.
Shareholder approval of the Transaction On 9 September 2016 ICAP plc held two shareholder meetings to approve the Transaction a court meeting and a general meeting.
All resolutions were conducted on a poll and passed with at least 96% of shareholder votes in favour of all resolutions.
The total number of votes received for both meetings represented more than 86% of the total voting rights of ICAP plc.
The original terms of the Transaction received ICAP plc shareholder approval on 24 March 2016.
Further information regarding the Transaction is available on site 41 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED
EFFECTIVENESS
The composition of the board and its committees is regularly reviewed to ensure there is the right mix of skills experience and knowledge of the Company to enable board and committee members to perform their roles effectively.
Time commitment In order to effectively discharge their responsibilities the nonexecutive directors must commit sufficient time to their role which at a minimum the board considers to be between 30 and 36 days each year.
The Chairman has confirmed that in his view each nonexecutive director continued to demonstrate commitment to their role during the year particularly in light of the significant time impact of the Transaction.
None of the nonexecutive directors took on further significant commitments during the year.
The
Chairman who is based at NEXs London office continued to commit as much time as was necessary to fulfil his duties with his responsibilities to NEX taking priority over other business commitments.
In addition to the time spent preparing for and attending board and committee meetings during the year the Chairman and the nonexecutive directors allocated sufficient time to further their understanding of the
This took the form of briefing meetings with executive and local management in our Stockholm and Tel Aviv offices as well as regular training sessions to ensure ongoing business awareness.
The table below summarises the directors attendance at board committee meetings during the year.
Governance Nomination Audit Risk Remuneration
Stuart
Bridges 44
Spencer 44 22
Charles
Gregson 44 22
Ritossa  22 45 67 45
Sievwright 44 22 55 77 55
Standing 22 22 55 77 55 Due to unavoidable circumstances Ivan Ritossa was unable to attend the Audit Risk and Remuneration Committee meetings held on 9 and 10 November 2016.
He did however receive the meeting papers and provided input to the chairmen of these committees in advance of the meetings Robert Standing was appointed a member of the Governance Committee on 9 February 2017 Performance evaluations The board considers the outcomes of its evaluations as fundamental to driving performance and engagement.
Key recommendations from each years assessments are prioritised as actions for the following year.
With a significant proportion of the boards time and activities having been committed to the Transaction in 201617  the board agreed that an external assessment which had been scheduled to be undertaken in 201617 following completion of the Transaction would be deferred to 201718.
This approach remains in line with the Code.
In prioritising its evaluation actions from 201516 the board had agreed that a detailed review of its composition was a key action for 201617 and ensured that proposed changes to the balance of the board would form part of the boards 201718 assessments.
Further details of this review are included in the Nomination Committee report on page 44.
The board confirmed it had received goodquality and relevant information throughout the year and agreed it had benefited from enhanced engagement with NEXs senior management team as part of NEX strategy discussions.
During the year the board committees also implemented a number of their prior year evaluation actions as discussed in more detail on pages 43 to 49.
With support from its principal committees the board has agreed that its key priorities in 201718 should include further development and communication of NEXs strategy setting appropriate performance metrics for executives and evaluating the talent that the Group has or requires to successfully achieve its objectives.
Led by John Sievwright our senior independent director the nonexecutive directors provided input for the Chairmans 201617 performance evaluation.
Taking into account the views of the executive directors the evaluation concluded that the Chairman had fully discharged his duties in terms of leadership and ensuring the effectiveness of the board during the year.
In particular the Chairman had played a crucial role in the context of the Transaction through his support of the Group Chief Executive Officer and ensuring that the board was kept fully informed as the Transaction progressed.
The evaluation also recognised the Chairmans strong lines of communication with many executives in the Group and his excellent grasp of daytoday operations both areas which he regularly discusses and shares with the nonexecutive directors.
Code principle
42 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
During the year the board carried out a formal review of the independence of its nonexecutive directors.
The review considered the nature of the nonexecutive directors other appointments any other positions they hold within the Group any potential conflicts of interest they have identified and their length of service including in their capacity as former directors of ICAP plc.
Their individual circumstances were also assessed against the independence criteria set out in the Code.
Following this review the board determined that all nonexecutive directors continue to be independent in character and judgement particularly in their thinking and challenge of management.
Board inductions Based on their background knowledge and skill set all new directors receive a comprehensive and tailored induction following appointment to the board.
Through a combination of office visits technical briefings and introductory meetings the NEX board induction programme is designed to broaden directors understanding of the Groups business operations strategic priorities people culture and clients.
Training and development The Chairman is responsible for ensuring that all directors receive ongoing training and development to enhance their roles as board and committee members.
Our nonexecutive directors engage fully in this process.
Throughout the year the directors were kept fully apprised by external advisors of their legal and fiduciary duties in the context of the Transaction.
They also received strategic business updates and detailed briefings on corporate governance regulatory and legislative developments including changes required by the EU Market Abuse Regulation.
External advice Where appropriate the directors may obtain independent professional advice in respect of their duties to the board and its committees at the Companys expense.
No directors sought external advice in 201617 .
Directors conflicts of interest The board has procedures in place for the disclosure of conflicts of interest.
The directors are aware of their responsibility to avoid a situation whereby they have an actual or potential conflict of interest and the requirement to inform the Chairman and the Group Company Secretary of any change in their situation.
An effective procedure is in place for the board to authorise conflict situations should they arise in accordance with the Companies Act and the Companys articles of association.
The Group Company Secretary is responsible for keeping appropriate records including the scope of any authorisations granted by the board.
The board undertakes an annual review of conflict authorisations.
No additional conflicts of interest were required to be authorised during the year.
Compliance with the Code It is the boards view that for the year ended 31 March 2017  the Company has applied all the main principles and been fully compliant with all provisions set out in the 2014 Code.
GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE In order to facilitate efficient and effective management and deliver longterm shareholder value the role of the Governance Committee is to review recommend and make decisions in relation to all aspects of the Groups governance environment.
The committee reports to the board.
Members
The Governance Committees membership is made up of the Chairman of the board the senior independent director a nonexecutive director the Group Chief Executive Officer and the Group Chief Financial Officer.
The committee is chaired by the Chairman of the board.
The Group General Counsel and Global Chief Operating Officer have standing invitations to attend committee meetings.
The table on page 42 sets out the directors who served on the Governance Committee during the year and their meeting attendance.
Key activities A key action identified by the committees performance evaluation in 201516 was for the committee to undertake a detailed review of the Groups corporate governance framework in 201617 .
Driven by the committees responsibility to ensure effective corporate governance throughout the Group this review began in May 2016.
With assistance from the Groups internal audit legal and company secretarial functions the committee debated how best to evaluate Group governance standards.
Recognising developments in best practice and the importance of accountability to shareholders the review focused on oversight of the Groups regulated subsidiaries and an evaluation of the role and activities of the committee.
Identified improvements included an enhanced framework for robust and regular performance evaluations of subsidiary level boards and committees and improved circulation of regulated entity board minutes to relevant stakeholders.
In order to ensure board composition and business oversight remain effective throughout the Group all subsidiary board appointments will require the committees prior approval going forward including an assessment of the value and experience which each nominated board member will bring to the board.
The committees terms of reference were updated in July 2016 and March 2017 to reflect these changes.
The review remains ongoing and we look forward to reporting on any further enhancements to our governance structure in next years report.
Code principle
43 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report NOMINATION COMMITTEE The Nomination Committee is primarily responsible for reviewing the structure size composition and succession planning of the board.
It also ensures that a formal rigorous and transparent procedure exists for the appointment of new directors.
The committee reports to the board.
Members
Members of the Nomination Committee are appointed by the board and comprise a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
The committee is chaired by the Chairman of the board.
The table on page 42 sets out the directors who served on the Nomination Committee during the year and their meeting attendance.
Key activities In line with the output from its 201516 performance evaluation the committee focused on a review of the boards composition during the year.
The committee agreed that a diversity of gender race experience and approach are powerful drivers for board effectiveness and determined that the board as composed was not considered to be sufficiently diverse.
In addressing this the committee was assisted by the Group Head of HR and appointed Heidrick and Struggles as external search consultants.
Heidrick and Struggles is an experienced and reputable executive search firm and a signatory to the voluntary code of conduct on gender diversity for external search consultants.
The committee evaluated the specific skills and experience required for the board taking into account the future of NEX as a forwardthinking technologybased services company.
The committee determined that a strong technology background would be a key skills requirement for future appointments and on that basis a short list of suitable board level candidates was prepared for the committees review.
The committee evaluated each of these candidates and refined the list further.
Potential candidates were invited to meet with the full board and key members of the executive team.
In line with NEXs board appointment policy final recruitment decisions are made by the board based on merit and we are pleased that Anna Ewing will be joining the board as a nonexecutive director in May 2017 .
Having previously worked for Nasdaq and Merrill Lynch she brings significant technology and operations experience to the board which we are confident will support our development and growth as a financial technology company.
During the year and particularly following completion of the Transaction we also considered the importance of effective succession planning as a key component of talent and resourcing risk management.
These discussions resulted in a detailed succession plan being finalised in February 2017 for the board key executives and senior management team.
Aside from recruitment services Heidrick and Struggles had no other connection with the Company during the year.
AUDIT COMMITTEE Chairmans overview As Chairman of the Audit Committee I am pleased to introduce this report which sets out how the committee has discharged its responsibilities during the year.
In line with the provisions of the Statutory Audit Services Order the committees terms of reference were updated during the year to reflect the committees increased responsibilities for approval of audit fees and oversight of a tender process for the Groups external audit contract at least every ten years.
We issued a competitive tender for our external audit contract in 201516 and this resulted in a recommendation from the committee that Deloitte be appointed as the Companys auditor for the year ending 31 March 2018.
Throughout the year under review PwC and Deloitte have worked together to ensure a smooth transition of the audit contract with minimal disruption to the business.
In line with prevailing independence rules in the UK the US Securities and Exchange Commission SEC and upcoming changes to EU rules a detailed independence transition plan was prepared and launched in November 2016.
The plan enabled Deloitte to familiarise itself with NEX and receive a structured and formal handover from PwC.
Deloitte has regularly reported to the committee on the progress of the transition and has met with senior management in London New York Stockholm and Tel Aviv.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank PwC Deloitte and the NEX management team for their hard work in ensuring a successful transition.
A resolution to propose the appointment of Deloitte as the Groups new external auditor will be put to the 2017 annual general meeting.
While recognising that 201617 was its final year of audit as required by the Code and in accordance with the committees terms of reference during the year the committee evaluated the effectiveness of the Groups external audit process for the prior year.
The evaluation process is discussed in more detail on page 46 but I am pleased to report that PwCs performance in 201516 was rated positively overall and I wish to take this opportunity to thank PwC for its services to the Group throughout the years.
Finally the board is required to provide a statement that taken as a whole it believes the Annual Report and financial statements to be fair balanced and understandable.
The governance framework to provide such assurance to the committee and to the board is set out on pages 45 and 46.
The statement itself is on page 54.
John Sievwright Chairman Audit Committee 15 May 2017 Code principle
Code principle
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED
44 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Audit Committee The Audit Committee is responsible for the effective governance of the Groups financial reporting including the adequacy of financial disclosures and both the external and internal audit functions.
It is authorised by the board to carry out any activity within its terms of reference.
The Audit Committee reports to the board.
Members
The Audit Committee members are all independent nonexecutive directors and the committee is chaired by John Sievwright.
The board is satisfied that at least one member of the committee has recent and relevant financial experience and that all members bring extensive expertise to the committee.
The table on page 42 sets out the directors who served on the Audit Committee during the year and their meeting attendance.
Meetings are attended by the Chairman the Group Chief Financial Officer the Global Chief Operating Officer the Group General Counsel the CFO Group Finance the Group Head of Internal Audit and the external audit partner.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee maintains contact with attendees throughout the year.
There were two meetings during 201617 when the committee met with the Group Head of Internal Audit and the external audit partner without any executive director or management present.
Key activities An annual work plan is agreed to ensure all areas of significance are considered by the Audit Committee and that business and reporting requirements are met.
The committees key activities during the year included reviewing and discussing a transition plan in respect of Deloittes appointment as the Companys external auditor in 2017 approval of the 201617 external audit fee the appropriateness of the Groups halfyear and annual financial statements and financial announcements to the London Stock Exchange accounting treatment of the Transaction the viability assessment and viability statement on page 55 the going concern statement on page 54 and the appropriateness of preparing the Groups halfyear and annual financial statements on a going concern basis reports from the external auditor the effectiveness of the Groups internal control systems for financial reporting an annual schedule of work to be conducted by the external and internal audit teams and the effectiveness of the external and internal audits.
Financial reporting The Audit Committee reviews the Groups accounting policies and monitors the integrity of the Groups financial statements including the halfyear and annual reports and other announcements relating to the Groups financial performance to ensure that they present a balanced and clear assessment of the Groups financial position and outlook.
During the year the committee considered certain accounting and financial reporting areas to be of a more subjective nature.
Throughout the year management presented to the committee its position on those areas that were material in nature and involved significant management judgement and assumptions.
In reviewing managements judgements and estimates in these areas where appropriate the committee discussed these judgements and estimates with the external auditor.
The committee discussed and approved the appropriateness of items that were presented in the exceptional items column in the consolidated income statement considering their nature and materiality.
Management presented financials attributable to the IGBB business and to the retained Group separately in the consolidated income statement.
The committee considered and approved managements presentation of items including discontinued operations and a 1162 million gain on the disposal of IGBB see note 5 to the financial statements.
The committee considers the annual goodwill impairment review to be a significant judgement area and as such reviewed the impairment testing which was undertaken by management during March 2017 .
The impairment test identified that there was no impairment.
In reviewing this area the committee considered the appropriateness of managements judgements and estimates see note 15 to the financial statements.
The committee considered and approved the Groups significant accounting policies including a new accounting policy for technology development revenue and a change to the segmental reporting accounting policy.
The committee also considered and approved a change from trade date accounting to settlement date accounting for matched principal receivables and payables.
The committee noted that management considered investment in joint ventures and associates provisions contingent liabilities and technology development revenue to be other significant areas where increased judgement is required.
The committee reviewed managements assessments and discussed the appropriateness of managements estimates with the external auditor.
The committee approved managements conclusions.
The committee considered managements going concern statement and the appropriateness of preparing the Groups annual financial statements on a going concern basis.
It also considered managements viability statement and the appropriateness of managements judgements estimates and assumptions made in assessing the viability of the Group.
The committee on behalf of the board is satisfied that an assessment of the solvency and liquidity of the Group over a period of three financial years up to 31 March 2020 has been carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
The viability statement is disclosed on page 55 and should be read together with the Groups risk management framework and principal risks as set out in the risk management section of the strategic report on pages 20 to 23.
45 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report Additionally auditing standards require the external auditor to presume risks of fraud in revenue recognition as a significant audit risk area and to perform procedures to address those risks.
The committee concluded that based on the findings reported by the external and internal auditors and from its own review of the Groups internal control and risk management frameworks the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 were not exposed to a material risk arising from this risk area.
The committee has delegated responsibility for the daytoday financial management and monitoring of financial controls to the GFC.
The work described above together with a review of the content of the strategic report provided the assurance to the committee and to the board that the Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2017  taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups and the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Internal audit The internal audit function consists of a small inhouse team supported by KPMG as outsourced providers.
Internal audit establishes an annual audit plan based on discussions with management and an assessment of the risks inherent in the Groups activities.
The activities of internal audit are reported to the Audit and Risk Committees and provide assurance to both management and these committees that the system of internal control achieves its objectives and highlights gaps and areas for improvement.
During the year an evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal audit function was carried out through a questionnaire and key stakeholders across the Group were asked to participate.
The questionnaire addressed the functions quality of planning and communication understanding of the key risks and controls within the business resourcing engagement and independence.
A subsequent report to the Audit Committee provided empirical data on which the functions overall performance was assessed.
The report also included specific comments made by respondents providing valuable insight into managements views.
The results of the evaluation concluded that the functions performance in 201617 was rated positively overall particularly its independence quality of reporting to the Audit Committee and high levels of engagement across the Group.
External auditor As reported on page 44 a recent tender of the Groups external audit contract concluded that Deloitte be appointed as the Companys external auditor for the year ending 31 March 2018.
Resolutions proposing Deloittes appointment and giving authority to the Audit Committee to determine their remuneration will be proposed at the 2017 annual general meeting.
PwC will not be proposed for reappointment.
Nonaudit services In line with best practice the Audit Committee is responsible for determining the nonaudit services that the external auditor may or may not provide to the Group and monitoring the balance of spend on audit and nonaudit fees to ensure the continued independence of the Groups external auditor.
A policy is in place whereby the expenditure with the Groups auditor for nonaudit work should not exceed 75% of the audit fee.
Any proposed nonaudit assignments with fees in excess of 100000 are subject to the Audit Committees prior approval.
Fees below this limit are approved by the Chairman of the Audit Committee and reported to the committee.
All nonaudit services provided to the Group are in accordance with applicable legislation.
The total spend on nonaudit services during the year was approximately 1.2 million being approximately 38% of the audit fee 201516 90%.
The nonaudit fee was mainly in relation to corporate finance and other assurance services required in connection with the Transaction.
Note 3 to the financial statements provides further details of the fees paid for audit and nonaudit services during the year.
Effectiveness
An evaluation of the effectiveness of the external audit process in 201516 was carried out through a questionnaire.
Key stakeholders across the Group were asked to participate in the evaluation.
While mindful that 201617 would be its last year of external audit the questionnaire was designed to evaluate PwCs audit process in its entirety and addressed PwCs quality of planning and communication sufficiency of audit firm resources technical knowledge independence and objectivity and PwCs understanding of the business.
A subsequent report to the Audit Committee provided empirical data on which the committee assessed the audit process.
It also included specific comments made by respondents providing valuable insight into managements views.
The results of the evaluation concluded that PwCs performance in 201516 was rated positively overall particularly its independence and objectivity.
Specific learnings from the feedback received will be shared with Deloitte going forward.
Whistleblowing
The Group maintains a global whistleblowing hotline through which employees may raise issues of concern report suspected wrongdoing or seek clarification on ethical dilemmas in confidence.
The service is administered through an independent third party vendor.
The Audit Committee receives reports of notifications made through the system.
No such notifications were submitted during the year.
Statutory Audit Services Order Following the tender of the Groups external audit contract in 201516 the Company confirms its compliance with the requirements of the Statutory Audit Services Order for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED
46 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions RISK COMMITTEE Chairmans overview I am pleased to introduce the Risk Committee report for 201617 .
My role as Chairman of the Risk Committee is to safeguard the independence and oversee the performance of the Group Risk function.
Based on the work the committee has undertaken during the year which is described in more detail on the following pages I believe that the Groups risk management and internal control systems remain effective.
No significant failings or weaknesses were identified during the year.
In addition I and the other committee members believe we have regularly received highquality information and that the key executives we rely on have acted with skill independence and transparency.
Such an assessment is important from a governance perspective but it is as important to ensure that the Group is always looking forward continually ensuring its effectiveness and taking steps to enhance its risk management and internal control systems.
With the Transaction now complete both the committee and the executive team will continue to be particularly vigilant to ensure that our risk management systems and internal controls are properly tailored to the principal risks of the Group.
We are particularly attuned to information security and business resiliency risk from cyber security and other events and these will continue to be key areas of focus.
In addition there are significant changes occurring both internally and externally that we will need to be prepared for including the impact of Brexit MiFID II the General Data Protection Regulation in Europe and the change in administration in the US.
All of these developments and the Groups business strategic priorities are likely to have implications for our risk management and internal control systems and we will need to ensure the consequences of such change are addressed in a timely and effective manner.
John Sievwright Chairman Risk Committee 15 May 2017 Risk Committee The Risk Committee reports to the board and is responsible for setting the overall risk strategy risk appetite and risk tolerance for the Group in order to ensure that the risk management function within the Group promotes the success of the Company.
The committee is authorised by the board to carry out any activity within its terms of reference.
Its principal areas of responsibility include ensuring that the Groups principal risks including key and emerging risks are properly identified assessed and mitigated on an ongoing basis regularly reviewing the quality and effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control frameworks and reviewing the internal audit programme as part of integrated assurance.
Members
The Risk Committee members are all independent nonexecutive directors and the committee is chaired by John Sievwright.
The table on page 42 sets out the directors who served on the Risk Committee during the year and their meeting attendance.
The Chairman of the board the Group Chief Financial Officer the Global Chief Operating Officer the Group General Counsel the Chief Risk Officer the Global Head of Compliance the Group Head of HR the Group Head of Internal Audit and the external audit partner regularly attend meetings of the committee.
The Chairman of the Risk Committee maintains contact with attendees throughout the year and has met with the Group Head of Internal Audit the Chief Risk Officer and the Global Chief Operating Officer without any executive director or management present.
Key activities An annual work plan is prepared to ensure all areas of significance are considered by the committee and that business and reporting requirements are met.
The committees key activities during the year included reviewing and discussing regular and robust assessments of the principal risks facing the Group key and emerging risks and Group risk appetite breaches separation planning and governance arrangements surrounding the Transaction annual review of the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control frameworks information risk reporting key risk indicator metrics and remedial actions compliance reporting and key regulatory updates affecting the Group a review of the Groups interactions with global regulators compliance examinations and routine and nonroutine regulatory enquiries an organisational review of the Groups Risk and compliance functions and levels of mandatory training in risk and compliance matters identifying and escalating any nonadherence.
Code principle
47 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report Risk control and management framework The board reviews the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control frameworks on an annual basis.
This review is supported by the Groups independent control functions.
Any remediating actions identified are reported to the board.
No significant failings or weaknesses in the Groups systems of risk management or internal control were identified during the year or when examining these systems for NEX following completion of the Transaction.
The Group complies with FRC guidance.
All commercial and support managers are responsible for the identification management and mitigation of the risks in the areas for which they are responsible.
Employees are expected to take a prudent approach to the management of risk and to be committed to transparency escalation of issues and continuous selfimprovement.
Prudent risk management is not something that is the province only of certain control functions it is everyones responsibility.
The Groups internal control and risk management systems in relation to financial reporting are described on pages 45 and 46.
Risk management
The Group maintains an independent risk management function responsible for providing expertise challenge and analysis of riskrelated developments.
Among the key responsibilities of the Group Risk function are serving as a central repository for the reporting of risk events providing challenge and analysis of such events and their remediation and presenting such events to the Risk Committee at its standing meetings assisting with the development and implementation of risk management policies and standards administering a board approved credit matrix for the assignment of counterparty credit limits to clients and the monitoring of exposure and potential breaches identifying and reviewing key and emerging risks on a regular basis and reporting updates to the Risk Committee at its standing meetings assisting with the preparation of ICAAPs for EU regulated subsidiaries of the Group and conducting targeted deepdives of important and emerging risk issues.
Internal control The board is responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems which management is responsible for maintaining and it does this through the Audit and Risk
The principal risks faced by the Group are detailed on pages 21 to 23.
The daytoday business of the Group is managed through a system of financial operational and compliance controls and monitored by a series of risk management systems.
Internal controls are designed to manage rather than eliminate risks and can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The effectiveness of the internal control system is reviewed regularly by the internal audit function.
The Group has investments in a number of joint ventures and associates.
Internal control procedures for joint ventures and associates rest with the senior management of those operations and the Company seeks to monitor such investments and exert influence through board representation.
The boards review of the effectiveness of the system of internal control in those entities is consequently less comprehensive than in its directlyowned subsidiaries.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED
48 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Remuneration Committee is authorised by the board to review and approve proposals to ensure that NEXs global reward and employee benefits approach supports the business strategy of the Group.
The committee is responsible for the oversight of the Groups remuneration strategy to ensure that NEXs approach to remuneration is aligned with the interests of employees and shareholders and to comply with current best practice and regulatory requirements.
Members
The Remuneration Committee members are all independent nonexecutive directors and the committee is chaired by Robert Standing.
The chairman of the committees statement for 201617 is set out on pages 56 and 57 .
The table on page 42 sets out the directors who served on the Remuneration Committee during the year and their meeting attendance.
Key activities The committees external evaluation in 201516 noted that continued alignment of executive managements interests with Group strategy and culture is key to driving appropriate outcomes for shareholders particularly in light of the Transaction.
The committee incorporated these principles into its key activities during the year which included reviewing and discussing the directors remuneration policy and the remuneration report for the year ended 31 March 2017 the implications of the Transaction on incentive plans and share awards approval of the executive directors bonuses for the year ended 31 March 2017  including assessment of the level of achievement of the executive directors objectives for the year performance against the EPS performance target for 2014 share awards and the highest earners compensation arrangements across the Group.
The directors remuneration policy and the remuneration report for the year ended 31 March 2017  which will be put to shareholders for approval at the 2017 annual general meeting are set out on pages 56 to 72.
Code principle
49 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report GLOBAL EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT GROUP GLOBAL EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT GROUP Code principle
Michael Spencer Group Chief Executive Officer  Chairman GEMG Michaels biography is set out on page 36.
Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Officer Stuarts biography is set out on page 37 .
GEMG
Women 14% Men 86% Total number of members 7
Women 42% Men 58% Total number of members 12
Women 22% Men 78% Total number of members 9 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES The Group operates three executive committees the GEMG the GOC and the GFC.
The purpose of these committees is to complement and support the work of the board and its principal committees.
Membership of the executive committees consists of the executive directors senior management and representatives from Group functions.
Appointments to the executive committees are approved by the board.
The GEMG is responsible for proposing commercial strategy to the board overseeing the strategic and operational performance of the Group and setting its commercial direction within the scope of delegated authorities.
The biographies of the GEMG members highlight the skills and experience each member brings to the committee.
The GOC has executive responsibility for the Groups operations and reports to the board and the GEMG.
It also reports to the Audit and Risk Committees as required.
The GFC has executive responsibility for the Groups financial structure and control environment.
The GFC reports to the GEMG the Audit and Governance Committees as required.
The gender balance of each of the Groups executive committees as at 31 March 2017 is illustrated below.
50 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Tim Cartledge Global Head of FX and Head of Product NEX Markets Tim was appointed Global Head of FX and Head of Product for NEX Markets in February 2017 .
He brings significant expertise in electronic trading within both the FX and fixed income markets.
Tim previously served as Chief Strategy Officer of EBS BrokerTec and prior to that he was Head of Global Fixed Income Currencies and Commodities Electronic Trading at Barclays Bank and Managing Director at Barclays
Tim has also held roles at Dresdner Bank Credit Suisse and Goldman Sachs.
Steve Gibson Chief Executive Officer NEX Opportunities Steve leads NEX Opportunities the Groups financial technology investment division.
Its portfolio includes a number of emerging fintech firms bringing new technologies and business models into capital markets.
NEX Opportunities is represented on the boards of Abide Financial AcadiaSoft Axoni Cloud9 Technologies Duco ENSO Financial OpenFin OpenGamma and Research Exchange.
Steve previously held senior management positions with Calypso Technology Ipreo and Siebel now Oracle.
Seth Johnson Chief Executive Officer NEX Markets Seth was appointed Chief Executive Officer of NEX Markets in October 2016.
He was previously responsible for developing ICAPs global broking strategy focusing on growing revenue improving the application of technology to its business model and expanding client coverage.
Seth also led the expansion of NEX Markets product portfolio in his role as Chief Executive Officer of BrokerTec and Chief Executive Officer of NEX Exchange.
He joined ICAP as a graduate trainee and has worked in the Group for more than 20 years.
Ken Pigaga Global Chief Operating Officer Ken was appointed Global Chief Operating Officer in November 2013 and previously served as Chief Operating Officer for ICAP Americas.
Prior to this Ken was a managing director at JPMorgan in the Investment Bank focused on ecommerce activities.
From
1991 to 2001 he held several roles at Goldman Sachs in emerging markets trading portfolio structuring and ecommerce.
Ken chairs the GOC.
He joined ICAP in 2006.
Jenny Knott Chief Executive Officer NEX Optimisation Jenny leads the NEX Optimisation division and heads the Abide Financial ENSO Financial NEX Data Reset Traiana and TriOptima businesses.
Her career in financial services spans over 30 years and includes Standard Bank Group where she held a variety of roles including Chief Executive Officer of Standard Bank Plc and CIB International Global Corporate and Investment Banking Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer.
Prior to this Jenny worked at a number of global investment banks including UBS and Nomura.
She joined ICAP in 2015.
51 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION Set out below is additional statutory information that NEX is required to disclose in its directors report.
Some of the matters normally included in the directors report have instead been included in the strategic report on pages 1 to 33 as the board considers these to be of strategic importance.
Related party transactions Details of related party transactions are set out in note 29 to the financial statements.
Environment
Details of the Groups environmental policy are given on page 17 of the strategic report.
Employees
Details of the Groups policies in respect of employee involvement diversity and human rights are given on pages 16 and 17 of the strategic report.
Post balance sheet events There have been no post balance sheet events.
Dividends
The directors recommend a final dividend of 27 .0p per share to be paid on 21 July 2017 to shareholders on the register on 30 June 2017 .
The shares will be quoted exdividend from 29 June 2017 .
Political donations No political donations were made during the year 201516 nil.
Directors indemnities Qualifying third party indemnity provisions as defined by section 234 of the Companies Act were in force during the year ended 31 March 2017 and remain in force as at the date of this report for the benefit of directors of the Company in relation to certain losses and liabilities which they may incur when acting in their capacity as a director or officer of any Group company.
The Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance in respect of itself and its directors and officers when acting in their capacity as a director or officer of any Group company.
Appointment and retirement of directors The appointment and retirement of directors is governed by the Companys articles of association the Code the Companies Act and related legislation.
The board has the power to appoint additional directors or to fill a casual vacancy among the directors.
Any such director holds office only until the next annual general meeting when that director will stand for appointment by shareholders.
In accordance with the Code the articles of association also provide that all directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
Articles of association The Companys articles of association are available on the Companys website at site and may be amended by special resolution at a general meeting of shareholders.
No changes to the articles of association of the Company will be proposed at the 2017 annual general meeting.
Share capital 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Issued share capital 379735432 ordinary shares of 17.5p each 1 ordinary share of 10p each 499999 redeemable preference shares of 10p each On completion of the Transaction the Company undertook a share consolidation whereby shareholders of the Company received four ordinary shares in NEX Group plc for every seven ordinary shares held previously.
All changes in the share capital of the Company during the year are detailed in note 26 to the financial statements.
Each ordinary share in issue carries equal rights including one vote per share on a poll at general meetings of the Company.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares.
As at 31 March 2017  the NEX Trust held 7 457 286 ordinary shares.
The voting rights of ordinary shares held in the NEX Trust are exercisable by the trustees in accordance with their fiduciary duties.
Powers of directors to issue or buy back the Companys shares The powers of the directors are determined by the Companies Act and the Companys articles of association.
The directors are authorised to issue and allot shares and to buy back shares subject to annual shareholder approval at the annual general meeting.
Repurchase of shares The Company did not purchase any of its own shares during the year.
As at 31 March 2017  and at 10 May 2017  the Company had an unexpired authority to repurchase shares up to a maximum of 66453700 ordinary shares of 10p each being 10% of the issued share capital of the Company on the Scheme Effective Date.
Authority will be sought at the 2017 annual general meeting to repurchase shares up to a maximum of 37 973543 ordinary shares of 17 .5p each.
52 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Employee share trust On the Scheme Effective Date all share awards and options over ICAP plc shares became share awards and options over NEX Group shares on a oneforone basis.
Awards granted under the Groups share plans are expected to be satisfied by ordinary shares held in the NEX Trust or new issues of shares.
As at 31 March 2017  employee share awards and options existed over 10087 589 of the Companys ordinary shares and 7 457 286 ordinary shares were held in the NEX Trust.
The voting rights of ordinary shares held in the NEX Trust are exercisable by the trustees in accordance with their fiduciary duties.
The right to receive dividends has been waived in respect of the shares held in the NEX Trust.
The rules of the Groups share plans contain provisions which may cause options and awards granted to employees under the schemes to vest on a change of control.
Substantial shareholders The Companys substantial shareholders do not have different voting rights from those of other shareholders.
As at 31 March 2017  the Company had been notified under the FCAs Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the following holdings of voting rights in its shares.
Percentage of voting rights attaching to issued share capital Person interested Indirect Direct Other Total Michael Spencer together with IPGL IPGL Limited INFBV and INCAP Overseas BV 16.30 1.00 0.07 17.37 Silchester International Investors LLP 8.25   8.25 Marathon Asset Management LLP 5.05   5.05 Michael Spencer owns a majority shareholding in IPGL of which IPGL Limited and INFBV are whollyowned subsidiaries.
Michael Spencer is deemed to be interested in all the shares in NEX Group plc held by INFBV and its indirect whollyowned subsidiary INCAP Overseas BV totalling 61546806 shares.
IPGL Limited holds 384187 shares in NEX Group plc and 199999 shares acquired via a contract for difference.
A further 3516558 shares are held by Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited as trustee of the NEX Trust.
The shares held in the NEX Trust include basic awards to Michael Spencer under the BSMP and matching awards under the BSMP in respect of which there are no unsatisfied performance or continuity of employment conditions.
Michael Spencer has a personal interest in 213042 shares in NEX Group plc and holds 57142 shares acquired via a contract for difference.
Michael Spencers spouse holds 53000 shares in NEX Group plc On 5 April 2017  the Company was notified that Schroders plc held 12.95% of the voting rights in the Companys issued share capital.
FCA Listing Rules  compliance with Listing Rule 9.8.4C The majority of the disclosures required under Listing Rule 9.8.4 are not applicable to NEX.
The table below sets out the location of the disclosures required by Listing Rule 9.8.4C.
Applicable subparagraph within Listing Rule 9.8.4C Disclosure provided 5 details of any arrangements under which a director of the Company has waived or agreed to waive any emoluments from the Company or any subsidiary undertaking See page 71 6 where a director has agreed to waive future emoluments details of such waiver together with those relating to emoluments which were waived during the period under review See page 71 12 details of any arrangements under which a shareholder has waived or agreed to waive any dividends See page 53 13 where a shareholder has agreed to waive future dividends details of such waiver together with those relating to all dividends which are payable during the period under review See page 53 53 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION CONTINUED Statement of directors responsibilities for the Annual Report The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the strategic report the remuneration report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors have elected to prepare the Groups and Companys financial statements in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRS as adopted by the EU have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for ensuring that the Group and the Company keep adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the remuneration report comply with the Companies Act and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Having taken all the matters considered by the board and brought to the attention of the board during the year into account the directors are satisfied that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and it provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the information on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors statement pursuant to the FCAs Disclosure and Transparency Rules The directors are required by the Disclosure and Transparency Rules to include a management report containing a fair review of the business and a description of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group and the
The directors of the Company who were in office during the year and up to the date of signing the Annual Report were Charles Gregson Michael Spencer Stuart Bridges Ivan Ritossa John Sievwright and Robert
Each of these directors whose function is listed in the directors biographies confirms to the best of their knowledge that the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the management report disclosures which are contained in the strategic report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the strategic report.
The financial position of the Group its cash flow liquidity position facilities and borrowing position are described in the financial review.
Notes
11 13 and 28 to the financial statements provide further detail on the Groups borrowings and management of financial risks.
The strategic report includes an analysis of the principal risks facing the Group and the Groups approach to risk management.
After reviewing the Groups annual budget liquidity requirements plans and financing arrangements the directors are satisfied that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue to operate and confirm that the Group and the Company are going concerns.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing these financial statements.
54 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Viability statement In addition to the requirement to consider the appropriateness of preparing the Groups financial statements on a going concern basis the directors have an obligation under the Code to make a statement in the Annual Report with regard to the viability of the Group including explaining how they have assessed the prospects of the Group the period of time for which they have made the assessment and why they consider that period to be appropriate.
The Groups viability assessment has been made over a period of three financial years up to 31 March 2020.
The directors are satisfied that a threeyear period is sufficient to enable a reasonable assessment of the Groups viability to be made.
In addition this period is covered by the Groups mediumterm plan.
The board reviewed the plan in detail challenged assumptions made in the forecasts and assessed the attainability of the forward projections.
In making this assessment the directors have considered a wide range of information relating to present and future conditions including future projections of profitability cash flows and capital resources.
They also assessed the potential financial and operational impacts in severe but plausible scenarios of the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
Based on these assessments the directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due up to 31 March 2020.
Disclosure of information to the auditor So far as each person who was a director at the date of approving this report is aware there is no relevant audit information being information needed by the Companys auditor in connection with preparing its report of which the Companys auditor is unaware.
Each director has taken all the steps that he is obliged to take as a director in order to make him aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act.
By order of the board Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Officer NEX Group plc 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR Company number 15 May 2017 55 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
REMUNERATION REPORT
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Similarly although the TSR peer group is not as relevant as it was to the ICAP business it was deemed that it was no less challenging to the Group as a relative measure and should also be retained for the 2015 and 2016 awards.
Looking forward we have decided to retain the overarching principle of measuring 50% of PSP awards on absolute EPS growth and 50% on relative TSR growth but have amended the targets to remove the influence of an inflationary measure on EPS in line with market practice.
We have also changed the peer group from a selected basket of companies to the FTSE 250 index.
It is our view that nominating a relevant peer group for NEX from publicly traded companies is challenging and the index provides a clear comparator for relative performance.
The annual report on remuneration describes the performance versus objectives during 201617 and how this translates into executive director remuneration.
This is the second year in which annual bonuses have been determined under the directors remuneration policy approved in 2015.
This year the report includes a more detailed disclosure section including financial targets.
Completion of the sale of the voice broking business means that the commercial sensitivity that made publication of targets last year imprudent is no longer a restricting factor and in years of normal business activity the committee will publish targets in the disclosure each year going forward.
The performance versus the objectives has been strong in 201617 and is representative of business performance overall.
Dear shareholders I am pleased to present the remuneration report for 201617 recommending the NEX Group plc remuneration policy for 201718 and explaining how we applied the current policy in 201617 .
This policy was approved by ICAP plc shareholders in July 2015.
Completion of the sale of our voice broking business in December 2016 marked a major milestone in the development of the business allowing it to become a financial technology company.
The creation of NEX Group plc requires that we as a committee present a remuneration policy to shareholders for approval.
Having considered this carefully we have decided to represent the current policy for approval for a period of one year only.
The committee considers this policy to be fit for purpose and given that it has been in place for only two years would prefer to undertake a review of executive director pay during the course of 201718 as the NEX strategy and culture develop and as the position on long term incentives becomes clearer.
The committee will consult with major shareholders on a new threeyear policy towards the end of 2017  with a view to putting that to shareholder vote in the 2018 annual general meeting.
The committee also considered awards made under the PSP in 2015 and 2016 and the performance conditions underpinning them.
Having reviewed a number of comparative financial models it became clear that although the start and end points for the EPS measure differed with the voice broking business factored out the growth expectation over the period was largely the same.
With this in mind the committee decided not to amend the EPS growth performance condition on these awards but to only include the continuing business of NEX Group plc for the measure and adjust the Looking forward we have retained the profitrelated financial measure in the executive director objectives to ensure that focus is retained on revenue generation and cost management.
56 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions The financial objectives that account for 70% of the bonus outturn had two main themes our growth and protection which was subdivided into completing the sale of our voice broking business and generating incremental revenue from strategic initiatives and profitability which was split between trading profit growth and creating a new structure for the Group.
Completion of the sale of the voice broking business was a binary objective which carried much less weight than the requirement to generate incremental revenue.
Revenue generation from strategic initiatives was not as strong as we had hoped but this will remain a priority for the business alongside prudent cost management to drive profits in the future.
Due to completion of the Transaction taking place nine months into the year trading operating profit was based on 12 months of the continuing business and nine months of the discontinued business.
This was compared to 12 months of continuing business and nine months of discontinued business in 201516.
The initial design of the Group structure for NEX is complete and in the process of being implemented.
This structure has already begun to produce cost savings.
The strategic objectives that account for 30% of the bonus outturn also had two main themes risk and control and people and culture.
The risk and control framework has been a focus for the Group for a number of years.
It is now the view of the committee that the design and implementation phases of this work are complete and that the framework is sufficiently well embedded in the business to be considered business as usual.
Risk and control will continue to be key priority and will remain under constant review to ensure that it is appropriate and fit for purpose although will no longer be measured for the purposes of executive director bonuses.
People and culture was split into themes the design and delivery of a reward framework and of a new corporate brand and culture.
In the case of the reward framework the design is complete and is being rolled out to the business for the coming year.
It is designed to reward strong performance and provide an appropriate balance of compensation for the content and seniority of each role in the business.
The NEX brand was launched on 30 December 2016 when the Transaction completed and was successfully implemented globally.
The Company also has a clear view on its culture going forward and the dissemination of this throughout the business is ongoing.
Overall the performance of the executive directors was strong this year during a period of significant change and has resulted in a bonus outturn of 78% of the maximum fractionally higher than in 2016.
Both the Group Chief Executive Officer and the Group Chief Financial Officer have elected to defer 100% of the bonus awarded to them into NEX Group plc shares.
The BSMP 2014 matching award did not vest as it failed to meet the performance conditions.
This was the final year of the BSMP following the adoption of the PSP in 2015 and subsequently by NEX.
Looking forward we have retained the profitrelated financial measure in the executive director objectives to ensure that focus is retained on revenue generation and cost management.
In addition to this we are including a clientfocused objective to the financial measures that rewards attraction and retention of clients and also rewards improved relationships and client service.
This is a key priority for the Company.
The strategic objectives for the coming year are based around the communication of the NEX Group strategy both internally and externally such that all employees can clearly articulate that strategy and work by its values.
Strategic focus will also be on the continued development of the operating model.
Significant progress has been made during 201617 to design and implement the Group structure.
This highlighted a number of additional areas where cost savings could be achieved and it is key that we develop these and work towards the most efficient model possible.
The directors remuneration policy will be put to a binding vote and the remuneration report other than the part containing the directors remuneration policy will be put to an advisory vote at the 2017 annual general meeting.
We look forward to receiving your support.
Robert Standing Chairman Remuneration Committee 15 May 2017 57 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY ICAP plc presented the following policy to shareholders at the annual general meeting in July 2015 when it was approved by binding vote.
With the exception of an amendment to limit the committees discretion in respect of the recruitment of a new executive director the policy has remained unchanged.
This was described in ICAP plcs 2016 remuneration report.
Further to the Transaction the committee is required to seek approval of the directors remuneration policy for NEX at the 2017 annual general meeting.
Given that the current policy has however been in place for only two years the committee has decided to retain the current policy for a further year which if approved will apply from the date of the 2017 NEX annual general meeting.
A full review of the policy will be undertaken during 2017  with a view to seeking shareholder approval for a new directors remuneration policy to take effect from 1 April 2018.
Future policy table for executive directors The table below summarises the directors remuneration policy in respect of each component of remuneration for executive directors.
Element of pay Purpose and link to NEXs strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Base salary Reflects individual role and experience.
Set at a level to attract the right talent into the Group to deliver the business strategy.
Salaries are reviewed annually in the context of the total remuneration opportunity.
Factors considered include size and scope of individual responsibilities skills experience and performance typical salary levels for comparable roles within appropriate pay comparators and reward levels and structure below the board.
Any increase usually takes effect from 1 April.
The committee may award increases at any other time for example where there is a significant change in the role or responsibilities of the executive director.
Maximum levels of salary have not been set by the committee but executive director salary increases will normally be in line with the wider employee population.
Higher increases than the average for the wider employee population may be awarded in exceptional circumstances at the Remuneration Committees discretion including a significant increase in scope andor responsibility of the individuals role rebalancing of fixed and variable pay or to take into account any future regulatory changes.
Where an executive director has been appointed to the board at a lower than typical salary larger increases may be awarded as they develop in the role.
There are no specific performance conditions attached to salary increases although overall performance of the individual and the Company will be one of the considerations in setting salary levels.
Pension Element of remuneration to assist employees with retirement planning.
Directors are normally enrolled in the relevant pension plan if any for senior managers in their country of residence.
The maximum pension contribution is equivalent to 5% of salary.
Directors may opt out of the defined contribution plan operated in the UK and instead receive an equivalent cash allowance.
A bonus sacrifice arrangement is also offered.
Individual arrangements are shown on page 64.
None
58 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Element of pay Purpose and link to NEXs strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Benefits Element of remuneration to provide a competitive and costeffective benefits package.
Executive directors are eligible to receive certain benefits that vary by director and may include but are not limited to medical life insurance car and travel benefits reflecting the directors location and individual circumstances.
The current Group Chief Executive Officer has the use of a driver in order to recognise the unique circumstances of the role and the travel requirements involved.
In certain circumstances our executive directors may be accompanied by their spousepartner on business trips.
This will only be where there is a genuine business reason.
The value of actual benefits received is shown on page 65.
Where executive directors are required to relocate or complete an international assignment or perform duties outside their home location the Remuneration Committee may offer additional expatriate benefits if considered appropriate or vary benefits according to local practice.
This may include cover for additional taxation and support with tax reporting.
Benefits are generally set taking into account affordability and local market practice for comparable roles.
The committee has not set a maximum limit for benefits.
The benefit policy and levels are kept under review and the committee may remove benefits that executive directors receive or introduce other benefits if it considers it appropriate.
None
Annual bonus The annual bonus plan incentivises executive directors to achieve the Companys key financial metrics and strategic objectives while also aligning their interests with those of our shareholders.
Deferral of a significant proportion of the bonus into shares helps to align the longterm interests of executives with those of our shareholders.
The level of award is determined by the Remuneration Committee based on performance against the relevant performance criteria.
Awards are delivered in a combination of cash and shares with at least 50% deferred for at least three years into NEX Group plc shares under the DSBP.
A further sixmonth retention period may also be applied on awards under the DSBP.
The committee may award dividend equivalents in respect of dividends declared over the deferral period.
Dividend equivalent payments are made at the end of the deferral period in either cash or shares.
The committee may apply malus or clawback to annual bonus awards in certain exceptional circumstances.
Further details on malus and clawback provisions are provided in the notes to the table.
The maximum annual bonus opportunity is 300% of salary.
At least 70% of the annual bonus opportunity is assessed against financial measures.
The balance will be subject to strategic andor individual objectives.
The committee retains the right to adjust the balance of the measures on an annual basis.
The financial element however will always have a greater weighting than the strategicindividual element.
Payouts will range from zero to 100% of the maximum with 50% of the maximum payable for achieving ontarget performance.
59 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Element of pay Purpose and link to NEXs strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures
Share Plan
The Groups long term incentive plan is to reward sustained Company performance and the creation of shareholder value over time.
Annual award of NEX Group plc shares subject to performance conditions over a period of at least three years.
An additional holding period of at least two years will apply following vesting.
Participants may receive a payment equivalent to the value of dividends paid on any vested shares when the participant receives those shares at the end of the holding period.
Payment of dividend equivalents may be in either cash or shares.
The committee may apply malus or clawback to PSP awards.
Further details on malus and clawback provisions are provided in the notes to the table.
The maximum PSP opportunity is 300% of salary.
Performance measures include the Companys financial performance and a share pricebased measure which will usually be equally weighted.
These measures are reviewed regularly to ensure that they remain appropriate to business strategy are sufficiently challenging and remain appropriate for incentivising executive directors.
In future the committee may decide that it is appropriate to introduce additional measures such as NEX Groups key longterm strategic objectives.
In any case at least 80% of the award will continue to be based on financial and share pricebased measures.
Threshold performance results in 25% vesting rising to full vesting for maximum performance.
Share holding requirement To create alignment with shareholders by encouraging longerterm focus.
Executive directors are required to build up over time and thereafter maintain a holding in the Companys shares.
The minimum shareholding requirement for the Group Chief Executive Officer is 500% of base salary and for the other executive directors is 300% of base salary.
Notes to the policy table Changes since last approved policy The committee has made two changes to the policy approved by ICAP shareholders in 2015 to remove the ability of the committee to approve compensation that sits outside the policy when hiring a new director and to extend the malus and clawback provisions on share awards from five years to seven years.
Legacy matters The committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of office notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed before this or a prior policy came into effect or at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
In particular under the 2003 BSMP a bonus in lieu of dividend is paid on vested but unexercised awards.
Performance conditions The performance conditions for both the annual bonus and PSP are selected to align directly with our short and longterm strategy.
The profit before tax and EPS measures under the annual bonus and PSP incentivise the achievement of continuing financial growth with the TSR measure providing a direct link to the creation of shareholder value.
We also use strategic measures to focus on the achievement of the key short and longterm strategic objectives of the Company.
Performance targets are set annually by the committee taking into account the boards business plans and building in an appropriate level of stretch.
The committee may vary both measures and targets year by year to ensure that they remain fully aligned with our strategy and continue to be reflective of the Companys business plans.
More detail on the annual bonus and PSP measures and targets can be found on pages 70 and 71.
60 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Malus and clawback All variable pay may be subject to malus and clawback in any of the following circumstances for a period of up to seven years in line with corporate governance timeframes a material misstatement of the Companys or any other Group members audited financial results a material failure of risk management by the Company any other Group member or a relevant business unit misconduct or material error on the part of the participant or a material downturn in the financial performance of the Company any other Group member or a relevant business unit malus only.
Malus and clawback parameters will remain under review in line with regulatory guidance.
Future policy table for the Chairman and nonexecutive directors Purpose and link to the Groups strategy Operation and fee levels To attract and retain a highperforming Chairman and nonexecutive directors with the right level of skills international experience and industry knowledge.
The Chairman receives a fee for the role as determined by the Remuneration Committee.
The Chairman is entitled to an additional fee for the chairmanship of the Nomination Committee but has waived his entitlement to this additional fee.
The nonexecutive directors receive an annual fee in respect of their duties.
Further fees may be paid in respect of chairmanship of board committees and for the senior independent director.
No fees are paid for membership of a board committee.
Additional fees are paid to nonexecutive directors who sit on the board of the SEF entities andor any other subsidiary boards due to the additional time commitment required for discharging these roles.
Nonexecutive directors fees are considered and approved by the executive directors and the Chairman.
Fees are set at a level which is considered appropriate to attract and retain the calibre of individuals required by the Company.
Fees are reviewed regularly against comparable companies and may be adjusted from time to time.
Expenses incurred in the performance of nonexecutive duties for the Company may be reimbursed or paid for directly by the Company as appropriate.
The Chairman is provided with an office and is reimbursed for a proportion of the cost of a car and driver to assist with the performance of his duties.
The current fee levels can be found on page 71.
Recruitment policy In determining remuneration for new appointments to the board the committee will apply the following principles the committee will consider all relevant factors including but not limited to the calibre of the individual the external market and existing arrangements for the Companys current executive directors with a view to ensuring that any arrangements offered are in the best interests of the Company and shareholders and without paying any more than is necessary and the committee will seek to align new executive directors remuneration packages with the remuneration policy as set out above.
Components and approach Pay on recruitment will be consistent with the usual policy for executive directors as set out in the policy table.
Where the new appointment is replacing a previous executive director salaries pension and total remuneration opportunity may be higher or lower than the previous incumbent dependent on skills and experience.
Where an executive director is appointed from within the Group the normal policy of the Company is that any existing arrangements would be honoured in line with the original terms and conditions.
Similarly if an executive director is appointed following an acquisition of or merger with another company legacy terms and conditions would be honoured.
Maximum level of variable pay The maximum level of variable pay which may be awarded to a new executive director in respect of their appointment shall be limited to that set out in the policy table above for each component of remuneration.
This excludes any oneoff awards made to compensate the director for awards forfeited from their previous employer.
Buyouts
In order to facilitate recruitment the committee may make a oneoff award to buy out incentive awards and any other compensation arrangements that a new director has had to forfeit on leaving their previous employer.
In doing so the committee will take into account all relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to the forfeited awards the likelihood of these conditions being met the proportion of the vestingperformance period remaining and the form of the award for example cash or shares.
Where possible the forfeited awards will normally be bought out on a likeforlike basis.
The committee is at all times conscious of the need to pay no more than is necessary particularly when determining any possible buyout arrangements.
61 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Contractual terms The Companys policy on notice periods is up to 12 months notice by the Company or executive director to provide a reasonable balance between the need to retain the services of key individuals and the need to limit the liabilities of the Company in the event of the termination of a contract.
Recruitment of Chairman and nonexecutive directors In the event of the appointment of a new Chairman andor nonexecutive director their remuneration framework will be in line with the table set out on page 71.
Service contracts and policy on payment for loss of office Executive directors Key terms relating to NEXs policy in the event of termination of an executive directors employment are set out in the table below.
Provision Policy Notice period Up to 12 months notice by the Company or executive director.
Termination payment Contractual entitlement would be limited to salary and benefits including pension over the notice period.
The Company would normally expect executive directors to mitigate any loss on their departure.
Incentive plans Participation in all incentive plans is noncontractual and at the committees discretion.
Annual bonus An executive director will not be eligible to receive an annual bonus unless the committee in its absolute discretion decides otherwise.
In determining whether to award a bonus the committee will assess performance during the financial year and apply pro rata as deemed appropriate.
It will normally be the case that a proportion of any bonus would continue to be deferred under the DSBP see below.
The committee however reserves the right to make any such payment in cash with no requirement to defer any bonus.
DSBP
Unvested awards will lapse except in certain circumstances such as illhealth injury or disability the participants employing company ceasing to be a Group member or any other reason and at the committees discretion other than in the case of summary dismissal when deferred awards under the DSBP will vest at the normal time.
The number of shares released in such circumstances will be determined by the committee in its absolute discretion taking into account the period until cessation of employment.
In the case of death awards will vest after the date of death.
PSP
Unvested awards will lapse except in certain circumstances such as illhealth injury or disability the participants employing company ceasing to be a Group member or any other reason and at the committees discretion other than in the case of summary dismissal when PSP awards will vest and be released at the normal time.
The number of shares released in such circumstances will be determined by the committee in its absolute discretion taking into account the period until cessation of employment.
In the case of death awards will vest after the date of death.
If the individual leaves prior to the release of awards but after the end of the vesting period the awards will continue to be released at the end of the holding period except on the grounds of summary dismissal in which case they will lapse.
The key termination provisions of the Groups current executive directors contracts are set out below Michael Spencer Michael Spencers notice period is 12 months.
He is entitled to receive salary and benefits for the duration of his notice period.
His contract includes a pay in lieu of notice clause which allows the Company to make a payment equal to this amount in lieu of any applicable period of notice.
He may be eligible to receive a discretionary bonus.
Stuart Bridges Stuart Bridges notice period is 12 months from the Company six months from the employee.
He is entitled to receive salary and benefits for the duration of his notice period.
He may be eligible to receive a discretionary bonus.
62 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Change of control In the event of a change of control or a voluntary winding up of the Company DSBP and PSP awards will vest at that time taking into account unless the board determines otherwise the extent to which any performance conditions have been met and the time elapsed since the grant date.
The committee however may require or permit individuals to exchange any awards for equivalent awards in the acquiring company.
Nonexecutive directors The nonexecutive directors and the Chairman of the Company have letters of appointment which set out their duties and responsibilities.
They do not have service contracts.
The key terms of the appointments are set out in the table below.
Provision Policy Notice period Nonexecutive directors and the Chairman are not entitled to compensation on leaving the board other than fees in respect of any notice period.
There is no notice period other than in the event of change in control for nonexecutive directors excluding the Chairman in which case a threemonth notice period will apply.
Availability of documentation Directors service contracts are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
Remuneration arrangements throughout the Group and wider employment conditions There are consistent overarching principles of remuneration which apply across the Group.
Given the nature of our business there is no single structure of remuneration that applies to all employees throughout the Group.
A significant element of pay however is performancelinked ensuring that all NEXs employees are focused on delivering strong financial results and achieving our strategic goals.
For members of the GEMG and other senior executives in the Group a proportion of remuneration is deferred into Company shares ensuring longterm alignment with the interests of our shareholders.
The committee takes into consideration the pay and conditions of employees throughout the Group when determining remuneration arrangements for executive directors.
NEX manages the costs of employment at the corporate level and expects changes in total remuneration for directors to reflect changes in the Companys performance.
Notwithstanding a change in structure of the overall package for the executive directors changes in salary are normally aligned to both policy and practice for increases for the wider employee base in terms of annual increases market positioning and adjustments for promotions and changes of role.
Director remuneration over time is expected to correlate with corporate performance and as such has the potential to be much more volatile than that of the wider employee base.
The Company does not consult directly with employees on the policy but information relating to employee remuneration is provided in regular updates to the committee.
Consideration of shareholder views The committee is committed to ongoing dialogue with shareholders and seeks the view of its largest shareholders when any major changes are being made to remuneration policy and arrangements for executive directors.
Minor amendments The committee may make minor amendments to the policy set out above for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for any such amendments.
63 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Charts illustrating the application of the directors remuneration policy The charts below illustrate the policy for 201718 in line with the policy table on pages 58 to 63.
The charts show hypothetical values for the remuneration package for executive directors under three different performance scenarios
Fixed elements of pay only No bonus payout or vesting under the PSP Performance in line with expectations Fixed elements of pay 50% of maximum annual bonus payout i.
150% of salary for Group Chief Executive Officer and 100% for Group Chief Financial Officer 25% of maximum vesting under the PSP i.
75% of salary for Group Chief Executive Officer and 50% for Group Chief Financial Officer
Fixed elements of pay 100% of maximum annual bonus payout i.
300% of salary for Group Chief Executive Officer and 200% for Group Chief Financial Officer 100% of maximum vesting under the PSP i.
300% of salary for Group Chief Executive Officer and 200% for Group Chief Financial Officer Minimum In line with expectations Michael Spencer Group Chief Executive Ocer Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Ocer
Minimum In line with expectations
100% 22.5% 44.9% 32.6% 42.3% 42.3% 15.3% 100% 19.6% 39.3% 41.1% 39.6% 39.6% 20.8% Fixed pay including pension Annual bonus including deferral
Salary Benefits
With effect from 1 April
In line with policy
Group Chief Executive Officer 750000 33186 32325 815511 Group Chief Financial Officer 500000 2221 21550 523771 64 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions The information in this section up to and including the statement of directors shareholding and share interests section is subject to audit.
The complete annual report on remuneration is subject to an advisory vote by shareholders.
Single total figure of remuneration The following table sets out the total remuneration for executive directors and nonexecutive directors for the years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016.
Salary and fees a Benefits b Annual bonus c
Payment in lieu of dividend e
Buyout awards f
Executive directors Michael Spencer 749 1018 3468 3591   3468 3591 Stuart Bridges   1302 757  900 1302 1657
Charles Gregson       315 328   315 328 Ivan Ritossa 95 95         95 95   95 95 John Sievwright       121 112   121 112 Robert Standing 90 90         90 90   90 90 Notes to the table a Salary and fees  the base salary or fees paid in respect of the relevant financial year. b Benefits  the taxable value of all benefits paid in respect of the financial year.
Benefits vary for each executive director but include medical life insurance car and travel benefits.
Michael Spencer also has the use of a driver.
The Chairman is provided with an office and is reimbursed for a proportion of the cost of a car and driver to assist with the performance of his duties. c Annual bonus  this represents the bonus awarded in respect of the 201617 performance year at least 50% of which will be deferred into NEX Group plc shares under the DSBP. d Pensioncash allowance  neither executive director participated in a pension plan during the year.
BSMP for 2009 2010 2011 and 2012. f Buyout awards  this represents the buyout award paid to Stuart Bridges on his appointment as Group Finance Director in 2015 and detailed in this report last year.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
65 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Additional disclosures in respect of the single total figure of remuneration table 201617 annual bonus The bonus plan was structured to incentivise executive directors to meet corporate objectives of investing to achieve growth and profitability continuing to promote the corporate culture through strong riskaware leadership and aligning their interests with those of shareholders.
The plan was designed so that progress and achievements in the past 12 months can be recognised and rewarded with a significant proportion deferred for a period of three years to ensure ongoing alignment and positive behaviours.
During 201617 the executive directors were measured against the key financial and strategic goals set by the committee at the start of the year.
The table below shows the content of the goals the weighting applied to each goal and the committees assessment of the executive directors performance and level of achievement.
Financial objectives 70% Objective Weighting Threshold Target Maximum Achievement Narrative Growth and protection Complete the sale of IGBB to TP ICAP 20% Binary target 100% The sale of IGBB was completed on 30 December 2016.
Completion was complex because of the requirements of the Competitions and Markets Authority which could have significantly delayed completion.
The management of these requirements alongside other complexities means that the committee is comfortable applying a 100% achievement rating.
Generate incremental revenue from strategic business initiatives 20% 5% prior year revenue 7 .5% prior year revenue 10% prior year revenue 38% We have seen incremental revenue growth in products launched in the past two years across the product group.
Notable are EBS DirecteFix and the TriOptima group of products.
Significant revenue growth came from the CFETS contract.
The target set was to achieve a 7 .5% increase in prior year total revenue from new products.
Profitability
Achieve trading operating profit of 100% to 110% compared to the prior year 40% 100% 106% 110% 63% Reported trading operating profit is 107% of prior year.
This is based on 12 months of continuing business and nine months of discontinued business compared to the same periods of the prior year.
Deliver a Group structure post completion of the Transaction to achieve a focused cost base that delivers savings versus prior year 20% 70% 85% 100% 100% This objective has been met and included a review of the key support areas and their purpose function design and target structure.
Implementation has commenced and savings are being realised.
As a result of the review further cost savings have been identified and it has been agreed that the work should be extended into the new financial year.
Financial objectives 70% 73% 66 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Strategic objectives 30% Objective Weighting Achievement Narrative Controls and governance Design and adopt a control risk and governance framework for the Group 25% 100% This objective has been fully met with strong monitoring of the control environment and the governance in place throughout the process of separating the business resulting in no gaps during the separation or after completion of the sale of IGBB.
Overall highlevel project monitoring has been established for NEX Markets and NEX
In addition development categorisation has been reviewed and is likely to present opportunities for cost savings in the future.
More adaptation is still required for the NEX business but is well underway.
Adapt a framework for the Group to manage information technology and information risk management 25% 100% The agreed framework has been successfully adapted to deal with the unique challenges of information risk management and technology.
This is key to the protection of the assets utilised by our clients and within the business.
The committee agreed that the controls and governance environment in the business is robust and appropriate.
While it remains a key ongoing consideration for all parts of the business and will continue to develop it is now sufficiently embedded that it should no longer be a formal objective for bonus purposes.
People and culture Deliver a Group reward framework for NEX 25% 80% A reward framework has been produced and delivered that simplifies the offering to employees rewards appropriately and fairly and reflects the achievement of objectives and targets that contribute to the longterm success of the Group and behaviours that are collaborative and reflect the culture of the business.
Design and launch a strong new corporate brand and culture for
25% 80% The NEX brand was launched on 30 December 2016 on completion of the sale of IGBB.
The entire business was rebranded globally externally and internally by 3 January 2017 .
The Company also has clarity on its culture going forward and the dissemination of this throughout the business is ongoing.
Strategic objectives 30% 90% The Remuneration Committee determined that the targets and achievements in the above table were a fair reflection of performance during the year.
The bonus payout for both executive directors was 78% of maximum.
Executive directors are required to defer at least 50% of bonus payments into NEX Group plc shares vesting after three years.
In line with the remuneration policy approved at the 2015 annual general meeting no matching awards will be made.
For 201617 bonus awards both the Group Chief Executive Officer and the Group Chief Financial Officer have elected to defer 100% into NEX Group plc shares.
2014 BSMP matching award The BSMP matching award granted in 2014 under the legacy arrangements was subject to a performance condition based on trading EPS with graduated vesting where 10% of the matching award will vest at RPI  6% per annum increasing to 100% vesting at RPI  15% per annum over a threeyear period.
The EPS targets were not met at any level therefore the award did not vest.
67 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Details of share awards granted in the year 2016 PSP award On 24 May 2016 PSP awards were granted to the two executive directors as shown in the table below.
Type of award
Face value
Maximum vesting % of face value End of performance period Michael Spencer PSP  conditional share award based on performance 521497 2242124 25% 100% 31 March 2019 Stuart Bridges PSP  conditional share award based on performance 231776 996498 25% 100% 31 March 2019 The face value of the awards is based on the average closing price for the five business days following 16 May 2016 being the preliminary announcement date of the 201516 financial results 4.2994.
The committee selected a combination of trading EPS and relative TSR as the performance conditions on the basis that it safeguards the progress that has been made in the Groups performance and underpins continuing forward growth in the Groups earnings and therefore promotes the longterm success of the Company.
The performance condition for the 2016 award is based on graduated vesting where 25% of the award will vest at EPS growth of CPI  20% over the threeyear period and TSR performance at the median level versus the agreed peer group as set out in last years remuneration report increasing to 100% vesting at EPS growth of CPI  45% over the threeyear period and TSR performance at the upper quartile level versus the agreed peer group.
The EPS and TSR performance conditions are measured independently and are not contingent on one another.
Payments to past directors Payments in line with those previously disclosed to ICAP plc shareholders were made in the year.
Payments for loss of office No payments for loss of office have been made during the year.
Statement of directors shareholding and share interests Minimum shareholding guidelines for executive directors have been in place since 2012.
These shareholdings will be built up over time and for these purposes will include vested share awards under long term incentive plans but will not include any unvested rights to shares awarded under long term incentive plans or any unexercised options.
Any vested shares subject to a holding period under the PSP will count towards shareholding guidelines.
Other shares that count towards the guideline include those that are beneficially owned and shares held by the NEX Trust in respect of BSMP basic awards and any vested but not exercised BSMP matching and PSP awards.
The minimum shareholding guideline for the Group Chief Executive Officer is 500% of base salary and for other executive directors is 300% of base salary.
The Group Chief Executive Officer had exceeded his target as at 31 March 2017  based on the share price at the close of business on that date.
The Group Chief Financial Officer was appointed in September 2015 and has five years from appointment to reach his target.
The table below details the share interests of the directors in office at 31 March 2017 .
Director Note Share interests in NEX as at 31 March 2017 Share interests in ICAP plc as at 31 March 2016
DSBP awards
PSP awards without performance condition
PSP awards with performance condition
BSMP awards
SAYE options Charles Gregson 219503 241625 Michael Spencer 1 2 3839742 3889383 394020  694759 3608215 4476 Stuart Bridges 134999 25000 104299 98750 429276 Ivan Ritossa 167500 John Sievwright 26927 20873 Robert Standing 5714 10000
Details of Michael Spencers shareholding including his connected parties are set out in a note to the substantial shareholders section on page 53.
The outstanding BSMP awards include the 2008 BSMP matching award which has vested and remains unexercised.
Between 31 March 2017 and 10 May 2017 there were no transactions by the directors in the Companys shares.
68 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions External appointments The Company recognises the opportunities and benefits to both the Company and executive directors serving as nonexecutive directors of other companies.
Executive directors are permitted to take on nonexecutive directorships with other companies with the approval of the Nomination
Any fees arising from such appointments are retained by the individual.
Stuart Bridges received a fee of 45500 which he retained for his nonexecutive directorship of Caledonia Investments plc.
Total shareholder return The TSR on a holding of the Companys ordinary shares compared with the FTSE 100 FTSE 250 and the FTSE AllShare indices for the eight financial years to 31 March 2017 is shown in the graph below.
As a constituent of the FTSE 250 when NEX was officially listed in December 2016 the Company considers both the FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 the appropriate indices for comparison.
TSR is a measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders reflecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
Performance graph  value of 100 invested NEXteltel 2016 2017 FTSE 100 FTSE 250 FTSE AllShare Remuneration of the Group Chief Executive Officer Previous policy Current policy 200910 201011 201112 201213 201314 201415 201516 201617 Single total figure of remuneration 000 6069 10727 5524 4326 2215 3320 3591 3468 Percentage of maximum bonus paid na na 56% 41% 12% 25% 76% 78% Percentage of maximum BSMP opportunity vesting 100% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% No maximum bonus stated prior to 201112 Change in the remuneration of the Group Chief Executive Officer compared with other employees The table below shows the percentage change in remuneration awarded to the Group Chief Executive Officer compared with other employees of the Group between 201516 and 201617 .
Salary Benefits Bonus Group Chief Executive Officer 0%  62% 3% All other employees  4% 7%  13% 69 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Relative importance of spend on pay
Total remuneration 616 653  6% Dividends 142 141 1% The figures shown above reflect the combined ICAP employee group.
From 201718 all figures shown will reflect NEX employees only.
Statement of implementation of the directors remuneration policy in the coming year As stated in the Chairmans statement the directors remuneration policy for NEX replicates the previous ICAP plc policy which was in place for only two years.
A full policy review will take place in 201718 and a new threeyear remuneration policy for the Group will be presented for shareholder approval at the 2018 annual general meeting.
We consider that the proposed remuneration arrangements for 201718 reflect the priorities of the business for the year complement business culture and demonstrate good governance align with the interests of shareholders and provide transparency.
Further details are set out below.
Salary
Salary levels from 1 April 2017 are shown below.
Salary % increase Group Chief Executive Officer 750000 0% Group Chief Financial Officer 500000 0% Pension and benefits Both executive directors receive a cash equivalent to the standard 5% of salary contribution to the UK defined contribution plan.
The cash equivalent is reduced to take account of employers national insurance contributions.
There will be no material change to benefits.
Annual bonus awards in respect of the 201718 financial year The bonus structure for 201718 is consistent with that detailed in the directors remuneration policy section of this report.
Annual bonuses will be assessed based on financial performance represented by growth and protection objectives and profitability objectives accounting for 70% of the overall award and strategic priorities represented by client focus and people and culture accounting for the remaining 30%.
Further details are set out below.
Maximum opportunity for 2017 Group Chief Executive Officer 300% of base salary Group Chief Financial Officer 200% of base salary Up to half of any bonus award will be paid in cash with the balance deferred into NEX Group plc shares for a threeyear period.
Performance measures The committee has selected measures to directly support NEXs strategy.
The 2017 annual bonus will be subject to the following performance measures Financial 70% Achieve growth in operating profit assessed using constant exchange rates Deepen relationships with strategic clients grow business with identified target client populations and drive crossselling across the NEX portfolio Strategic priorities 30% Define and clearly articulate the NEX strategy internally and externally Complete and implement the redesign of an operating model to support the NEX strategy The targets set for performance measures are commercially sensitive and as permitted by the regulations are not being disclosed in advance.
Further detail will be provided in next years Annual Report within commercial constraints with context on performance against those targets and the resulting bonus.
70 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Long term incentive awards In the 201718 financial year awards will be made under the PSP to the Group Chief Executive Officer and the Group Chief Financial Officer.
Further details are set out below.
Maximum opportunity Group Chief Executive Officer 300% of base salary Group Chief Financial Officer 200% of base salary
Performance will be measured over a threeyear performance period.
Once they have vested awards will be subject to an additional holding period of at least two years.
Performance measures and targets The performance period will run from 1 April 2017 to 31 March 2020.
TSR 50% of the award Half of the 2017 PSP award will be subject to a total shareholder return performance condition.
The Groups TSR will be measured relative to the FTSE 250 index.
Vesting of awards under the TSR element will be in line with the following schedule TSR performance Below median
Upper quartile Percentage of TSR element vesting 0% 25% 100% Straightline vesting between median and upper quartile EPS 50% of the award The remaining 50% of the 2017 award will be subject to an EPS performance condition.
Awards under this element will vest in line with the following schedule Annual EPS growth 6% 6% 12% Percentage of EPS element vesting 0% 25% 100% Straightline vesting between 6% and 12% Chairman and nonexecutive directors fees Following an internal review of nonexecutive director fees including a benchmark review the decision was taken to make a small adjustment for the coming year.
This is the first change for a number of years with fees held at the current level for nonexecutive directors since 2010.
The fees for the Chairman have also been increased to reflect the extensive time commitment made during and since separation of the business the Transaction.
This is the first change since 2012.
The Nomination Committee chairmans fee and the SEF nonexecutive directors fees remain at the current level.
There are no fees paid for membership of board committees.
The table below shows the nonexecutive director fee structure as at 1 April 2017 .
Position Fee % increase Chairman 350000 17% Nonexecutive director 85000 6% Additional fees Senior independent director 11000 10% Chairman of the Audit Committee 11000 10% Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 11000 10% Chairman of the Risk Committee 11000 10% Chairman of the Nomination Committee 5000 0% Membership of the SEF board andor any other subsidiary board 1500025000 0% Charles Gregson waived his entitlement to the additional fee for his role as chairman of the Nomination Committee Additional fees are paid to nonexecutive directors who sit on the boards of SEF entities due to the additional time commitment for discharging this role Support to the committee The committee is supported by the Group Chief Executive Officer the Group Chief Financial Officer the Group Head of HR and the Group Company Secretary.
The committee received external advice from Deloitte in relation to matters affecting executive compensation until October 2016.
Since October 2016 the committee has received external advice from Willis Towers Watson.
Both Deloitte and Willis Towers Watson were appointed by the Company.
Willis Towers Watson was selected from a number of alternatives following a process conducted internally.
Until October 2016 Deloitte also provided tax advice to the business.
The committee is satisfied that the advice received from Deloitte and Willis Towers Watson was independent and objective.
The fees in respect of the advice provided were 52829 to Deloitte and 24550 to Willis Towers Watson.
71 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Statement of voting at the ICAP plc 2016 annual general meeting At the 2016 ICAP plc annual general meeting votes cast in respect of the remuneration report were
Remuneration report
Total number of votes Votes cast For 520142451 93.05% Against 38843072 6.95% Number of votes cast 558985523 Votes withheld 7799904 The committee was satisfied with the voting outcome for the remuneration report and directors remuneration policy and looks forward to the support of shareholders in relation to the report and policy in 2017 .
Retrospective disclosure from 201516 Due to commercial sensitivity the committee elected not to disclose the financial targets relating to 201516 bonus awards in the 2016 report.
It did however make a commitment to retrospectively disclose the financial targets in this Annual Report provided they were no longer considered sensitive.
The targets are shown in the below table for information.
Key strategic areas Performance measure
Threshold
25%
50%
100% Achievement
Payout % bonus Growth and protection financial Defence of existing market share 11.7% 77% 87% 97% 95% 90% 10.5% Market share growth in electronic and post trade 11.7% 0% 3.25% 6.5% 5.9% 90% 10.5% Revenue from new products relative to prior year 11.7% Flat  20%  60%  39% 74% 8.6% Total 35% 85% 30% Profitability financial Profit before tax m 17.5% 20tel25% 4% Cash conversion 17.5% 95% 15% 95% 5% 95% 96% 90% 16% Total 35% Detailed in 2016 ICAP plc Annual Report 58% 20% Nonfinancial Detailed in 2016 ICAP plc Annual Report 30% 90% 27% Total 100% 77% 72 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Our opinion In our opinion NEX Group plcs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit and the Groups and the Companys cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
What we have audited The financial statements included within the Annual Report comprise the consolidated and Company balance sheets as at 31 March 2017 the consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended the consolidated and Company statements of cash flow for the year then ended the consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended the accounting policies and the notes to the financial statements which include other explanatory information.
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These are crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and applicable law.
Our audit approach Audit scope Areas of focus
Overview
Overall Group materiality 10.0 million which represents 5% of continuing and discontinued profit before tax acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items.
We conducted an audit of the complete financial information of three financially significant business reporting units covering the continuing business and an audit of the income statements of six reporting units covering the discontinued business.
Additional business reporting units were selected to increase the level of audit evidence for each account balance on which a combination of controls testing and substantive tests of detail were undertaken.
Business reporting units that are not subject to specific audit procedures are still subject to audit work on entity level controls and Group level analytical review procedures over their financial information.
The areas of focus for our audit to which we allocated the greatest amount of our resources and effort were sale of IGBB presentation and disclosure of exceptional items goodwill impairment assessment and fraud in revenue recognition.
The scope of our audit and our areas of focus We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland.
We designed our audit by determining the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
The risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit including the allocation of our resources and effort are identified as areas of focus in the table on pages 74 and 75.
We have also set out how we tailored our audit to address these specific areas in order to provide an opinion on the financial statements as a whole and any comments we make on the results of our procedures should be read in this context.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
73 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Sale of IGBB On 30 December 2016 the Group completed the disposal of the IGBB business to Tullett Prebon plc now renamed TP ICAP plc.
On the income statement the profit of IGBB for the period up to the disposal net of tax has been presented separately on the face of the income statement as a discontinued operation.
The gain on disposal of 1.2bn is presented in the income statement as part of exceptional items.
The measurement of gain on sale of a disposal group is inherently complex particularly when it encompasses a large number of entities with material amounts involved.
We reviewed the management analysis for the accounting treatment of the disposal and were satisfied that this was appropriate.
We assessed the accuracy and completeness of the IGBB disposal group.
We also gained comfort over the consideration received and tested the net asset reconciliation in relation to the IGBB transaction and determined that the gain on disposal was not materially misstated.
We tested the split of reserves between IGBB and NEX and noted that it was appropriate.
We assessed the disclosures made in the financial statements and noted that they were compliant with the relevant accounting standards.
Relevant references in the Annual Report note 5.
Presentation and disclosure of exceptional items Assessment of the Groups performance generally focuses on trading profit being operating profit before acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items.
The gain on sale of IGBB net of costs of sale has been treated as an exceptional item.
In addition NEX Group plc incurred various other transaction costs principally the costs of contractors and temporary staff which have also been classified as exceptional items.
There is a risk that costs could be incorrectly classified between the columns of the financial statements with an impact on the disclosed underlying business performance.
We understood managements basis of determining whether or not revenue and expenses in relation to transactions fell within the classification of exceptional items as described in the accounting policy.
We selected a sample of revenue and expenses that had been identified as exceptional items and based on our understanding of the accounting policy and the transaction formed our own judgement as to whether they were appropriately presented and disclosed in exceptional items with no material exceptions noted.
We examined the Groups disclosure in respect of exceptional items and agreed that the narrative provided appropriately reflected the nature of the underlying expenses.
Relevant references in the Annual Report notes 4 and 5.
Goodwill impairment assessment This was an area of focus due to the size of the goodwill balance and given the judgement required as part of the directors assessment of the carrying value of the Groups cash generating units CGUs about the future results of the business and the discount rate applied to the future cash flow forecasts.
We examined the forecasts of future cash flow prepared by management by comparing them to the latest board approved budgets.
We also tested historical budgeting accuracy by comparing current year results with the equivalent figures included in the prior year forecast.
Our testing did not give any indication of impairment.
We assessed the directors key assumptions for discount and longterm growth rates using our knowledge of the business future strategy and past performance.
We compared rates used to past results and external data where available.
We also performed sensitivity analyses on the key assumptions.
We found no material exceptions in these tests.
We also reviewed the disclosures made in relation to goodwill and found them to be appropriate.
Relevant references in the Annual Report note 15.
74 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Fraud in revenue recognition We focused on the accuracy and timing of the recognition and the presentation in the income statement of transaction and access fees from the NEX Markets business fees from the provision of services in the NEX Optimisation business and commissions from the IGBB business.
These revenue streams are dependent on the fulfilment of contractual obligations which may involve subjective estimation with regard to stage completion and are subject to manual intervention which could result in revenue being recognised inappropriately.
We tested the reconciliations between the revenue systems used by the Group and its financial ledgers and journal entries posted to revenue accounts to help identify any unusual or irregular items.
We then performed testing over these amounts to ensure that they should be recognised as revenue.
No exceptions were found in the sample selected.
We evaluated the relevant IT systems and tested the operating effectiveness of internal controls over the accuracy and timing of commissions and fees recognised in the financial statements.
We also tested the timing of revenue recognition assessing whether the necessary contractual obligations had been fulfilled by taking a sample of revenue transactions and agreeing them back to contracts and did not find any exceptions.
Relevant references in the Annual Report note 1.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the geographic structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which the Group operates.
Following the sale of the IGBB business during the year the Group reports its operating results and financial position along three business lines being NEX Markets NEX Optimisation and Other.
The results for the year also include nine months of revenue and expenses from the IGBB business disclosed as discontinued operations.
In establishing the overall approach to the audit we identified three reporting units across the NEX Markets NEX Optimisation and Other functions that in our view required an audit of their complete financial information due to their size.
Specific audit procedures on certain balances and transactions were performed at a further eight reporting units either due to their size or their risk characteristics.
To audit the results of the discontinued IGBB business we identified six reporting units where we performed an audit of their revenue and expenses in view of their size and a further two reporting units where specific procedures were performed on certain balances and transactions.
Where the work was performed by component auditors under our instruction we determined the level of involvement we needed to have in the audit work at those reporting units to be able to conclude whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained to support an opinion on the financial statements as a whole.
In the current year the Group engagement team visited the UK and US components being the two most significant countries in the Group.
The 19 reporting units accounted for 94% of Group total continuing and discontinued income and 89% of Group total assets.
75 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall Group materiality 10.0 million 2016 10.1 million.
How we determined it 5% of continuing and discontinued profit before tax acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items.
Rationale for benchmark applied We based materiality on continuing and discontinued profit before tax acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items.
The acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items are significant and expected to be discrete and nonrecurring in nature and thus are not considered to be indicative of the underlying performance of the business.
The removal of these items also mitigates undue volatility in determining our materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 500000 2016 500000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the directors statement set out on page 54 in relation to going concern.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to the directors statement about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
As noted in the directors statement the directors have concluded that it is appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
The going concern basis presumes that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to remain in operation and that the directors intend them to do so for at least one year from the date the financial statements were signed.
As part of our audit we have concluded that the directors use of the going concern basis is appropriate.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted these statements are not a guarantee as to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
76 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Other required reporting Consistency of other information and compliance with applicable requirements Companies Act 2006 reporting In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group the Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
ISAs UK and Ireland reporting Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and the Company acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
We have no exceptions to report.
Code that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for members to assess the Groups and the Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and the Company acquired in the course of performing our audit.
We have no exceptions to report. of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We have no exceptions to report.
The directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to the directors confirmation on page 55 of the Annual Report in accordance with provision C.2.1 of the Code that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to. or mitigated.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to. assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and the directors statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing our audit.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
77 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Governance and directors report Adequacy of accounting records and information and explanations received Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Company financial statements and the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Directors remuneration Directors remuneration report  Companies Act 2006 opinion In our opinion the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Other Companies Act 2006 reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Corporate governance statement Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the part of the corporate governance statement relating to ten further provisions of the Code.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Our responsibilities and those of the directors As explained more fully in the statement of directors responsibilities set out on page 54 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
What an audit of financial statements involves An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the strategic report and directors report we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
Christopher Rowland Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
15 May 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
78 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial statements Consolidated income statement 80 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 82 Consolidated and Company balance sheet 83 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 84 Company statement of changes in equity 85 Consolidated and Company statement of cash flow Basis of preparation 87 Notes to the financial statements 79 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017
Trading
Acquisition and disposal costs
Total
Revenue 1 543   543 Operating expenses 3 398 21 5 414 Other income  22  22 Operating profit Finance income 10 Finance costs 10 31   31 Share of profit of joint ventures after tax 22 Share of profit of associates after tax 23 Profit before tax from continuing operations Tax 8 28 6  22 Profit for the year from continuing operations Profit for the year from discontinued operations 5 73  1140 1213 Profit for the year 159 7 1145 1311 Attributable to Owners of the Company 160 7 1145 1312 Noncontrolling interests 1   1 159 7 1145 1311 Earnings per ordinary share from continuing operations pence basic 6 23.2 26.4 diluted 6 22.5 25.6 80 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2016
Trading
Acquisition and disposal costs
Total
Revenue 1 460   460 Operating expenses 3 321 75 9 405 Other income Operating profit 1 139 75 9 55 Finance income 10 1 1  2 Finance costs 10 30   30 Share of profit of joint ventures after tax 22 1   1 Share of profit of associates after tax 23 1   1 Profit before tax from continuing operations 110 74 9 27 Profit for the year from continuing operations 87 58 7 22 Profit for the year from discontinued operations 5 73  27 46 Profit for the year 160 58 34 68 Attributable to Owners of the Company 163 58 34 71 Noncontrolling interests 3   3 Earnings per ordinary share from continuing operations pence restated basic 6 23.6 6.0 diluted 6 22.9 5.8 81 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Profit for the year 1311 68 Other comprehensive incomeexpense from continuing operations Items that will be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss when specific conditions are met Revaluation gain in the year  1 Net movement on cash flow hedges 7 3 Exchange differences 143 44 Current tax recognised in other comprehensive income 1 Deferred tax recognised in other comprehensive income 1 1 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax from continuing operations 150 43 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax from discontinued operations 29 19 Total comprehensive income for the year 1490 130 Total comprehensive incomeexpense attributable to Owners of the Company 1485 131 Noncontrolling interests 5 1 1490 130 82 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY BALANCE SHEET Group Company
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated As at 31 March As at 31 March
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets arising on consolidation 15 1026 826 Intangible assets arising from development expenditure 14 127 88 Property and equipment 25 36 30 Investments in subsidiaries 21   1490 Investments in joint ventures 22 7 6 Investments in associates 23 42 52 Deferred tax assets 8 21 13 Trade and other receivables 18 17 9 Availableforsale investments 24 20 9 1296 1033 1490 Current assets Trade and other receivables 1tel Cash and cash equivalents 12 321 157 Restricted funds 12 103 26 Availableforsale investments 24 1 Held for sale assets  3111 599 3488 194 Total assets 1895 4521 1684
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 19 197 197 Borrowings 11 72 64 Tax payable 28 41 Provisions 16 11 Held for sale liabilities  2579 Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 19 61 12 Borrowings 11 435 519 Deferred tax liabilities 8 96 67 Retirement benefit obligations 4 3 Provisions 16 12 13 Total liabilities 916 3503 Net assets 979 1018 1684
Capital and reserves Called up share capital Share premium account  454 Other reserves 27 49 77 Translation 257 104 Retained earnings 580 276 1618 Equity attributable to owners of the Company 952 977 1684 Noncontrolling interests 27 41 Total equity 979 1018 1684 The financial statements and accompanying notes on pages 80 to 133 were approved by the board on 15 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Stuart Bridges Group Chief Financial Officer 83 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY Year ended 31 March 2017
Share premium
Translation
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
Balance at 1 April 2016 66 454 7tel41 1018 Profit for the year     1312 1312 1 1311 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Cash flow hedges   7   7  7 Exchange differences    166  166 6 172 Income tax   1  1 Total comprehensive incomeexpense for the year   6 166 1313 1485 5 1490 Share options exercised     2 2  2 Other movements in other controlling interests       1 1 Sharebased payments in the year note 9     11 11  11 Dividends paid in the year     142 142 1 143 Capital reorganisation  454 1  455 Distribution of discontinued operations   33 13 1335 1381 19 1400 Balance at 31 March 2017 66  4tel27 979 Year ended 31 March 2016
Share premium
Translation
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
Balance at 1 April 018 Profit for the year     71 71 3 68 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Cash flow hedges   3   3  3 Exchange differences    61  61 2 63 Revaluation gains realised in the year   1   1  1 Income tax     1 1  1 Total comprehensive incomeexpense for the year   2 61 72 131 1 130 Share options exercised     3 3  3 Other movements     4 4 2 2 Sharebased payments in the year note 9     8 8  8 Dividends paid in the year     141 141 2 143 Balance at 31 March 2016 66 454 7tel41 1018 As part of the capital reorganisation NEX Group plc acquired the ordinary shares of ICAP plc by way of the Scheme of Arrangement and undertook a capital reduction and share consolidation as explained in note 26.
84 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY Year ended 31 March 2017
Retained earnings
Balance as at 1 April 2016 Profit for the year  1238 1238 Total comprehensive income for the year  1238 1238 Share options exercised  1 1 Capital reorganisation 66 379 445 Balance as at 31 March 2017 66 1618 1684 Period ended 31 March 2016
Retained earnings
Balance as at 18 February 2016 and 31 March 2016 85 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW Group Company
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Cash flows from operating activities 12a 309 164 1 Cash flows from investing activities Dividends received from associates 4 6 Dividends received from joint ventures 1 2 Other equity dividends received  1 Payments to acquire property and equipment 19 17 Intangible development expenditure 75 54 Proceeds from disposal of availableforsale investments  1 Acquisition of availableforsale investments 9 5 Acquisition of interests in businesses net of cash acquired 46 Acquisition of associates and joint ventures 5 17 Monies received in satisfaction of completion receivable 330 Derecognition of cash held in discontinued operations 384 Net cash flows from investing activities 203 83 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid to noncontrolling interest 1 2 Proceeds from exercise of share options 2 3 1 Dividends paid to owners of the Company 142 141 Repayment of borrowings 151 126 Funds received from borrowings net of fees 51 171 Movement in restricted funds 44 16 Net cash flows from financing activities 285 111 1 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 179 30 Net cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 433 448 FX adjustments 67 15 Net cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 12c 321 433 Cash includes cash and cash equivalents of 321m 201516 516m and overdrafts of nil 201516 83m.
The consolidated cash flow statement for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated to include restricted funds in financing activities instead of operating activities.
Restricted funds comprises cash held at a CCP clearing house or a financial institution providing NEX with access to a CCP.
Cash flows of discontinued operations Cash inflows from operating activities of 141m 201516 23m cash outflows from investing activities of 13m 201516 15m and cash outflows from financing activities of 1m 201516 2m were incurred in the year relating to discontinued operations.
Cash flows of discontinued operations have been included in the consolidated statement of cash flow above.
86 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions BASIS OF PREPARATION Preparation of financial statements The consolidated financial statements of the Group and the separate financial statements of NEX Group plc have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as issued by the IASB and the interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRIC and their predecessor bodies and as endorsed by the EU and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRSs.
In publishing the parent company financial statements here together with the Group financial statements NEX Group plc has taken advantage of the exemption in section  of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its individual income statement individual statement of comprehensive income and related notes that form a part of these financial statements.
The financial statements are prepared in pound sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and are presented in millions.
NEX Group plc is incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The significant accounting policies adopted by the Group and the Company are included at the beginning of the notes to which they relate.
The preparation of financial statements requires management to apply judgements and the use of estimates and assumptions about future conditions.
Management considers impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets arising on consolidation note 15 investment in joint ventures and associates notes 22 and 23 provisions note 16 contingent liabilities note 17 technology development revenue note 1 and the presentation of exceptional items note 4 to be the areas where increased judgement is required.
Further information about key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty are set out in the relevant notes to the financial statements.
Estimates and assumptions are continuously evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Due to the inherent uncertainty in making estimates actual results reported in future periods may be based on amounts which differ from those estimates.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised and in any future periods affected.
Segmental information and the number of employees analysed by operating segment for the year ended 31 March 2016 have been restated due to a change in accounting policy for operating segments notes 1 and 9b.
Earnings per share dividends per share treasury shares and shares held in the employee share trust as at 31 March 2016 have been restated as if the share consolidation had occurred at the beginning of the comparative year notes 6 7 and 26.
The consolidated cash flow statement for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated to include restricted funds in financing activities instead of operating activities note 12.
Matched principal trade receivables and payables as at 31 March 2016 have been restated due to a change in accounting policy from trade date accounting to settlement date accounting notes 5 18 and 19.
All notes to the financial statements have been restated for the year ended 31 March 2016 to be on a continuing operations basis where possible.
The Company was incorporated on 18 February 2016 and on 15 December 2016 obtained control of the entire share capital of ICAP plc via the Scheme of
There were no changes in rights or the proportion of control exercised as a result of this transaction.
Although the Scheme of Arrangement resulted in a change of legal ownership this was a common control transaction and therefore outside the scope of IFRS3.
In substance these financial statements reflect the continuation of the preexisting group headed by ICAP plc and the financial statements have been prepared applying the principles of a capital reorganisation.
As a result the consolidated comparatives presented in these financial statements are the consolidated results of ICAP plc.
The prior year consolidated balance sheet reflects the share capital structure of ICAP plc.
The current year consolidated balance sheet presents the legal change in ownership of the Group including the share capital of NEX Group plc and the reserves arising as a result of the Scheme of Arrangement.
The consolidated statement of changes in equity on page 84 and the additional disclosures in note 26 explain the impact of the Scheme of Arrangement in more detail.
The Company comparatives presented in these financial statements are those of NEX Group plc not ICAP plc.
Discontinued operations On 30 December 2016 the Group completed the disposal of IGBB to TP ICAP.
The results of the IGBB business have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated income statement as the sale was a single co ordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business.
The assets and liabilities attributable to IGBB were presented as held for sale assets and liabilities on the face of the balance sheet as at 31 March 2016 because at that point the disposal met the criteria in IFRS5 for held for sale classification since the business was available for sale in its present condition and the sale was highly probable.
The assets and liabilities attributable to IGBB are no longer presented on the balance sheet as at 31 March 2017 since the Transaction completed during the year.
The shares in TP ICAP plc were fully transferred to NEX shareholders and are deemed as a distribution through equity.
Presentation of the income statement The Group maintains a columnar format for the presentation of its consolidated income statement.
The columnar format enables the Group to continue its practice of improving the understanding of its results by presenting its trading profit.
This is the profit measure used to calculate trading EPS note 6 and is considered to be the most appropriate as it better reflects the Groups trading earnings.
Trading profit is reconciled to profit before tax on the face of the consolidated income statement which also includes acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items.
The column acquisition and disposal costs includes any gains losses or other associated costs on the full or partial disposal of investments associates joint ventures or subsidiaries and costs associated with a business combination that do not constitute fees relating to the arrangement of financing amortisation or impairment of intangible assets arising on consolidation any remeasurement after initial recognition of deferred contingent consideration which has been classified as a liability and any gains or losses on the revaluation of previous interests.
The column may also include items such as gains or losses on the settlement of preexisting relationships with acquired businesses and the remeasurement of liabilities that are above the value of indemnification.
87 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements BASIS OF PREPARATION CONTINUED Items which are both of a nonrecurring nature and material are disclosed separately to give a clearer presentation of the Groups results.
These are shown as exceptional items on the face of the consolidated income statement.
For the year ended 31 March 2017  the gain on disposal of IGBB was presented in the column exceptional items as opposed to the column acquisition and disposal costs given the exceptional nature and size of the disposal.
When the Group has disposed of or intends to dispose of a business component that represents a major line of business or geographic area of operations it classifies such operations as discontinued.
The post tax profit or loss of the discontinued operations is shown as a single line on the face of the consolidated income statement separate from the other results of the Group.
The consolidated income statement for the comparative periods is restated to show the discontinued operations separate from those generated by the continuing operations.
Basis of consolidation The Groups consolidated financial statements include the results and net assets of the Company its subsidiaries and the Groups share of joint ventures and associates.
Subsidiaries
An entity is regarded as a subsidiary if the Group has control over its strategic operating and financial policies and intends to hold the investment on a longterm basis for the purpose of securing a contribution to the Groups activities.
The purchase method of accounting is used to account for the acquisition of subsidiaries by the Group.
The cost of acquisition is measured at fair value of the assets given equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred or assumed at the date of exchange.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in the business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date irrespective of the extent of any minority interest.
The excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If the costs of the acquisition are less than the fair value of the net assets acquired the difference is recognised directly in the consolidated income statement.
Fees associated with an acquisition are expensed as incurred.
When the Group increases its investment in an entity resulting in an associate becoming a subsidiary the intangibles related to the acquisition are valued and the elements of those not previously recognised as a share of net assets are recorded as revaluation gains realised in the year in other comprehensive income.
A change of ownership that does not result in a loss of control is classified as an equity transaction with the difference between the amount by which the noncontrolling interest is recorded and the fair value of the consideration received recognised directly in equity.
Where the Group has issued a put option over shares held by a noncontrolling interest the Group derecognises the noncontrolling interest and instead recognises a contingent deferred consideration liability for the estimated amount likely to be paid to the noncontrolling interest on exercise of those options.
The residual amount representing the difference between any consideration paidpayable and the noncontrolling interests share of net assets is recognised in equity.
Movements in the estimated liability after initial recognition are recognised within the consolidated income statement.
Where the Group has a call option over shares held by a noncontrolling interest the Group continues to recognise the noncontrolling interest until it is certain that the option will be called.
At that point the accounting treatment is the same as for a put option.
The results of companies acquired during the year are included in the Groups results from the effective date of acquisition.
The results of companies disposed of during the year are included up to the effective date of disposal.
The Group treats transactions with noncontrolling interests as transactions with equity owners of the Group.
For purchases from noncontrolling interests the difference between any consideration paid and the relevant share acquired of the carrying value of net assets of the subsidiary is recorded in equity.
Gains or losses on disposals to noncontrolling interests are also recorded in equity.
On consolidation the accounting policies of Group companies the Company and its subsidiaries are consistent with those applied by the Group.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated as part of the consolidation process.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
Joint ventures A joint venture is an entity in which the Group has an interest and in the opinion of the directors exercises joint control over its operating and financial policies.
An interest exists where an investment is held on a longterm basis for the purpose of securing a contribution to the Groups activities.
Following the adoption of IFRS11 Joint Arrangements and IAS28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures on 1 April 2014 investments in joint ventures are recognised using the equity method.
Under this method such investments are initially stated at cost including attributable goodwill and are adjusted thereafter for the post acquisition change in the Groups share of net assets.
88 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
The Group classifies investments in entities over which it has significant influence but not control and that are neither subsidiaries nor joint ventures as associates.
Investments in associates are recognised using the equity method.
Under this method such investments are initially stated at cost including attributable goodwill and are adjusted thereafter for the post acquisition change in the Groups share of net assets.
Availableforsale investments The Group classifies investments in entities which are not subsidiaries joint ventures or associates as availableforsale investments.
Availableforsale investments are initially recognised at fair value.
Availableforsale investments in equity assets that do not have a quoted market price in an active market and whose fair value cannot be reliably measured are subsequently recorded at cost less impairment.
All other availableforsale investments are fair valued subsequently at each period end.
Foreign currencies In individual entities transactions denominated in foreign currencies are recorded at the prior month closing exchange rate between the functional currency and the foreign currency.
At each end of the reporting period monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing at the end of the reporting period.
Exchange differences are recognised in the consolidated income statement except for exchange differences arising on nonmonetary assets and liabilities where these form part of the net investment of an overseas business or are designated as hedges of a net investment or cash flow and therefore the changes in value resulting from exchange differences are recognised directly in other comprehensive income.
Nonmonetary items carried at historical cost are translated in the balance sheet at the exchange rate on the original transaction date.
Non monetary items measured at fair value are translated using the exchange rate ruling when the fair value was determined.
On consolidation the results of businesses with nonpound sterling functional currencies are translated into the presentational currency of the Group at the average exchange rates for the year where these approximate to the rate at the date of the transactions.
Assets and liabilities of overseas businesses are translated into the presentational currency of the Group at the exchange rate prevailing at the end of the reporting period.
Exchange differences arising are recognised within other comprehensive income.
Cumulative translation differences arising after the transition to IFRSs are taken to the consolidated income statement on disposal of the net investment.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a nonpound sterling entity are treated as assets and liabilities of that entity and translated into the presentational currency of the Group at the period closing rate.
Where applicable the Group has elected to treat goodwill and fair value adjustments arising before the date of transition to IFRSs as denominated in the presentational currency of the Group.
In the consolidated statement of cash flows cash flows denominated in foreign currencies are translated into the presentational currency of the Group at the average exchange rates for the year or at the rate prevailing at the time of the transaction where more appropriate.
Future accounting developments At 31 March 2017  the following standards have been issued by the IASB which are not effective for these consolidated financial statements in July 2014 the IASB issued IFRS9 Financial Instruments which will replace IAS39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
NEX expects some classification and measurement changes in relation to its availableforsale investments and some impairment changes in relation to its financial assets but these are not expected to be significant from a Group perspective.
The standard will become effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
NEX intends to adopt IFRS9 for its financial statements for the year ending 31 March 2019.
NEX does not expect to restate comparatives on initial application of IFRS9 on 1 April 2018 but will provide detailed transitional disclosures in accordance with the amendment requirements of IFRS7 in May 2014 the IASB issued IFRS15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers which will replace IAS18 Revenue and IAS11 Construction Contracts and other related interpretations on revenue recognition.
Adoption of the standard is not expected to have a significant impact on NEXs main revenue streams of transaction fees and subscription fees.
Efforts will be focused on preparing and sourcing information necessary to comply with the enhanced disclosure requirements introduced by IFRS15.
The standard will become effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
NEX intends to adopt IFRS15 for its financial statements for the year ending 31 March 2019 and in January 2016 the IASB issued IFRS16 Leases which will replace IAS17 Leases and other related interpretations on leases.
NEX expects an increase in both assets and liabilities for transactions currently accounted for as operating leases.
The standard will become effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
NEX intends to adopt IFRS16 for its financial statements for the year ending 31 March 2020.
The impact on NEXs financial statements from the adoption of these IFRS standards is currently being assessed and will be disclosed closer to the time of the adoption.
89 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Segmental information The Group has determined its operating segments based on the management information including trading revenue and trading operating profit reviewed on a regular basis by the Companys board.
The Group considers the executive members of the Companys board to be the Chief Operating Decision Maker
The management information reviewed by the Companys board changed during the year due to the disposal of IGBB.
NEX now has two reportable segments NEX Markets and NEX Optimisation.
NEX now also presents a NEX Group and other column which includes the Groups remaining activities that do not meet the definition of reportable segments and a Hedging impact column which also does not meet the definition of a reportable segment.
The NEX Group and other column includes the activities of Shipping Argentina NEX Exchange certain joint venture and associate investments and corporate costs.
The Hedging impact column shows the effect of hedging which is done centrally.
IFRS8 requires entities to present segmental information in the same way that the CODM reviews the information when directing resources and managing the business.
We believe that the new segmental disclosure achieves this more accurately.
Segmental information for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated due to the change in accounting policy for operating segments and to be on a continuing operations basis.
Revenue comprises transaction fees access fees and technology development fees from its NEX Markets business and fees from the provision of NEX Optimisation services.
NEX Markets Transaction fees and access fees the Group acts as an intermediary for FX and fixed income products through the Groups electronic platforms.
Revenue is generated from transaction fees which are dependent on the average trading volumes.
The Group also charges fees to use the electronic trading platform for access to liquidity in the FX or precious metal markets.
Matched principal business the Group is involved in a nonadvisory capacity as principals in the matched purchase and sale of financial instruments between our clients.
Revenue is generated from transaction fees and is recognised in full at the time of the commitment by our clients to sell and purchase the financial instrument.
Technology development the Group provides technology development services.
Fees from the development of technology are recognised as revenue by reference to the stage of completion including the completion of services provided for post delivery service support.
This process requires the exercise of significant judgement by management.
NEX Optimisation The Group receives fees from the sale of financial information and provision of NEX Optimisation services to third parties.
These are stated net of VAT rebates and other sales taxes and recognised in revenue on an accruals basis to match the provision of the service.
TriOptima provides risk mitigation solutions for OTC derivatives primarily through the elimination and reconciliation of outstanding transactions.
Traiana operates market infrastructure for pre and post trade processing risk management and regulatory compliance across multiple asset classes.
NEX Data delivers pricing analytics and index solutions to financial market participants from information received from NEX Markets and elsewhere.
NEX Data generates subscriptionbased fees as well as licensing fees from other index administrators for the use of NEX Data in their indices.
Reset is a provider of risk mitigation services reducing basis risk within trading portfolios in interest rate FX equity index and inflation derivatives.
ENSO delivers data analytics and workflow tools that enable hedge funds and asset managers to more effectively manage their relationships with prime brokers.
ENSO provides a complete view of an individual hedge funds relationships across multiple counterparties delivering insights on counterparty credit risk collateral management portfolio financing and treasury.
Abide Financial provides regulatory reporting technology services ensuring market participants are compliant with evolving reporting obligations.
Abide Financial acts as a reporting hub for EMIR Approved Reporting Mechanism for MiFID and a Regulatory Reporting Mechanism for REMIT.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 90 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Segmental information continued Segmental results relating to the Groups total operations Year ended 31 March 2017
Markets
NEX
Optimisation
NEX Group and other
Group
Continuing operations Operating expenses 197 171 30  398 Trading operating profitloss 116 69 23 17 145 Profitloss from associates  3 3 Trading EBIT 116 66 20 17 145 Reconciliation to the consolidated income statement Trading net finance cost note 10 31 Trading profit before tax 114 Acquisition and disposal costs 1 Exceptional items note 4 5 Profit before tax from continuing operations 120 Tax on continuing operations 22 Profit for the year from continuing operations 98 Profit for the year from discontinued operations net of tax note 5 1213 Profit for the year 1311 Continuing operations Other segmental information Trading operating profit margin 37% 29% nm nm 27% Trading depreciation 7 4   11 Trading amortisation 19 9 1  29 Trading EBITDA 142 79 19 17 185 Capital expenditure on intangible developments 30 28 1  59 Trading EBIT is the trading profit before deducting net finance cost and tax.
Given that the Groups debt financing arrangements are managed centrally through a treasury function the board of NEX Group plc does not incorporate net finance cost in the assessment of the segments performance therefore this is presented on a total Group basis.
Trading EBITDA is the trading profit before deducting net finance cost tax amortisation depreciation and impairment charges.
The Group did not earn more than 10% of its total revenue from any individual client.
The Group earned revenue from continuing operations of 57m 201516 47m from entities in the UK 221m 201516 187m from entities in the US 86m 201516 72m from entities in Sweden and 38m 201516 37m from entities in Singapore.
NEXs regulated companies will meet CRD IV disclosure requirements to the extent in scope by disclosing the information in their 201617 financial statements or on the NEX website.
Continuing revenue from the rendering of services recognised in the year was 530m 201516 460m.
Continuing revenue from technology development recognised in the year was 13m 201516 nil.
The Group used the costsincurred method to estimate the stage of completion of technology development revenue.
Progress on technology development projects is on track to date.
The hedging impact relates primarily to NEX Markets.
91 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Segmental information continued Segmental results relating to the Groups total operations continued Year ended 31 March 2016 restated
Markets
NEX
Optimisation
NEX Group and other
Group
Continuing operations Operating expenses 169 124 28  321 Trading operating profitloss 92 70 17 6 139 Profit from joint ventures   1  1 Profitloss from associates  3 2  1 Trading EBIT 92 67 14 6 139 Reconciliation to the consolidated income statement Trading net finance cost note 10 29 Trading profit before tax 110 Acquisition and disposal costs 74 Exceptional items note 4 9 Profit before tax from continuing operations 27 Tax on continuing operations 5 Profit for the year from continuing operations 22 Profit for the year from discontinued operations net of tax note 5 46 Profit for the year 68 Continuing operations Other segmental information Trading operating profit margin 35% 36% nm nm 30% Trading depreciation 5 3   8 Trading amortisation 17 5   22 Trading EBITDA 114 75 14 6 169 Capital expenditure on intangible developments 25 10 1  36 Trading EBIT is the trading profit before deducting net finance cost and tax.
Given that the Groups debt financing arrangements are managed centrally through a treasury function the board of NEX Group plc does not incorporate net finance cost in the assessment of the segments performance therefore this is presented on a total Group basis.
Trading EBITDA is the trading profit before deducting net finance cost tax amortisation depreciation and impairment charges.
Segmental information for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated due to the change in accounting policy for operating segments and to be on a continuing operations basis.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 92 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions FX exposure The table below shows the actual impact on the Groups 201617 results of the movement during the year of the dollar and euro exchange rates in terms of translational exposure.
For the year ended 31 March 2017 For the year ended 31 March 2016
Euro
Total
Dollar
Euro
Total
Group
Group trading operating profit 3 6
Group operating profit 3 6 The Group does not hedge the translation of those profits or losses earned by its nonpound sterling functional currency companies.
The principal exchange rates which affected the Group expressed in currency per pound sterling are shown below.
Closing rate as at 31 March Closing rate as at 31 March Average rate year ended 31 March Average rate year ended 31 March The table below shows the impact on the Groups 201617 results of a 10 cent appreciation which the Group considers to be an appropriate sensitivity measure in the dollar and euro in terms of translational exposure.
Dollar
Euro
Total
Group trading operating profit 10 5 15
Group operating profit NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Operating expenses The table below is presented on a continuing operations basis.
Operating expenses for the year ended 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
Profit before tax is stated after charging Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Trading operating expenses Employee costs note 9 222 172 IT costs 84 80 Professional and legal fees including auditors remuneration 22 21 Depreciation and impairment of property and equipment excluding IT 4 2 Operating lease rentals  minimum lease payments 15 12 Exchange adjustments 2 4 Other 53 38 Trading operating expenses 398 321 Acquisition and disposal costs Amortisation of intangible assets arising on consolidation 20 38 Impairment of investment in associates  25 Other acquisition and disposal costs 1 12 Acquisition and disposal costs 21 75 Exceptional items note 4 5 9 Operating expenses 414 405 Continuing IT costs include 38m 201516 28m of continuing depreciation and amortisation charges.
The remaining 46m 201516 52m of continuing costs incurred include the purchase of assets that are individually below the Groups capitalisation threshold maintenance expenditures certain enhancements not eligible for capitalisation and research phaserelated expenditures.
IT costs do not include employee costs these are presented within employee costs.
The table below is presented on a total Group basis including discontinued operations.
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March
Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the parent Companys and consolidated financial statements 1.0 0.8 Fees payable to the Companys auditors for other services the auditing of any subsidiary of the Company 2.2 3.2 auditrelated assurance services taxation compliance services  0.1 taxation advisory services 0.2 0.1 other assurance services 0.3 1.0 corporate finance transaction services 0.7 2.4 Other assurance services and corporate finance transaction services relate to services provided in connection to the disposal of IGBB.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 94 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Operating expenses continued Contractual arrangements The Group places reliance on a number of key suppliers to carry out its business and has procedures to ensure that purchasing decisions balance cost against other factors including service quality global reach and resilience.
The settlement of matched principal and exchangetraded businesses requires access to clearing houses either directly or through third party providers of clearing and settlement services.
In North America the Group is a member of the FICC through which it clears US Treasury agency and repo products for its client base.
In Europe clearing arrangements for exchangetraded transactions are outsourced to third parties.
Exceptional items Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Exceptional items before tax Onerous lease provisions release 7 Legal expenses insurance claim 3 Regulatory matters 5 Other costs  9 Total exceptional items before tax 5 9 Tax credit  2 Total exceptional items after tax 5 7 For the year ended 31 March 2017  continuing exceptional items consist of income of 3m which relates to a legal expenses insurance claim income of 7m which relates to the release of onerous lease provisions in Singapore and London and an expense of 5m which relates to legal expenses incurred in relation to past regulatory matters.
Exceptional items for the year ended 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
95 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Discontinued operations On 30 December 2016 the Group completed the disposal of its IGBB business to TP ICAP.
The results of the IGBB business have been presented as discontinued operations as the sale was a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business.
The assets and liabilities attributable to IGBB were presented as held for sale assets and liabilities on the face of the balance sheet as at 31 March 2016.
These assets and liabilities were transferred to held for sale at carrying value.
The assets and liabilities attributable to IGBB are no longer presented on the balance sheet as at 31 March 2017 since the Transaction completed during the year.
Nine months ended 30 December 2016
Acquisition and disposal costs
Total
Revenue 587   587 Operating expenses 504 1 28 533 Other income 2   2 Operating profit from discontinued operations 85 1 28 56 Net finance income 2   2 Share of profit of associates and joint ventures after tax 4   4 Gain on sale of discontinued operations   1162 1162 Profit before tax from discontinued operations 91 1 1134 1224 Tax on ordinary activities from discontinued operations 18 1 6 11 Profit for the year from discontinued operations 73  1140 1213 Attributable to Owners of the Company 74  1140 1214 Noncontrolling interests 1   1 73  1140 1213 Year ended 31 March 2016
Acquisition and disposal costs
Total
Revenue 741   741 Operating expenses 661  31 692 Other income 2   2 Operating profit from discontinued operations 82  31 51 Net finance income 4   4 Share of profit of associates and joint ventures after tax 7   7 Profit before tax from discontinued operations 93  31 62 Tax on ordinary activities from discontinued operations 20  4 16 Profit for the year from discontinued operations 73  27 46 Attributable to Owners of the Company 77  27 50 Noncontrolling interests 4   4 1162m gain on sale of IGBB consists of the 1381m distribution received by ICAP plc shareholders less IGBBs adjusted net assets of 209m and costs of sale of 28m plus 18m of reserves relating to IGBB that were recycled to the income statement.
The gain on sale of discontinued operations is exempt from UK tax.
The Group previously applied trade date accounting but the Group has changed its accounting policy in the year to recognise matched principal receivables and payables at the settlement date as explained in note 18.
Matched principal receivables and payables as at 31 March 2016 have been restated as a result of the change in accounting policy.
Held for sale assets and liabilities as at 31 March 2016 included some of the Groups matched principal trade receivables and payables.
The restated 31 March 2016 held for sale trade and other receivables balance is 2507m and the restated 31 March 2016 held for sale trade and other payables balance is 2456m.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 96 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Earnings per share The Group presents basic and diluted earnings per share EPS for its ordinary shares.
Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year adjusted for own shares held.
The
Group also calculates trading EPS basic and diluted from the trading profit for the year.
The Group believes that this is the most appropriate measurement for assessing NEXs performance since it better reflects the businesss trading earnings.
The diluted EPS is calculated by adjusting share capital in issue for the additional weighted average number of ordinary shares that are likely to be issued under various employee share award schemes as at the balance sheet date.
As explained in the basis of preparation accounting policy the Groups financial statements reflect the continuation of the preexisting group headed by ICAP plc.
As explained in note 26 the number of shares in 201617 changed significantly as a result of the share consolidation.
The 201617 weighted average number of shares has been stated as the weighted average number of shares in the period from the date of the share consolidation to the balance sheet date.
The 201516 weighted average number of shares has been restated as if the share consolidation had occurred at the beginning of the comparative year.
EPS relating to the Groups total operations Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 restated Trading basic and diluted
Shares millions
Earnings
Shares millions
Trading basic continuing operations 86 371 23.2 87 368 23.6 Trading basic discontinued operations 73 371 19.7 73 368 19.8 Trading basic continuing and discontinued operations 159 371 42.9 160 368 43.4 Dilutive effect of share options continuing and discontinued operations  12 1.3  12 1.3 Trading diluted continuing operations 86 383 22.5 87 380 22.9 Trading diluted discontinued operations 73 383 19.1 73 380 19.2 Trading diluted continuing and discontinued operations 159 383 41.6 160 380 42.1 Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 restated Basic and diluted
Shares millions
Earnings
Shares millions
Basic continuing operations 98 371 26.4 22 368 6.0 Basic discontinued operations 1213 371 327.2 46 368 12.5 Basic continuing and discontinued operations 1311 371 353.7 68 368 18.5 Dilutive effect of share options continuing and discontinued operations  12 11.0  12 0.6 Diluted continuing operations 98 383 25.6 22 380 5.8 Diluted discontinued operations 1213 383 317.0 46 380 12.1 Diluted continuing and discontinued operations 1311 383 342.7 68 380 17.9 Weighted average number of ordinary shares excludes the weighted average number of shares held as treasury shares of nil 201516 8m and those held in the employee share trusts relating to employee share schemes on which dividends have been waived being 7m shares 201516 3m.
Further information is contained in note 26.
The earnings for the year ended 31 March 2017 include nine months of discontinued operations while the earnings for the year ended 31 March 2016 include 12 months of discontinued operations.
The 201516 weighted average number of shares number of treasury shares and number of shares held in the employee share trust have been restated as if the share consolidation had occurred at the beginning of the comparative year.
97 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Dividends payable The Company recognises the final dividend payable only when it has been approved by the shareholders of the Company in a general meeting.
The interim dividend is recognised when the amount due has been paid.
Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2016 of 27 .0p per ordinary share 2015 27 .0p 100 99 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 of 11.5p per ordinary share 2016 11.5p 42 42 Total dividend recognised in the year 142 141 The final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2016 was satisfied in full with a cash payment of 100m which was paid to the shareholders of ICAP plc prior to the disposal of IGBB.
The interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 was satisfied in full with a cash payment of 42m.
The interim dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 was paid to the shareholders of ICAP plc who were on the register at 9 December 2016.
The shares were quoted exdividend from 8 December 2016.
The directors have proposed a final dividend of 27 .0p per share for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
This has not been recognised as a liability of the Group at the year end as it has not yet been approved by shareholders.
Based on the number of shares in issue at the year end the total amount payable would be Therefore subject to shareholders approval of the proposed final dividend of 27 .0p per share including the interim dividend of 11.5p per share the fullyear dividend will be 38.5p per share.
The fullyear dividend of 38.5p per share will be covered 1.1 times 201516 1.1 times by the trading EPS basic from continuing and discontinued operations of 42.9p per share 201516 43.4p per share.
The right to receive dividends has been waived in respect of the shares held in employee share trusts.
The 201516 final dividend per share and the 201617 interim dividend per share have been restated on the basis that the share consolidation occurred at the beginning of the comparative year.
The proposed current year fullyear dividend of 38.5p per share is equivalent to the fullyear dividend disclosed in the Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2016 of 22.0p per share on a preshare consolidation basis.
Tax
Tax on the profit for the year comprises both current and deferred tax as well as adjustments in respect of prior years.
Tax is charged or credited to the consolidated income statement except when it relates to items charged or credited to other comprehensive income or directly to equity in which case the tax is also included in other comprehensive income or directly within equity respectively.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the period using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
Deferred tax is recognised using the liability method in respect of temporary differences between the carrying value of assets and liabilities for reporting purposes and the tax bases of the assets and liabilities.
Deferred tax is calculated at the rate of tax expected to apply when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries joint ventures associates and intangibles arising on consolidation except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax liabilities are offset against deferred tax assets within the same taxable entity or qualifying local tax group where there is both the legal right and the intention to settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Calculations of current and deferred tax liability have been based on ongoing discussions with the relevant tax authorities managements assessment of legal and professional advice case law and other relevant guidance.
Where the expected tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts that were recorded initially such differences will impact the current and deferred tax amounts in the period in which such determination is made.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 98 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Tax continued Tax charged to the consolidated income statement in the year The following tax charge breakdown is based on a continuing operations basis.
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Current tax Current year 29 33 Adjustment to prior years 5 9 Deferred tax Current year 3 5 Adjustment to prior years 1 4 Tax charge on trading profit 28 23 Tax credit on acquisition and disposal costs Current year  3 Deferred tax current year 7 13 Deferred tax adjustment to prior years 1 Tax credit on acquisition and disposal costs 6 16 Tax credit on exceptional costs Current year  2 Tax credit on exceptional costs  2 Tax charge to the consolidated income statement 22 5 The Groups share of profit of associates from continuing operations in the consolidated income statement is shown net of tax of 1m 201516 1m.
The Groups share of joint ventures from continuing operations in the consolidated income statement is shown net of tax of nil 201516 1m.
The total tax charge to the consolidated income statement for discontinued operations is 11m 201516 16m.
The following reconciliation of the tax charge is based on a continuing operations basis.
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Trading profit before tax 114 110 Tax on trading profit at the standard rate of Corporation Tax in the UK of 20% 201516 20% 23 22 Reconciling items Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 5 7 Nontaxable income 3 4 Impact of overseas tax rates and bases 7 4 Movement in provisions 1 Prior year adjustment to current and deferred tax 4 5 Impact of change in rates 1 1 Tax charge on trading profit 28 23 The total tax charge on trading profit from discontinued operations is 18m 201516 20m.
The Groups 201617 effective tax rate on trading profit for continuing operations is 25% 201516 21%.
99 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Tax continued Tax charged to the consolidated income statement in the year continued Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Profit before tax 120 27 Tax on profit at the standard rate of Corporation Tax in the UK of 20% 201516 20% 24 5 Reconciling items Trading profit see above 5 1 Acquisition and disposal costs and exceptional items not deductible for tax purposes 5 3 Impact of overseas tax rates on adjusted items 3 2 Impact of change in rates on adjusted items  2 Impact of prior years adjustments on adjusted items 1 Tax charged to the consolidated income statement 22 5 The standard rate of Corporation Tax in the UK will change from 20% to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and 17% from 1 April 2020.
UK deferred tax will therefore unwind at a rate of 19% for periods from 1 April 2017 to 31 March 2019.
Tax charged to the consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
Deferred tax balances recognised on the balance sheet Year ended 31 March As at 31 March Deferred tax assets 21 13 Deferred tax liabilities 96 67 Net balances 75 54 Deferred tax  movement of Group balances before offset within countries
Intangible
Employee related items
Other
Total
Net balances at 1 April 2016 66 3 12 3  54 Tax chargecredit 6 6 4 1  3 Movement tofrom equity  7 2  9 14 FX adjustments 9 1 1 1  10 Net balances as at 31 March 2017 81 5 19 1 9 75
Goodwill
Intangible
Employee related items
Other
Total
Net balances at 1 April 2015 78 15 26 2 2 67 Tax chargecredit 2 17 FX adjustments 2  1 1 2 2 Transfer to held for sale 10  17 1 6 2 Net balances as at 31 March 2016 66 3 12 3  54 Continuing deferred tax assets of 9m 201516 9m have not been recognised in respect of certain trading losses because it is not probable that future profits will be available against which the Group can utilise the benefits.
The principal movement in deferred tax relates to the ongoing increase of accelerated tax allowances on goodwill and a release of amortisation on separately identifiable intangible assets.
The movement of Group deferred tax balances before offset within countries as at 31 March 2016 has been restated due to a reclassification between categories.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 100 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Employee information and expense NEX operates a number of defined contribution pension plans throughout the Group.
Payments to defined contribution pension plans are recognised as an expense in the consolidated income statement as they fall due.
Any difference between the payments and the charge is recognised as a shortterm asset or liability.
The Group awards share options and other sharebased payments as part of its employee incentive schemes as well as other sharebased payment transactions.
The fair value of services received is measured by the fair value of the shares or share options awarded at the grant date and is charged to employee expenses over the period the service is received on a straightline basis.
A corresponding amount is recognised in equity.
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Gross salaries including bonuses 237 185 Social security costs 18 11 Sharebased payments note 9c 4 6 Pension costs 8 5 Gross employee costs 267 207 Employee costs capitalised as internally generated intangible assets note 14 45 35 Net employee costs 222 172 Employee costs for the year ended 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
Average Year end Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations NEX Markets 69telNEX Optimisation 78telNEX Group and other 34telTotal 1817 1635 1941 1684 The average number of employees for the year ended 31 March 2016 and the number of employees as at 31 March 2016 have been restated due to the change in the accounting policy for operating segments in the year note 1 and to be on a continuing operations basis.
The average number of employees in discontinued operations up to the date of completion of the Transaction was 2572 year ended 31 March 2016 2608.
The number of employees in discontinued operations as at 31 March 2017 was nil 201516 2587.
Employees in discontinued operations were predominantly in the global broking business which was an operating segment as at 31 March 2016 but is no longer an operating segment as at 31 March 2017 due to the change in accounting policy for operating segments note 1.
The total charge to the consolidated income statement in respect of employee share awards in the year from continuing operations was 4m 201516 6m which includes nil 201516 1m charged to acquisition and disposal costs.
Sharebased payments for the year ended 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Deferred Share Bonus Plan DSBP 1 Performance Share Plan PSP 2 1 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP 1 2 Other sharebased payments schemes  3 Total 4 6 101 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Employee information and expense continued c Sharebased payments continued The DSBP is a long term incentive plan for the executive directors GEMG members and certain other senior managers in the Group.
These awards are delivered as a proportion of the annual bonus deferred into NEX Group plc shares for three years.
The awards do not have performance conditions but are subject to certain service conditions malus and clawback.
The PSP is a long term incentive plan for the executive directors GEMG members and certain other senior managers in the Group.
Recipients are granted a number of NEX Group plc shares with a maximum award potential of 300% of salary.
These awards are subject to certain service and performance conditions malus and clawback.
The LTIP is a long term incentive plan previously awarded to GEMG members and certain other senior managers in the Group.
The 2014 share awards consisted of basic and matching awards.
Under the basic awards a certain percentage of the pretax bonus was deferred in NEX Group plc shares for three years with no performance conditions attached.
The matching awards equalled the basic awards but were subject to certain service and performance conditions.
The 2015 matching award was replaced with a PSP award.
Basic LTIP awards were last made to GEMG members in 2015 and to certain other senior managers in 2016.
From 2017 LTIP basic awards will be replaced with DSBP awards.
More information is provided in the remuneration report on pages 56 to 72.
The total charge to the discontinued income statement in respect of employee share awards in the year was 7m 201516 2m.
The current year charge predominantly relates to an accelerated charge that was recognised on the disposal of IGBB.
Key management consists of the members of the GEMG including the executive directors of the board.
The aggregate remuneration for key management from continuing operations was 17m 201516 11m.
The executive directors remuneration of 6m 201516 5m is disclosed separately in the remuneration report.
A charge of 3m 201516 charge of 2m was recognised in the continuing consolidated income statement relating to share options held by key management.
Retirement benefits accrued to four 201516 three continuing members of the GEMG under defined contribution schemes and during the year key management received 0.1m 201516 0.1m in continuing post retirement benefits.
Net finance expense Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March restated Continuing operations Finance income Other finance income Dividends received on equity investments  1 Revaluation of deferred considerations  1 Total finance income  2 Finance costs Interest payable and similar charges Bank loans and overdrafts 27 28 Other finance costs 4 2 Total finance costs 31 30 Net finance expense 31 28 Interest rate risk exposure The Group has an exposure to fluctuations in interest rates on both its cash positions and borrowings which it manages through a combination of pound sterling euro and yen debt drawn on fixed and floating rate terms.
The Groups objective is to minimise its interest cost and the impact of interest rate volatility on the Groups consolidated income statement.
In addition to debt the Groups treasury policies also permit the use of derivatives including interest rate swaps interest rate options forward rate agreements and cross currency swaps to meet these objectives.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 102 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Net finance expense continued Interest rate risk exposure continued At 31 March 2017  after taking into account the impact of the euro to pound sterling cross currency swaps the interest rate profile of the Groups cash and debt from continuing operations was as follows Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 restated Floating rates Fixed rates
Floating rates Fixed rates
Continuing operations Pound sterling Dollars and currencies closely related to the dollar Other currencies
The Group has no floating debt other than the RCF which was undrawn as at 31 March 2017 .
A 100 basispoints parallel increase in Libor and Libid rates which the Group considers to be an appropriate sensitivity measure would decrease net finance costs by 2m in relation to pound sterling cash and by 1m in relation to dollar cash.
At 31 March 2016 359m of cash and cash equivalents and 81m of debt were presented within held for sale assets and liabilities on the balance sheet.
Net finance expense and interest rate risk exposure for the year ended 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
Company
The Company is not exposed to interest rate movements since it does not hold variable rate cash or debt.
Borrowings
Longterm borrowings are recognised initially at fair value being their issue proceeds net of issuance costs incurred.
At subsequent reporting dates longterm borrowings are held at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method with changes in value recognised through the consolidated income statement.
Issuance costs are recognised in the consolidated income statement over the period of the borrowings using the effective interest rate method.
The borrowings note is presented on a continuing basis.
Group
Group
Company
Company
As at 1 April Group18 February Company 519 386 New longterm borrowings  108 Repayments 108 Exchange adjustment 24 25 As at 31 March 435 519 Analysis of longterm borrowings Fair value as at 31 March
31 March Fair value as at 31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Fiveyear senior notes repayable tel280 276 RCF repayable 2019   110 108 Retail bond repayable tel131 124 Tenyear senior notes repayable 46tel 103 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Borrowings continued a Longterm borrowings continued The fiveyear senior notes are presented on the balance sheet at amortised cost net of fees.
To enable the Group to manage the translational exposure which arises as a result of the notes being denominated in euros and to meet its risk management objective of minimising both interest cost and the impact of interest volatility on its consolidated income statement the Group entered into a number of cross currency swaps to convert its obligations over the life of 250m of the notes from euros to pounds sterling at an FX rate of 1.21.
These swap from a fixed effective euro interest rate of 3.20% to a fixed pound sterling interest rate of 4.39%.
The swaps have been accounted for as a cash flow hedge and as at 31 March 2017 have a fair market value of 7m asset 201516 7m liability and they offset the effect of FX on the notes.
The remaining 100m of the notes remain in euros and have been designated as a net investment hedge of the Groups eurodenominated net assets.
The Groups 300m RCF was undrawn as at 31 March 2017 201516 110m drawn resulting in committed headroom of 300m 201516 315m.
During the year the RCFs maturity date was extended by one year to 31 March 2019.
The RCF incorporates a 200m swingline facility of which 75m is available as a late day fronted solution.
The weighted average effective interest rate for the year was 2.1% 201516 2.2%.
The Groups bank facilities contain a number of customary financial and operational covenants.
Included in these the Company is required to remain as the ultimate holding company in the Group.
The Group and Company remained in compliance with the terms of all its financial covenants throughout the year ended 31 March 2017 .
Fair values of the fiveyear senior notes repayable 2019 and the retail bond repayable 2018 have been measured using level 1 fair value measurement inputs.
The fair value measurements of the tenyear senior notes repayable 2023 use level 2 fair value measurement inputs which are derived from the fair values of similar bonds.
Committed facilities
31 March
Group as at 31 March
Group as at 31 March
Group as at 31 March
Less than one year 72  62 Between one and two years 423  108 315 Between two and five years  300 400 More than five years 12  11 50tel The undrawn balance has been classified based on the maturity date of the facility.
As at 31 March 2017  the Groups longterm issuer ratings were unchanged at Baa3 stable by Moodys and BBB stable by Fitch.
Analysis of shortterm borrowings Fair value as at 31 March
31 March Fair value as at 31 March restated
31 March restated
31 March
31 March Japanese yen loan Overdrafts   2 2 For several years the Group has entered into a series of yen term loans with Tokyo Tanshi Co Limited borrowing each for a term of up to six months.
These loans have been refinanced either immediately on maturity or a few days thereafter with similar terms.
Bank overdrafts are for shortterm funding and are repayable on demand and are generally repaid within a very short time period.
Shortterm borrowings as at 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 104 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand demand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments which are subject to insignificant risk of change in fair value and are readily convertible into a known amount of cash with less than three months maturity.
The Group holds money and occasionally financial instruments on behalf of clients client monies in accordance with local regulatory rules.
Since the Group is not beneficially entitled to these amounts they are excluded from the consolidated balance sheet along with the corresponding liabilities to clients.
Restricted funds comprise cash held with a CCP clearing house or a financial institution providing NEX with access to a CCP and funds set aside for regulatory purposes but excluding client money.
The funds represent cash for which the Group does not have immediate and direct access or for which regulatory requirements restrict the use of the cash.
Group year ended 31 March
31 March restated Profit before tax from continuing operations 120 27 Profit before tax from discontinued operations note 5 1224 62 Operating exceptional items 23 40 Share of profit of associates after tax 2 3 Share of profit of joint ventures after tax 2 4 Amortisation of intangible assets arising on consolidation 20 38 Impairment of property and equipment 2 Impairment of investment in associates  25 Amortisation and impairment of intangible assets arising from development expenditure 39 37 Depreciation and impairment of property and equipment 16 11 Other acquisition and disposal costs  12 Gain on equity interest 20 Gain on disposal of discontinued operations 1162 Sharebased payments trading 7 7 Net finance expense 26 24 Increase of trading provision 3 2 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 294 278 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 18 12 Timing differences on unsettled matched principal trades 80 40 Increase in trade and other payables 65 Cash generated by operations before exceptional items 421 250 Exceptional items paid 48 29 Cash generated by operations 373 221 Interest received 2 3 Interest paid 22 26 Tax paid 44 34 Cash flow from operating activities 309 164 The cash flow movement in trade and other receivables includes the net movement on matched principal transactions and deposits for securities borrowedloaned.
The reconciliation of Group profit before tax to net cash flow from operating activities for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated to include restricted funds in financing activities instead of operating activities.
The reconciliation of Group profit before tax to net cash flow from operating activities includes discontinued operations.
105 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Cash continued b Net debt Net debt comprises cash and cash equivalents less gross debt.
Net debt as at 31 March 2016 has been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
Group year ended 31 March
31 March restated Gross debt note 11 507 583 Cash and cash equivalents 321 157 Net debt 186 426 c Total cash
31 March
31 March restated Cash and cash equivalents 321 157 Overdrafts  2 Net cash and cash equivalents 321 155 Restricted funds 103 26 Total cash 424 181 d Client money At 31 March 2017  the Group held client money from continuing operations of 26m 201516 nil.
This amount together with the corresponding liabilities to clients is not included in the Groups consolidated balance sheet.
Restricted funds comprises cash held at a CCP clearing house or a financial institution providing NEX with access to a CCP.
The balance fluctuates based on business events around the year end and the continuing amount increased during the year by 77m to 103m as at 31 March 2017 201516 decreased by 17m to 26m.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 106 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Capital and liquidity planning and management The Group does not seek to take proprietary market risk positions so does not seek to expose its capital to market risk and it does not undertake any form of maturity transformation so does not seek liquidity risk.
Thus the overall approach to the planning and management of the Groups capital and liquidity is to ensure the Groups solvency i. its continued ability to conduct business deliver returns to shareholders and support growth and strategic initiatives.
Liquidity
Group
The Group is exposed to liquidity risk as a result of trades executed as matched principal which result in margin and collateral requirements from clearing houses clearing banks and as a result of regulatory rules stipulating the maintenance of certain liquidity buffers.
Such requirements can arise up until settlement which is typically only for a one to fiveday period.
Liquidity risk occurs primarily in BrokerTec US LLC which is required to deposit margins from time to time with the FICC and its clearing bank.
BrokerTec US LLC uses its funded cash together with access to the Groups 200m swingline facility to manage its liquidity requirements.
The liquidity requirements of the Group have decreased significantly following the disposal of IGBB.
The Group has a centralised approach to the provision of contingency funding for its trading entities.
Through the GFC the board periodically reviews the liquidity demands of the Group and the financial resources available to meet these demands.
The GFC ensures that the Group in totality and by subsidiary has sufficient liquidity available in order to provide constant access even in periods of market stress to an appropriate level of cash other forms of marketable securities and committed funding lines to enable it to finance its ongoing operations proposed acquisitions and other reasonable unanticipated events on costeffective and attractive terms.
As at 31 March 2017  the Group had continuing gross debt of 507m 201516 583m the maturity analysis of which is set out in note 11 and continuing cash and cash equivalents of 321m 201516 157m see note 12c.
Cash held at clearing houses or a financial institution providing NEX with access to a CCP to which the Group has no immediate access in practice is disclosed as restricted funds in the financial statements note 12e.
The Group invests its cash balances in a range of capital protected instruments including money market deposits AAArated liquidity funds and government bonds with the objective of optimising the return while having regard to counterparty credit risk and liquidity.
With the exception of some small local cash management balances surplus cash is invested with strong institutions holding investment grade ratings.
Company
The Companys policy is to ensure that it has constant access to an appropriate level of liquidity to enable it to finance its forecast ongoing operations proposed acquisitions and other reasonable unanticipated events on costeffective and attractive terms.
If the Company has any cash it is loaned intraGroup for further investment.
Capital management The Groups capital strategy is to maintain an efficient and strong capital base which maximises the return to its shareholders while also maintaining flexibility.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt note 11 and equity including share capital note 26 share premium other reserves note 27 and retained earnings.
The Group seeks to ensure that it has sufficient regulatory capital in each of its eight regulated entities to meet local regulatory requirements.
As none of the regulated companies in the Group take proprietary positions they do not have an inventory of assets so regulatory capital is mostly covered by cash.
In general higher levels of market volatility can result in increased demand for the Groups services.
As the capital requirements in the Groups regulated entities are however driven predominantly by the fixed cost base the impact of changes in volumes on the capital requirement is significantly dampened.
As such absent a material acquisition existing capital resources are viewed as sufficient to operate and to continue to invest in the development of the Groups businesses.
107 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Intangible assets arising from development expenditure Development expenditure on software is recognised as an intangible asset in accordance with the provisions of IAS38 Intangible Assets.
Capitalised expenditure is recognised initially at cost and is presented subsequently at cost less accumulated amortisation and provisions for impairment.
Amortisation of these assets is charged to the consolidated income statement on a straightline basis over the expected useful economic life of the asset of three to five years.
The Group reviews the useful economic lives of these assets on a regular basis.
Development costs are incurred and capitalised when a final development plan including the specifics of the assets to be developed is signed off by a committee with appropriate delegated authority including business management boards.
As part of the approval process the committee considers the commercial viability and technological feasibility of bringing the asset into use.
When a project is abandoned in the development phase costs are charged to the income statement.
Prior to this stage costs incurred in the research phase including undertaking feasibility studies are recorded in the income statement.
Once an internally generated software asset is brought into use any ongoing related costs are charged to the income statement to the extent that they relate to ongoing maintenance of the asset.
Where any costs are identified by an appropriately authorised management committee to be an enhancement to the original asset these costs are capitalised and amortised over the remaining expected useful life of the asset.
The Group has an internal threshold for capitalisation of 5000 for individual assets and 125000 for softwarerelated projects.
The key component of the development costs is compensation of employees.
Each of the Groups businesses and the Groups infrastructure area have their own dedicated IT project development teams.
Amortisation and impairment of intangible assets arising from development expenditure is charged within operating expenses.
Amortisation is charged against assets from the date at which the asset becomes available for use.
Group
Cost
As at 1 April 191 274 Additions 59 54 Disposals  58 Transfer to held for sale Exchange adjustments 16 6 As at 31 March 266 191 Accumulated amortisation and impairment As at 1 April 103 166 Amortisation charge for the year 29 37 Impairment in the year  4 Disposals  58 Transfer to held for sale Exchange adjustments 7 3 As at 31 March 139 103 Net book value As at 31 March 127 88 Included within additions are 45m 201516 35m of employee costs note 9a.
Intangible assets arising from development expenditure as at 31 March 2017 include assets under development of 44m 201516 39m.
No amortisation charge was recorded on these assets.
The additions and amortisation charge during the year is disclosed by operating segments in note 1.
Disposals represents retirement of fully amortised assets and those that are no longer in use from the fixed assets register.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 108 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Intangible assets arising on consolidation Since 1 April 2004 intangible assets arising on consolidation include goodwill and other separately identifiable intangible assets such as client relationships and client contracts that arose on business combinations.
The amortisation and any impairment is included in the consolidated income statement within the column Acquisition and disposal costs.
The Group reviews the performance of the acquired businesses and reassesses the period over which the acquired intangible asset is likely to continue to generate cash flows that exceed the carrying value.
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of subsidiaries when the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interest and the fair value of any previously held equity interest in the acquiree exceeds the amount of the identifiable net assets acquired.
If the amount of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired is greater the difference is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Goodwill is initially recognised at cost and is subsequently held at cost less any provision for impairment.
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of investments in joint ventures when the cost of investment exceeds NEXs share of the net fair value of the joint ventures identifiable assets and liabilities.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of joint ventures is included in Investments in joint ventures and is not tested separately for impairment.
See note 22.
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of interests in associates when the cost of investment exceeds NEXs share of the net fair value of the associates identifiable assets and liabilities.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of associates is included in Interests in associates and is not tested separately for impairment.
See note 23.
Where the Group makes an acquisition and the balances are reported as provisional at the year end the Group has a measurement period of up to 12 months from the date of acquisition to finalise the provisional amounts where new information becomes available about facts and circumstances that existed at the balance sheet date which could impact the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising on consolidation.
The measurement period ends as soon as the information required is received.
On disposal of a subsidiary joint venture or associate the attributable goodwill is included in the calculation of the profit or loss on disposal.
The Group has recognised separately identified intangible assets on acquisitions where appropriate.
These generally include client contracts and client relationships.
Intangible assets acquired by the Group are stated initially at fair value and are adjusted subsequently for amortisation and any impairment.
Amortisation and impairment of intangibles arising on consolidation are recognised in the second column of the consolidated income statement.
Where an impairment has taken place the asset is reviewed annually for any reversal of the impairment.
Any reversals of impairment are credited to the consolidated income statement.
All separately identifiable intangible assets have a finite life excluding goodwill.
Amortisation of separately identifiable intangible assets is charged to the consolidated income statement on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives as follows Client relationships 2  10 years Client contracts Period of contract Other intangible assets Period of contract A deferred tax liability is recognised against the asset for which the amortisation is nontax deductible.
The liability unwinds over the same period as the asset is amortised.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested for impairment annually and whenever there is an indicator of impairment.
Goodwill and other intangible assets arising on consolidation are allocated to a cash generating unit CGU at acquisition for the purpose of impairment testing which is undertaken at the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
The identification of CGUs is reviewed where there is a significant change to the Groups segmental reporting structure.
Impairment testing is performed by comparing the recoverable amount of a CGU with its carrying amount.
The carrying amount of a CGU is based on the assets and liabilities of each CGU including attributable goodwill.
The recoverable amount of a CGU is the higher of its fair value less cost to sell and its value in use VIU.
VIU is the present value of the expected future cash flows from a CGU.
Where the carrying value of the asset exceeds its VIU an impairment charge is recognised immediately in the consolidated income statement and the asset is stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
For goodwill impairment charges previously recognised are not reversed and impaired intangible assets are reviewed annually for reversal of previously recognised impairment.
This process requires the exercise of significant judgement by management if the estimates made prove to be incorrect or performance does not meet expectations which affect the amount and timing of future cash flows goodwill and intangible assets may become impaired in future periods.
109 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Intangible assets arising on consolidation continued a Intangible assets arising on consolidation
Other
Total
Cost
As at 1 April tel1624 Additions 84 19 103 Deferred tax 7  7 Exchange adjustments 106 4 110 As at 31 March 2017 1196 648 1844 Amortisation and impairment As at 1 April tel798 Amortisation charge for the year  20 20 As at 31 March tel818 Net book value As at 31 March 2017 1008 18 1026
Other
Total
Cost
As at 1 April 2015 1062 625 1687 Additions 5  5 Transfers to held for sale 92  92 Exchange adjustments 24  24 As at 31 March tel1624 Amortisation and impairment As at 1 April tel757 Amortisation charge for the year  38 38 Write off 3  3 As at 31 March tel798 Net book value As at 31 March The Group recognises 1026m of intangible assets arising on consolidation 201516 826m with 1008m relating to goodwill 201516 811m and 18m relating to other intangible assets 201516 15m.
The other intangible assets mainly represent client relationships and have varying remaining amortisation periods across CGUs.
The individual CGUs goodwill other intangible assets arising on consolidation and net assets were tested for impairment which resulted in no impairment.
Additions of 103m relate to the acquisition of ENSO Abide Financial and eMID of which 84m is goodwill and 19m is other intangible assets.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 110 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Intangible assets arising on consolidation continued b Impairment testing of intangible assets arising on consolidation As at 31 March 2017 CGU Business segment % of total goodwill and other intangibles
Other
Net book value Abide Financial NEX Optimisation 2 21  21 BrokerTec NEX Markets 14 146  146 EBS NEX Markets 40 411  411 ENSO NEX Optimisation Reset NEX Optimisation 17 168  168 TriOptima NEX Optimisation 6 62  62 Traiana NEX Optimisation Total 100 1008 18 1026 As at 31 March 2016 CGU Business segment % of total goodwill and other intangibles
Other
Net book value BrokerTec NEX Markets 18 145  145 EBS NEX Markets Reset NEX Optimisation 18 146  146 TriOptima NEX Optimisation 7 57  57 Traiana NEX Optimisation Total Impairment testing methodology The recoverable amount of a CGU is determined using VIU calculations which are based on discounting managements pretax cash flow projections for the CGU.
The pretax discount rate used is the weighted average cost of capital WACC NEX allocates to investments in the businesses within which the CGU operates.
A longterm growth rate estimate is used to extrapolate the cash flows in perpetuity because of the longterm nature of the businesses in the CGUs.
Discount rate Longterm growth rate Key assumptions % % % % Abide Financial 8.5 na 3.9 na BrokerTec 8.2 8.7 4.3 4.5 ENSO 8.1 na 4.4 na TriOptima 7.6 8.4 4.2 4.3 Traiana 8.1 8.5 4.4 4.5 Discount rates The Groups pretax WACC was 8.0% 201516 8.6%.
The Groups WACC is a function of the Groups cost of equity derived using a Capital Asset Pricing Model CAPM and the Groups cost of debt.
The cost of equity estimate depended on inputs in the CAPM reflecting a number of variables including the riskfree rate and a premium to reflect the inherent risk of the business being evaluated.
These inputs are based on the markets assessment of economic variables and management judgement which are subject to scrutiny by the GFC and the Audit Committee see page 45.
All inputs to the CAPM were externally sourced.
The CGUspecific WACCs were then derived by adjusting the Group WACC for businessspecific risk factors.
Nominal longterm growth rate The growth rate reflects weighted average real GDP growth and inflation for the countries within which the CGUs operate.
The rates are based on the International Monetary Funds mediumterm forecasts as they are deemed to be reliable estimates of likely future trends.
The rates applied do not exceed the expected growth in the local economy or for businesses which operate on a global scale the global GDP.
Managements judgement in estimating the cash flows of a CGU The cash flow projections for each CGU are based on plans approved by the board.
For the 201617 annual impairment testing of Abide Financial ENSO and Traiana managements cash flow projections for the three years ending 31 March 2020 were used.
For all other CGUs management cash flow projections for the year ending 31 March 2018 were used.
111 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Intangible assets arising on consolidation continued b Impairment testing of intangible assets arising on consolidation continued Based on the conditions at the balance sheet date and having assessed sensitivities of the key assumptions management determined that a reasonably possible change in any of those key assumptions noted above would not cause an impairment in any of the CGUs.
Provisions
A provision is recognised where there is a present obligation either legal or constructive as a result of a past event for which it is probable there will be a transfer of economic benefits to settle the obligation.
A provision is recognised only where a reliable estimate can be made of the value of the obligation.
Restructuring
Regulatory matters
Other
Total
As at 1 April 2016 10 2  9 21 Amounts recognised in the income statement 3   23 20 Settled during the year 3   18 21 Reclassified from accruals    1 1 Exchange adjustments 1   1 2 As at 31 March 2017 5 2  16 23
Regulatory matters
Other
Total
As at 1 April Amounts recognised in the income statement    7 7 Settled during the year 5 1 1  7 Reclassified from accruals   1  1 Exchange adjustments  1  1 2 Transfer to held for sale 2 11  2 15 As at 31 March 2016 10 2  9 21 The expected maturity profile of the contractual provisions is disclosed in note 19.
Other provisions of 16m relate primarily to separation costs.
Restructuring provisions of 5m as at 31 March 2017 relate to onerous lease provisions for the London New York and Singapore offices 201516 9m.
Contingent liabilities contractual commitments and guarantees The Groups contingent liabilities include possible obligations that arise from past events whose existence will be confirmed only by the occurrence or nonoccurrence of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of NEX.
Additionally contingent liabilities also include present obligations that have arisen from past events but are not recognised because it is not probable that settlement will require the outflow of economic benefits or because the amount of the obligations cannot be reliably measured.
Contingent liabilities are not recognised in the financial statements but are disclosed unless the probability of the outflow of the Groups economic resources is remote.
Judgements applied in concluding the appropriateness of contingent liabilities disclosure are confirmed after consultation with external counsel and discussion with the Audit Committee.
Contingent liabilities The Company and its subsidiaries continue to cooperate with the government agencies in Europe and the US relating to their investigations into the setting of yen Libor.
ICAP plc was dismissed from initial US civil litigation against various yen Libor and euroyen Tibor setting banks.
However the plaintiff in that litigation was given permission by the court to add ICAP Europe Limited IEL which was sold to TP ICAP as a defendant and an amended complaint doing so was filed on 29 February 2016.
IEL filed a motion to dismiss the amended complaint on 16 May 2016 and following briefing on the motion oral argument took place on 25 October 2016.
On 10 March 2017  the court granted IELs motion and IEL has been dismissed from the lawsuit.
It is unclear whether plaintiffs will appeal the courts decision.
On 24 July 2015 a new litigation was filed on behalf of two additional plaintiffs in the same court based on similar allegations.
The new litigation includes claims against ICAP plc and IEL both of which have filed motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction and have joined codefendants motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim.
Oral argument on these motions was heard on 5 May 2016 and on 10 March 2017  the court granted ICAP plcs and IELs motions thus dismissing both parties from the lawsuit.
On 3 April 2017  plaintiffs filed a notice to commence the appeal process.
Plaintiffs in the Euribor civil litigation named ICAP plc and IEL on 13 August 2015 as parties to that preexisting litigation.
ICAP plc and IEL have joined the other defendants in filing motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction and for failure to state a claim.
On 21 February 2017  the court granted ICAP plcs and IELs motions to dismiss in the Euribor case.
Plaintiffs subsequently filed a motion for leave to amend their complaint which the court denied.
Barring an appeal or other application by plaintiffs both parties remain out of the case.
It is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these inquiries or the litigations and it is not possible to provide an estimate of any potential financial impact on the Group.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 112 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Contingent liabilities contractual commitments and guarantees continued Contingent liabilities continued The Group continues to cooperate with inquiries by the US government agencies into the setting of USD ISDAFIX rates.
In 2014 civil lawsuits were filed in the US against USD ISDAFIX setting banks where a subsidiary of the Company was originally named but was subsequently replaced by ICAP Capital Markets LLC ICM as a defendant.
Those suits have now been consolidated into a single action which is in the discovery stage.
ICM intends to defend these litigation claims vigorously.
It is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these inquiries or the litigation and it is not possible to provide a reliable estimate of any potential financial impact on the Group.
From 25 November 2015 through present ICM has been named as a defendant along with a number of banks and Tradeweb Markets LLC in ten civil lawsuits relating to the interest rates swaps market.
Eight of the lawsuits are class actions by alleged investors in the market and the other two are single plaintiff cases brought by failed competitors.
All of the suits make allegations that defendants together colluded to prevent buy side clients from accessing the interest rates swaps market on electronic exchangelike platforms including the boycott of any platform offering alltoall trading.
The actions generally assert claims of violation of antitrust laws and unjust enrichment.
The cases have been consolidated and are being managed by the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York.
Defendants intend to file a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim.
The consolidated litigation is in the early case management stage and all defendants filed motions to dismiss the complaints for failure to state a claim on 4 November 2016.
Plaintiffs then filed an amended complaint which among other things added ICAP SEF US LLC and ICAP Global Derivatives Limited both of which were sold to TP ICAP as defendants.
All defendants filed new motions to dismiss on 29 January 2017 .
The motions have been fully briefed and oral argument is presently scheduled for 2 May 2017  pending a request by defendants for a two to four week adjournment of such date.
Discovery is presently suspended.
It is not possible to predict the outcome of these litigations or to provide an estimate of any potential liability or financial impact on the Group.
On 16 August 2016 ICAP plc and ICAP Australia Pty Limited which was sold to TP ICAP along with a number of banks and two TP ICAP group entities were named as defendants in a purported class action filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York alleging antitrust Commodity Exchange Act and common law claims arising out of the alleged manipulation of the Australian Bank Bill Swap Reference Rate BBSW which plaintiffs contend harmed a class of individuals and entities that traded in the US in instruments priced benchmarked andor settled based on BBSW between 1 January 2003 and some indeterminate later time.
ICAP plc and ICAP Australia Pty Limited accepted service while preserving the right to challenge the courts exercise of personal jurisdiction over the entities.
Both defendants along with other defendants in the case filed motions to dismiss on 24 February 2017 .
Plaintiffs opposition is due 28 April 2017  and defendants reply papers are due 25 May 2017 .
It is not possible to predict the outcome of this litigation or to provide an estimate of any potential liability or financial impact on the Group.
From time to time the Group is engaged in litigation in relation to a variety of matters and is also required to provide information to regulators and other government agencies as part of informal and formal inquiries or market reviews.
For the sake of clarity some of the matters described herein may not be the direct responsibility of the Group but may be its responsibility under indemnification andor breach of warranty provisions agreed to by the Group with TP ICAP.
The sale by ICAP plc of its global broking business to TP ICAP entailed customary warranties given by ICAP plc in the sale and purchase agreement and repeated at completion of the Transaction.
Warranty claims are subject to customary limitations including a de minimis and aggregate claims threshold a cap and time limits for bringing a claim.
In addition to such warranties ICAP plc also provided TP ICAP with indemnities for among other things certain known regulatory litigation and employment claims.
It is not possible to predict whether any of the matters described herein will give rise to liabilities under the warranties andor indemnities given in connection with the Transaction.
Details of regulatory and other matters that have a provision recognised for them are detailed in note 16.
Contractual commitments Operating lease commitments At the end of the financial year the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows As at 31 March As at 31 March Within one year 18 24 Between one and five years 45 53 After five years Operating lease commitments relate to the rental of premises for office space in Asia Pacific Sweden the UK and the US.
The operating lease commitments include onerous lease provisions before estimated receipts under noncancellable subleases.
The operating lease commitments as at 31 March 2016 include commitments that have since transferred to TP ICAP.
Guarantees
In the normal course of business certain Group companies enter into guarantees and indemnities to cover clearing and settlement arrangements andor the use of third party servicessoftware.
It is not possible to quantify the extent of any potential liabilities but there are none currently expected to have a material impact on the Groups consolidated results or net assets.
As at 31 March 2017  the Group has given 1024m 201516 404m of guarantees to counterparties.
113 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently reviewed for recoverability.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of receivables.
Significant financial difficulties of the debtor probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default or delinquency in payments are considered indicators that the trade receivable is impaired.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of the future cash flows.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of a provision for doubtful debt and the amount of the loss is recognised in the consolidated income statement within Operating expenses.
When a trade receivable is determined to be uncollectable it is written off against the allowance account for trade receivables.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against Operating expenses in the consolidated income statement.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial instruments which have a fixed or determinable value.
They are recognised at cost less any provisions for impairment in their value.
Fair value through profit or loss assets are designated as such where they meet the conditions of IAS39 Financial Instruments Recognition and
They are recognised initially at fair value and any subsequent changes in fair value are recognised directly in the consolidated income statement.
These assets are usually held for shortterm gain or are financial instruments not designated as hedges.
The accounting policy for derivative financial instruments is included in note 28.
Matched principal transactions are those where the Group acts in a nonadvisory capacity as principal in the commitment to purchase and sell securities and other financial instruments through two or more transactions between our clients.
Substantially all matched principal receivables and payables note 19 settle within a short period of time usually within three days of the trade date.
The Group previously applied trade date accounting but the Group has changed its accounting policy in the year to recognise matched principal receivables and payables at the settlement date.
Settlement date accounting provides more reliable and relevant information due to the change in the Groups principal business activities after the completion of the Transaction.
Matched principal trade receivables and payables as at 31 March 2016 have been restated as a result of the change in accounting policy.
Financial instruments not held at fair value are impaired where there is objective evidence that the value may be impaired.
The amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying value and the present value of any expected future cash flows with any impairment being recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Subsequent recovery of amounts previously impaired are credited to the consolidated income statement.
Group as at 31 March
31 March restated
31 March
31 March Noncurrent receivables Deposits 3 3 Derivative financial instruments 8 Other receivables 6 6 Current receivables Matched principal trade receivables  55 Other trade receivables 76 69 Impairment of other trade receivables  1 Amounts owed by subsidiaries   194 Amounts owed by associates 3 Amounts owed by other related parties 1 1 Derivative financial instruments 6 3 Other receivables 70 58 Prepayments 18 9 Matched principal trade receivables as at 31 March 2016 have been restated as a result of the change in accounting policy to settlement date accounting.
The Group is exposed to credit risk in the event of nonperformance by counterparties in respect of its matched principal exchangetraded and corporate treasury operations.
The Group does not bear any significant concentration risk to either counterparties or markets.
The credit risk in respect of the NEX Markets excluding the matched principal business and the NEX Optimisation businesses is limited to the collection of outstanding transaction fees and this is managed proactively by the Groups accounts receivable function with oversight from the independent credit risk function.
The matched principal business involves the Group acting as a counterparty on trades which are undertaken on a delivery versus payment basis.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 114 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Trade and other receivables continued a Credit risk management continued The Group manages its credit risk in these transactions through appropriate policies and procedures in order to mitigate this risk including onboarding requirements setting appropriate credit limits for all counterparties which are closely monitored by the credit risk team to restrict any potential loss through counterparty default.
The Groups matched principal counterparty exposure at any given point throughout the year is split between investment grade counterparts rated BBBBaa3 or above and subinvestment grade counterparts rated BBBa1 or lower.
The Groups potential stressed counterparty credit risk is less than 5% of the Groups total capital resources.
The credit risk on core cash cash equivalents and derivative financial instruments is monitored on a daily basis.
All financial institutions that are transacted with for borrowings and deposits are approved by the GFC and internal limits are assigned to each one based on a combination of factors including external credit ratings.
The majority of cash and cash equivalents are deposited with investment graderated financial institutions.
Company
The Company is exposed to credit risk in the event of nonperformance by counterparties.
This risk is considered minimal as all counterparties are Group companies and the risk of nonpayment is viewed as low.
Other trade receivables represent amounts receivable in respect of agency business and information services.
All receivables are individually assessed for impairment at the reporting date.
Management judgement is applied in determining whether there is objective evidence that a loss event has occurred and if so the measurement of the impairment allowance.
In determining whether there is objective evidence that a loss event has occurred judgement is exercised in evaluating all relevant information on indicators of impairment which is not restricted to the consideration of whether payments are contractually past due but includes broader consideration of factors indicating deterioration in the financial condition and outlook of clients affecting their ability to pay.
For those receivables where objective evidence of impairment exists management determines the size of the allowance required based on a range of factors including probability of default and if defaulted expectation of recovery.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed and the reversal is recognised in the income statement.
As at 31 March 2017  nil of continuing other trade receivables remain impaired 201516 1m.
There have been no new impairments during the year.
Past due but not impaired trade and other receivables are those in respect of which the debtor has failed to make a payment or a partial payment in accordance with the contractual terms of the invoice but there is no major concern over the creditworthiness of the counterparty therefore they are not impaired.
In the prior reporting periods receivables past a normal settlement date were considered past due and were reported on that basis.
As at 31 March 2017 the following continuing other trade receivables were past due but not impaired.
Group
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Less than 30 days overdue 46 44 Over 30 days but less than 90 days overdue 24 16 Over 90 days but less than 180 days overdue 4 4 Over 180 days overdue Other trade receivables past due but not impaired as at 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
The table below shows the concentration of the Groups continuing trade receivables by currency Trade receivables as at 31 March 2017
Pound sterling
Euro
Yen
Other
Total
Other trade receivables net Trade receivables as at 31 March 2016
Pound sterling
Euro
Yen
Other
Total
Matched principal trade receivables  55    55 Other trade receivables net 5 55 5    3 123 Trade receivables by currency as at 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
115 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Trade and other payables Accounts payable are recognised initially at fair value based on the amounts exchanged and subsequently held at amortised cost.
The accounting policies for matched principal transactions are included within the trade and other receivables note note 18.
Details of the accounting policy relating to derivative financial instruments are included in note 28.
Group as at 31 March
31 March restated
31 March
31 March Current payables Matched principal trade payables 1 55 Other trade payables 16 9 Amounts owed to associates  4 Amounts owed to related parties 1 1 Derivative financial instruments 11 12 Accruals 119 89 Other tax and social security 12 6 Deferred income 29 16 Other payables 8 4 Contingent deferred consideration  1
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Noncurrent payables Contingent deferred consideration 27 3 Deferred consideration 15 Derivative financial instruments  8 Other payables 18 Deferred income 1 1 Total 61 12 As at 31 March 2017 the fair value of trade and other payables is not materially different from their book values.
Contingent deferred consideration additions in the year are in relation to the acquisitions of ENSO Abide Financial and eMID note 15.
Matched principal trade payables as at 31 March 2016 have been restated as a result of the change in accounting policy to settlement date accounting.
Maturity of trade and other payables and provisions The table below shows the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities note 20 included within trade and other payables based on the contractual amount payable on the date of repayment Maturity of trade and other payables and provisions as at 31 March 2017 Less than three months Three months to one year One to five years Greater than five years
Matched principal trade payables 1    1 Other trade payables 15 1   16 Derivative financial instruments 4 7   11 Amounts owed to related parties 1    1 Other payables 6 2 18  26 Contingent deferred consideration   27  27 Deferred consideration   15  15 Provisions note 16  4 1  5 Accruals 49 70    221 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 116 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Trade and other payables continued Maturity of trade and other payables and provisions continued Maturity of trade and other payables and provisions as at 31 March 2016
Less than three months Three months to one year One to five years Greater than five years
Matched principal trade payables 55    55 Other trade payables 9    9 Derivative financial instruments 4 8 8  20 Amounts owed to associates 4    4 Amounts owed to related parties 1    1 Other payables 4    4 Contingent deferred consideration  1 3  4 Provisions note 16 Accruals 57 32   The gross amounts payable have been disclosed above rather than their net present value.
Based on their shortterm nature there is no material difference between the net present value and gross amount of the balances disclosed above.
The maturity of trade and other payables and provisions as at 31 March 2016 has been restated due to the change in accounting policy to settlement date for matched principal trade payables.
Financial assets and liabilities a Financial assets The carrying value less impairment of current trade receivables and payables is assumed to approximate their fair values due to their shortterm nature.
As at 31 March 2017 and 2016 the fair values of financial assets are not materially different from their book values.
Classification of financial assets as at 31 March 2017
Available forsale Loans and receivables
Cash and cash equivalents note 12   321 321 Restricted funds note 12   103 103 Availableforsale investments note 24  21  21
Other trade receivables net   76 76 Amounts owed from other related parties   1 1 Amounts owed from associates   3 3 Derivative financial instruments 14   14 Other receivables   Classification of financial assets as at 31 March 2016
Hedging instruments
Loans and receivables
Cash and cash equivalents note 12   157 157 Restricted funds note 12   26 26 Availableforsale investments note 24  9  9 Matched principal trade receivables   55 55 Deposits   3 3 Other trade receivables net   68 68 Amounts owed from other related parties   1 1 Derivative financial instruments 3   3 Other receivables   The classification of financial assets as at 31 March 2016 has been restated due to the change in accounting policy to settlement date for matched principal trade receivables.
117 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Financial assets and liabilities continued a Financial assets continued Financial assets can be reconciled to the balance sheet as follows
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Current receivables note 18 174 194 Noncurrent receivables note 18 17 9 Availableforsale financial investments note 24 21 9 Cash and cash equivalents including restricted funds note 12 424 183
Prepayments note 18 18 9 Prepayments included within current receivables are not defined as financial assets under IAS39.
As at 31 March 2017 and 2016 the fair values of financial liabilities are not materially different from their book values except for the fair value of the retail bond repayable in 2018 and fiveyear senior notes repayable in 2019 note 11.
Classification of financial liabilities As at 31 March 2017 As at 31 March 2016 restated
Amortised cost
Hedging instruments
Total
Matched principal trade payables  1 1  55 55 Other trade payables  16 16  9 9 Derivative financial instruments 11  11 20  20 Amounts owed to associates     4 4 Amounts owed to related parties  1 1  1 1 Other payables  26 26  4 4 Contingent deferred consideration  27 27  4 4 Deferred consideration  15 15 Accruals  119 119  89 89 Borrowings and overdrafts note 11  507 507  583 583 Provisions note 16  5 5  The classification of financial liabilities as at 31 March 2016 has been restated due to the change in accounting policy to settlement date for matched principal trade payables.
Financial liabilities can be reconciled to the balance sheet as follows
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Current payables note 19 197 197 Noncurrent payables note 19 61 12 Borrowings and overdrafts note 11 507 583 Provisions note 16 5 10
Tax and social security note 19 12 6 Deferred income note 19 30 17 Excludes noncontractual provisions.
Taxes payable deferred income and certain provisions are not classified as financial liabilities under IAS39.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 118 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Financial assets and liabilities continued b Financial liabilities continued
Financial assets and liabilities All the Companys financial assets are classified as loans and receivables and the financial liabilities are held at amortised cost.
The fair value of these assets and liabilities is not materially different from their book values.
Principal subsidiaries An entity is regarded as a subsidiary if the Company has control over its strategic operating and financial policies and intends to hold the investment on a longterm basis for the purpose of securing a contribution to the Groups activities.
Investment in subsidiaries  Company The Companys immediate subsidiary company is ICAP plc which is incorporated in England and Wales and is 100% owned by the Company.
At 31 March 2017 the book value of this investment was 1490m 201516 nil.
There were no impairment charges recognised during the year.
All of the Companys other subsidiaries are indirectly owned.
A complete list of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates is given in note 31.
The Companys principal subsidiaries their country of incorporation and the Groups ownership are listed below.
England and Wales Abide Financial Limited 84.7 BrokerTec Europe Limited 100 EBS Group Limited 100 ICAP plc 100 NEX Data Services Limited 100 NEX Exchange Limited 100 NEX Group Holdings plc 100 NEX SEF Limited 100 NEX Services Limited 100 Israel EBS Financial Technologies Ltd 100 Traiana Technologies Ltd 86.7 Singapore NEX Services Pte.
Limited 100 Reset Private Limited 100 Sweden TriOptima AB 100 Switzerland EBS Service Company Limited 100 United States BrokerTec Americas LLC 100 ENSO Financial Management LLP 100 NEX Services North America LLC 100 Traiana Inc.
The percentage held represents the percentage of issued ordinary share capital held all classes and also represents the voting rights of the Company.
Abide Financial Limited has a 30 June year end.
All other principal subsidiaries have a 31 March year end.
All companies operate in their country of incorporation.
BrokerTec Europe Limited EBS Group Limited Reset Private Limited and BrokerTec Americas LLC also operate from branches outside their countries of incorporation.
119 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Investments in joint ventures Investments in joint ventures are recognised using the equity method.
Under this method such investments are initially stated at cost including attributable goodwill and are adjusted thereafter for the post acquisition change in the Groups share of net assets.
Investments in joint ventures are reviewed for indicators of impairment under IAS39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Whenever application of IAS39 indicates that an investment may be impaired the carrying amount of the investment including attributed goodwill is tested for impairment as a single asset under IAS36 by comparing the carrying amount with its recoverable amount the higher of VIU and fair value less costs to sale.
The Group adopted IFRS11 Joint Arrangements and IAS28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures for the financial year beginning 1 April 2014.
Previously the Group proportionally consolidated the joint ventures results and position of its joint ventures under IAS31.
The Group determined that as a result of the adoptions of IFRS11 and IAS28 the joint ventures results will not be proportionately consolidated in the Group financial statements but will be treated under the equity accounting method.
Movements in investments in joint ventures As at 1 April 6 13 Share of profit for the year  4 Dividends received  2 Exchange adjustments 1 Transfer to held for sale As at 31 March 7 6 Summary financial information of joint ventures The Groups share of joint ventures assets liabilities and profit for continuing operations is given below.
The amounts for 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Assets 7 7 Liabilities 4 3
31 March
31 March restated Continuing operations Revenue 10 10 Operating expenses 10 9 Profit before tax  1 Share of profit of joint ventures after tax  1 Joint ventures  Group The Groups joint ventures and their country of incorporation are listed below.
England and Wales TFSICAP Currency Options Limited 23.0 Broking TFSICAP Holdings Limited 45.0 Broking TFSICAP Limited 23.0 Broking Germany Tradition Financial Services GmbH 33.3 Broking United States TFSICAP Holdings LLC 45.0 Broking TFSICAP LLC 23.0 Broking All joint ventures have a 31 December year end.
The difference in the joint ventures year ends from the Groups year end is not considered to have a material impact on their results.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 120 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Investments in associates Investments in associates are recognised using the equity method.
Under this method such investments are initially stated at cost including attributable goodwill and are adjusted thereafter for the post acquisition change in the Groups share of net assets.
Investments in associates are reviewed for indicators of impairment under IAS39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Whenever application of IAS39 indicates that an investment may be impaired the carrying amount of the investment including attributed goodwill is tested for impairment as a single asset under IAS36 by comparing the carrying amount with its recoverable amount higher of VIU and fair value less costs to sell.
Movements in investments in associates As at 1 April 52 68 Additions 5 39 Transfer from availableforsale investment  1 Transfer to subsidiary 19 Share of profit for the year  3 Dividends received  6 Other movements  11 Impairment  25 Exchange adjustments 4 3 Transfer to held for sale  42 As at 31 March 42 52
During the year the Group spent 5m investing in new associates and increasing its stake in existing associates.
Additions include a new investment in Research Exchange Limited and an increase in the Groups investment in OpenGamma Inc. both of which are NEX Optimisation associates.
Transfer to subsidiary During the year ENSO and Abide Financial became subsidiaries which resulted in a transfer to subsidiary of 13m and 6m respectively.
Summary financial information for associates The Groups share of associates assets excluding goodwill liabilities and profit for continuing operations is given below.
The amounts for 31 March 2016 have been restated to be on a continuing operations basis.
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Assets 42 30 Liabilities 20 15
31 March
31 March restated Continuing operations Revenue 31 26 Operating expenses 30 26 Profit before tax 1 Tax 1 1 Share of profit of associates after tax  1 121 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Investments in associates continued The Groups associates and their country of incorporation are listed below.
Cayman Islands BSN Holdings Limited 25.1 Broking China Shanghai CFETSICAP International Money Broking Co.
Ltd
33.0 Broking England and Wales BSN Capital Partners Limited 25.1 Broking Duco Technology Limited 44.4 Optimisation Research Exchange Limited 19.4 Optimisation Hong Kong Capital Shipbrokers Limited 50.0 Broking Singapore Howe Robinson Partners Pte.
Limited 35.0 Broking United States AcadiaSoft Inc.
25.0 Optimisation BSN Capital Partners LLC 25.1 Broking CLS Aggregation Services LLC 42.5 Optimisation OpenGamma Inc.
27.3 Optimisation BSN Capital Partners Limited Shanghai CFETSICAP International Money Broking Co.
Ltd CLS Aggregation Services LLC and OpenGamma Inc.
31 December year ends.
Research Exchange Limited has a 30 September year end.
The difference in these associates year ends from the Groups year end is not considered to have a material impact on their results.
All other associates have a 31 March year end.
Availableforsale investments Availableforsale financial assets are debt and equity nonderivative financial assets and are initially recognised at fair value.
Availableforsale investments in equity assets that do not have a quoted market price in an active market and whose fair value cannot be reliably measured are subsequently recorded at cost less impairment.
If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has been incurred on such financial assets the amount of the impairment loss is measured as the difference between the carrying amount of the financial asset and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the current market rate of return for a similar financial asset.
All other availableforsale financial assets are fair valued subsequently at each period end.
Any subsequent changes in fair value are recognised directly in other comprehensive income.
When a decline in the fair value of an availableforsale financial asset has been recognised in other comprehensive income and there is objective evidence that the asset is impaired the cumulative unrealised loss that had been recognised in other comprehensive income is transferred to the consolidated income statement.
Impairment losses recognised in the consolidated income statement for an investment in an availableforsale equity instrument are not reversed through the consolidated income statement.
Dividends on availableforsale equity investments are recognised in the consolidated income statement when the right to receive payment is established.
When an availableforsale financial asset is derecognised any cumulative unrealised gain or loss recognised previously in other comprehensive income is transferred to the consolidated income statement.
These assets are generally expected to be held for the long term and are included in noncurrent assets.
Assets such as shares or seats in exchanges cashrelated instruments and longterm equity investments that do not qualify as associates or joint ventures are classified as availableforsale.
As at 1 April 9 17 Additions 12 5 Disposals  1 Transfer to associates  1 Transfer to held for sale  11 As at 31 March 21 9 Additions of 12m include Cloud9 Technologies LLC Schvey Inc.
OpenFin Inc. and government bonds.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 122 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Availableforsale investments continued As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Noncurrent availableforsale investments Held at fair value 2 Held at cost less impairment 18 9 Total 20 9 Current availableforsale investments Held at fair value 1 Total 1 The fair value of 3m 201516 nil was determined using level 1 inputs being the quoted prices of the equity instruments.
As at 31 March As at 31 March restated Listed securities Equities listed in the rest of the world 3 Total listed securities 3 Unlisted securities Equity investments 18 9 Total unlisted securities 18 9 Total availableforsale investments 21 9 Availableforsale investments as at 31 March 2016 have been restated due to a reclassification between listed and unlisted securities.
Availableforsale investments are denominated in the following currencies
Dollar
Euro
Total
As at 31 March As at 31 March 2016 7 2  9 123 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Property and equipment Property and equipment is recognised initially at cost including the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset into its intended use.
Property and equipment is subsequently presented at initial cost less accumulated depreciation and any provisions for impairment in its value.
It is depreciated on a straightline basis over its expected useful economic life as follows Short leasehold property improvements Period of lease Furniture fixtures and equipment 3  5 years The Group reviews its depreciation rates regularly to take account of any changes in circumstances.
These rates are determined on consideration of factors such as the expected rate of technological development and anticipated usage levels.
When a leasehold property becomes surplus to the Groups foreseeable business requirements a provision is made on a discounted basis for the expected future net cost of the property.
201617 201516
Short leasehold property improvements
Total
Short leasehold property improvements
Total
Cost
As at 1 April Additions Disposals  3 3 1 26 27 Reclassification 4 4 Exchange adjustments Transfer to held for sale    45 31 76 As at 31 March Accumulated depreciation As at 1 April Charge for the year Impairment 2  2 Disposals  3 3 1 26 27 Exchange adjustments Transfer to held for sale    34 27 61 As at 31 March Net book value As at 31 March Additions during the year include assets under construction that are expected to become available for use of 5m 201516 5m.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 124 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Share capital Ordinary shares are recognised in equity as share capital at their nominal value.
The difference between consideration received and the nominal value is recognised in the share premium account.
Company shares held in trust in connection with the Groups employee share schemes are deducted from consolidated shareholders equity.
Purchases sales and transfers of the Companys shares are disclosed as changes in the consolidated shareholders equity.
The assets and liabilities of the trust are consolidated in full into the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Treasury shares are recognised in equity and are measured at cost.
Consideration received for the sale of such shares is also recognised in equity with any difference between the proceeds from the sale and original cost being taken to retained earnings.
201617 201516 Group  allotted called up and fully paid Number of shares millions
Number of shares millions
As at 1 April Share consolidation 285 As at 31 March 17 201516 Company  allotted called up and fully paid Number of shares millions
Number of shares millions
As at 1 April 20161718 February 201516 Capital reorganisation 665 66 Share consolidation 285 As at 31 March 380 66 The share capital of the Group is represented by the share capital of the parent company NEX Group plc.
The Company was incorporated on 18 February 2016 and became the holding company of the Group on 15 December 2016.
Prior to this the share capital of the Group was represented by the share capital of the previous parent ICAP plc.
The Companys number of ordinary shares in issue at 31 March 2017 was 379735432 201516 1.
The Groups number of ordinary shares in issue as at 31 March 2017 was 379735432 201516 664537 006 with nil 201516 12986546 held as treasury shares and 7 457 286 201516 4787 904 held in the employee share trust.
The cost of shares held in the employee share trust is loaned to the trust by the Company and is reported as other receivables.
NEX Group plc was incorporated on 18 February 2016 and issued one ordinary share of 10p and 499999 redeemable preference shares of 10p each.
The following steps took place around the time of the completion of the Transaction on 15 December 2016 NEX Group plc became the parent company of the Group by acquiring the 664537 006 ordinary shares of ICAP plc for 275p per share by way of the Scheme of Arrangement on 29 December 2016 NEX Group plc undertook a capital reduction reducing the nominal value of its 664537 006 shares in issue from 275p per share to 10p per share on 29 December 2016 NEX Group plc cancelled and extinguished 499999 redeemable preference shares and on 30 December 2016 NEX Group plc undertook a share consolidation reducing the number of shares in issue from 664537 006 to 379735432 and increasing the nominal value of shares from 10p per share to 17 .5p per share.
Certain employees hold 1248168 share options over the Companys shares which are potentially issuable.
These options were granted between 201213 and 201516 and the weighted average exercise price ranges from 302.0p to 452.0p.
125 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Share capital continued c Shares held in trust for employee share schemes The Company has established an employee share trust in respect of the SEEPP BSMP Traiana Plan LTIP DSBP PSP UCSOP and SAYE which is funded by the Company and has the power to acquire shares in the open market to meet the Companys future obligations under these schemes.
As at 31 March 2017 the NEX Trust owned 7 457 286 ordinary shares in the Company with a market value of 43m.
As at 31 March 2016 the ICAP Trust owned 2735945 ordinary shares in ICAP plc with a market value of 23m.
The number of shares held in trust for employee share schemes as at 31 March 2016 has been restated as if the share consolidation had occurred at the beginning of the comparative year.
Number of shares millions restated As at 1 April 3 3 Exercised by employees during the year 3 Transferred from treasury shares 7 As at 31 March 7 3 d Treasury shares During the year the Company did not purchase any of its own shares 201516 nil but transferred 655909 shares 201516 1330267 to employees under its sharebased payments schemes and 6764975 shares 201516 nil to the employee share trust.
As at 31 March 2017  the number of shares held as treasury shares was nil 201516 7 420883.
The number of treasury shares as at 31 March 2016 has been restated as if the share consolidation had occurred at the beginning of the comparative year.
Number of shares millions restated As at 1 April 8 9 Transferred to employees 1 1 Transferred to the employee share trust 7 As at 31 March  8
Group
Merger reserve
Hedging reserve
Total other reserves As at 1 April 2016 28 1 9 57 77 Unrealised gain in the year net of tax   6  6 Capital reorganisation  1   1 Distribution of discontinued operations 28   5 33 As at 31 March 2017   3 52 49
Merger reserve
Hedging reserve
Total other reserves As at 1 April 2015 28 1 6 56 79 Unrealised lossgain in the year   3 1 2 As at 31 March 2016 28 1 9 57 77 The merger reserve was created on the merger of Garban and Intercapital in 1999 and also includes goodwill arising before 1 January 1998 written off to reserves.
The merger reserve related to IGBB and therefore has been derecognised on the disposal of IGBB.
The capital redemption reserve was created as a result of shares cancelled in 1998 and 2005.
The capital redemption reserve is a legal reserve relating to the previous parent of the Group ICAP plc and therefore has been derecognised due to the legal change in ownership of the Group to NEX Group plc.
The revaluation reserve represents revaluations of availableforsale investments.
The hedging reserve arises from fair value movements of derivative financial instruments that are designated as cash flow hedges on the balance sheet.
The Company has retained earnings of 1618m 201516 nil all of which is all distributable.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 126 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Currency risk management The Group uses various financial instruments as hedges to reduce exposure to FX and interest rate movements.
These can include forward FX contracts currency options and cross currency swaps.
All derivative financial instruments are initially recognised on the balance sheet at their fair value adjusted for transaction costs.
Where derivative financial instruments do not qualify for hedge accounting changes in the fair value are recognised immediately in the consolidated income statement along with transaction costs.
Where they do qualify gains and losses are recognised according to the nature of the hedge relationship and the item being hedged.
Hedges are either classified as fair value hedges cash flow hedges or net investment hedges.
The fair values of the Groups derivative financial instruments are determined using appropriate valuation techniques from observable data including discounted cash flow analysis as no active markets with quoted prices exist for the instruments held by the Group.
The method of recognising the movements in the fair value of a derivative depends on whether the instrument has been designated as a hedging instrument and if so the nature of the exposure being hedged.
To qualify for hedge accounting the terms of the hedge must be documented clearly at inception and there must be an expectation that the derivative will be highly effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flows attributable to the hedged risk.
Hedge effectiveness is tested throughout the life of the hedge and if at any point it is concluded that the relationship can no longer be expected to remain highly effective in achieving its objective the accounting for the hedge relationship is terminated.
Fair value hedges derivative financial instruments are classified as fair value hedges when they hedge an exposure to changes in the fair value of a recognised asset or liability that is attributable to a particular risk that could affect the consolidated income statement.
The hedging instrument is recorded at fair value on the balance sheet with changes in its fair value being taken through the consolidated income statement.
For periods in which the hedge is shown to be effective the gain or loss on the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk adjusts the carrying amount of the hedged item and is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Cash flow hedges derivative financial instruments are classified as cash flow hedges when they hedge the Groups exposure to changes in the cash flows attributable to a particular asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction.
Gains or losses on designated cash flow hedges are recognised directly in other comprehensive income to the extent that they are determined to be effective.
Any remaining ineffective portion of the gain or loss is recognised immediately in the consolidated income statement.
On recognition of the hedged asset or liability any gains or losses relating to the hedging instrument that had previously been recognised directly in other comprehensive income are included in the initial measurement of the fair value of the asset or liability.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss in equity remains there and is recognised in the consolidated income statement when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was reported in other comprehensive income is transferred immediately to the consolidated income statement.
Net investment hedges changes in the value of foreigndenominated investments due to currency movements are recognised directly in other comprehensive income.
The accounting treatment for a net investment hedging instrument whether it is a derivative financial instrument or a recognised asset or liability on the balance sheet is consistent with the aforementioned treatment for a cash flow hedge.
Gains and losses accumulated in other comprehensive income are included in the consolidated income statement on the ultimate disposal of the foreigndenominated investment.
The gain or loss relating to any ineffective portion is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Group
The Group presents its consolidated financial statements in pound sterling and conducts business in a number of other currencies principally the dollar.
Consequently the Group both continuing and discontinued operations is exposed to FX risk due to exchange rate movements which affect the Groups transactional revenue and the translation of the earnings and net assets of its nonpound sterling operations.
The Groups policy is for all subsidiaries to hedge their material nonfunctional currency transactional exposures through a combination of forward FX contracts and options for up to two years forward.
Under this policy a minimum of 75% of the forecast exposures are hedged for the first six months 50% for the following six months and 25% for the next six months.
The majority of these exposures relate to dollar sales arising in pound sterling functional currency companies.
The table below sets out the Groups outstanding forward FX contracts as at 31 March 2017 which are designated as cash flow hedges.
Half year to 30 September 2017 Half year to 31 March 2018 Half year to 30 September 2018 Currency pair
Transaction rate Fair value
Transaction rate Fair value
Transaction rate Fair value NEX Markets Buy ILS sell  ILS 46 5.16 1 ILS 31 4.96 1 ILS 15 4.63 Other currency pairs 9 Various  5 Various  3 Various NEX Optimisation Other currency pairs 31 Various  20 Various  9 Various Total 4 Israeli shekel.
127 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Currency risk management continued b Balance sheet translational exposures The Group is exposed to balance sheet translational exposures at the local entity level where the local consolidated balance sheet may contain monetary assets or liabilities denominated in a currency other than the entitys functional currency.
Where material it is the Groups policy to hedge 100% of these exposures using a mix of foreign currency swaps and forward FX contracts.
Balance sheet translational exposures also arise on consolidation as a result of the retranslation of the balance sheet of the Groups nonpound sterling operations principally dollar and euro into pounds sterling the Groups presentational currency.
The Groups general policy is not to actively manage these exposures as active management using instruments with a shorter tenure than the underlying net asset can give rise to a net cash outflow.
However from time to time it will use forward FX contracts cross currency swaps or nonpound sterling denominated borrowings to mitigate these exposures.
As at 31 March 2017 the Group has 235m of forward FX contracts 100m of the 2019 fiveyear senior notes and the 15m 2023 tenyear senior notes designated as hedging instruments against the underlying dollar and euro exposures respectively.
As at 31 March 2017 these exposures were 1.2bn 201516 1.4bn and 0.1bn 201516 0.2bn including intangible assets arising on consolidation but before 0.2bn 201516 0.2bn and 0.1bn 201516 0.1bn of hedging.
The table below shows the actual impact on the Groups equity of movements in the dollar and euro exchange rates due to transactional and translational exposures.
The table below also discloses the anticipated impact on the Groups equity of a 10 cent weakening which the Group considers to be an appropriate sensitivity measure in the dollar and euro in terms of transactional and translational exposure.
201617 201516
Euro
Total
Dollar
Euro
Total
Actual impact 8 33 10 cent weakening 70 8 78 65 8 73 c Derivative financial instruments Among other methods the Group uses derivative financial instruments to implement its FX policy.
These include the use of forward FX contracts to hedge a portion of its transactional dollar and euro exposures and cross currency interest rate swaps to hedge the FX and interest rate risks on its senior notes.
Where these are designated and documented as cash flow hedges in the context of IAS39 and are demonstrated to be effective marktomarket gains and losses are recognised directly in other comprehensive income and transferred to the consolidated income statement on derecognition of the underlying item being hedged.
The table below presents the carrying value of the Groups derivative financial instruments.
As at 31 March 2017 As at 31 March 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Forward FX contracts  cash flow hedges 3 7 3 12 Forward FX contracts  net investment hedges 2 Forward FX contracts  other 1 4 Cross currency swaps  cash flow hedges 8   8 No amounts 201516 nil were recognised in the consolidated income statement in the year as a result of ineffective hedges.
Fair value hierarchy for the derivative financial instruments is shown below.
As at 31 March 2017 As at 31 March 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Derivative assets  14   3 Derivative liabilities  11   20 In deriving fair value of all derivative instruments as at 31 March 2017  valuation models were used which incorporated observable market data.
There were no significant inputs used in the models that were unobservable.
Company d Balance sheet translational exposures The Company is exposed to balance sheet translational exposures where the balance sheet contains financial assets or liabilities denominated in a currency other than pounds sterling.
While it is the Groups policy to hedge 100% of these exposures at Group level at Company level these exposures can affect the Companys profit after tax.
At 31 March 2017  the Company had no financial assets or liabilities denominated in foreign currencies 201516 nil.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 128 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Related party transactions
As part of the disposal of Exotix to the Group headed by IPGL a company controlled by Michael Spencer the Group Chief Executive Officer in 2007  the Group loaned employees of Exotix Limited a subsidiary of Exotix 1.5m to enable them to purchase a shareholding.
The Group collected revenue of 6m 201516 15m on behalf of Exotix.
As at 31 March 2017  there was a balance due to Exotix from the Group of 1m 201516 1m.
The Group was responsible for the debtor management of associate Capital Shipbrokers Limited an associate company.
As at 31 March 2017  the outstanding balance due from the Group to Capital Shipbrokers Limited was 1m 201516 2m.
The Group provides BSN Capital Partners Limited an associate undertaking with office space and facility services and also has a preferred brokerage agreement with BSN Capital Partners Limited.
As at 31 March 2017  the outstanding balance due to the Group was 4m 201516 1m.
The Group recharged CLSAS an associate company 3m 201516 3m as compensation for technical services during the year.
As at 31 March 2017 the total outstanding balance due to the Group was 0.4m 201516 0.3m. e Howe Robinson Partners Pte.
Limited Howe Robinson The Group collects revenue for Howe Robinson an associate company.
The Group received 2m 201516 3m during the year and as at 31 March 2017 the total outstanding balance due from the Group was 1m 201516 4m.
Throughout the year NEX also had board representation and transactions with certain other associates joint ventures and availableforsale investments.
None of these transactions were material or had material balances outstanding as at 31 March 2017 .
Related party transactions are made on an armslength basis.
Company
NEX Group plc is the Groups ultimate parent company and is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
For the year ended 31 March 2016 ICAP plc was the Groups ultimate parent company and was incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
On 15 December 2016 all shares in ICAP plc were exchanged for shares in NEX Group plc via the Scheme of Arrangement.
Amounts owed to the Company from subsidiaries are disclosed in note 18 and amounts owed by the Company to subsidiaries are disclosed in note 19.
Post balance sheet events There have been no post balance sheet events.
Group subsidiaries and related undertakings In accordance with section 409 of the Companies Act a full list of related undertakings the country of incorporation the registered office address and the effective percentage of equity owned is disclosed below as at 31 March 2017 .
Subsidiaries
Unless otherwise stated the subsidiary undertakings below are whollyowned and the share capital disclosed comprises ordinary shares or common stock or the local equivalent thereof which are indirectly held by NEX Group plc.
These undertakings are controlled by the Group and their results are fully consolidated into the Groups financial statements.
Whollyowned subsidiaries Note England and Wales 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR Astley and Pearce Limited BrokerTec Europe Limited BrokerTec Investments Capital Shipbrokers LLP 1 Capital Shipbroking Limited EBS Dealing Resources International Limited EBS Group Limited EBS Investments EBS No.
2 Limited Garban Broking Services Limited Garban Harlow Resources Limited Godsell Astley and Pearce Foreign Exchange Limited Godsell Astley and Pearce Holdings Limited 129 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Whollyowned subsidiaries Note Harlow Ueda Savage Limited ICAP plc 2 3 Intercapital Limited Intercapital No.
1 Limited Intercapital No.
2 Limited Intercapital No.
3 Limited Midhurst Chartering Limited Municipal Brokers Limited NEX Data Services Limited NEX Exchange Limited NEX Finance Limited NEX Group Holdings plc NEX International Investments Limited NEX Markets Limited NEX Optimisation Limited NEX SEF Limited NEX Services Limited ReMatch Holdings Limited ReMatch Limited TriOptima UK Limited 15 Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5GL BrokerTec Global Holdings Limited 4 EBS Global Holdings Limited 4 ICAP Hyde Holdings Limited 4 ICAP Shipping Derivatives Limited 4 5 30 Finsbury Square London EC2P 2YU Euclid Opportunities Limited 4 GarbanIntercapital Quest Trustee Limited 4 ICAP International Limited 4 ICAP US Investment Company 4
Reconquista 365 Piso 8 of B Buenos Aires Intercapital Argentina S.
Intercapital Lat Am Services S.
China
Unit 368 Division 302 No.
211 North Fute Road Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone EBS Shanghai Information Technology Co.
Ltd.
Germany
Alsterarkaden 13 20354 Hamburg Intercapital Germany GmbH
6A Queensway Gibraltar GX11 1AA ICAP Luxembourg Services 4 ICAP Services No.
ICAP Services No.
Hong Kong 6th Floor Alexandra House 18 Chater Road Central Intercapital Hong Kong Limited Nexstep HK 2 Limited Nexstep HK 3 Limited Group subsidiaries and related undertakings continued NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 130 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Whollyowned subsidiaries Note
Floor 22 132 Menachem Begin Road Triangle Tower Azrieli Center Tel Aviv EBS Financial Technologies Ltd.
Japan
Toho Twin Tower Building 3rd Floor 152 Yurakucho Chiyodaku Tokyo 1000006 EBS Dealing Resources Japan Limited 410 NihonbashiMuromachi 4chome Chuoku Tokyo 1030022 TriOptima Japan K.
Luxembourg
17 Boulevard du Prince Henri L1724 Luxembourg Euclid Opportunities S.
Singapore
10 Marina Boulevard 2101 Marina Bay Financial Centre Singapore Intercapital No.
1 Pte.
Limited
Intercapital No.
2 Pte.
Limited
NEX Services Pte.
Limited
Reset Holdings Private Limited Reset Private Limited 7 8 4 Robinson Road 1001 Singapore TriOptima Asia Pacific Pte.
Limited
Sweden
Mster Samuelsgatan 17 111 44 Stockholm TriOptima AB
Lavaterstrasse 40 CH8002 Zurich EBS Service Company Limited United States The Corporation Trust Company 1209 Orange Street Wilmington Delaware DE 19801 BrokerTec Americas LLC 9 BrokerTec Holdings Inc.
EBS Dealing Resources Inc.
EBS Holdco Inc.
EBS No.
4 LLC 9 Euclid Investment Holdings Inc.
Intercapital Capital Markets LLC 9 Molten Markets Inc.
NEX Group Investments Inc.
NEX Investments LLC 9 NEX Services North America LLC 9 TriOptima North America LLC 9 108 West 13th Street Wilmington Delaware DE 19801 ENSO Financial Management LLP 1 4 Times Square New York NY 10036 Intercapital Securities Inc.
Group subsidiaries and related undertakings continued 131 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Group subsidiaries and related undertakings continued Subsidiaries where the effective interest is less than 100% Percentage Note England and Wales 78 Cannon Street London EC4N 6HL Abide Financial DRSP Limited 84.7 Abide Financial Limited 84.7 10 St Mary Le Bow House 54 Bow Lane London EC4M 9DJ Abide Financial Repository Limited 84.7 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR ENSO UK Limited 85.9 Traiana Limited 86.7
Floor 25 132 Menachem Begin Road Square Tower Azrieli Center Tel Aviv Traiana Technologies Ltd.
Italy
Via Giuseppe Marcora 11 20121 Milan eMID SIM S.
Jersey
PO Box 384 6 Hilgrove Street St Helier JE4 9ZH ENSO LP 85.9 1 11
Box 270 851 04 Sundsvall Goldcup 14357 AB 84.7 United States The Corporation Trust Company 1209 Orange Street Wilmington Delaware DE 19801 Traiana Inc.
Other related undertakings Unless otherwise stated the undertakings below are recognised using the equity method of accounting and the share capital disclosed comprises ordinary shares or common stock or the local equivalent thereof which are held by subsidiaries of the Group.
Other related undertakings Percentage Note England and Wales 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR BSN Capital Partners Limited 25.1 15 St John Street London EC1M 4AA Duco Technology Limited 44.4 12 1st Floor Watson House 54 Baker Street London W1U 7BU Exotix Holdings Limited 21.8 13 Citypoint Level 28 One Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9AW Exotix Investment Partners LLP 20.5 1 13 47 Dorset Street London W1U 7ND Research Exchange Limited 19.4 14 Beaufort House 15 St.
Botolph Street London EC3A 7QX TFSICAP Currency Options Limited 23.0 TFSICAP Holdings Limited 45.0 TFSICAP Limited 23.0 Cayman Islands co Genesis Trust and Corporate Services Limited Elgin Avenue George Town Grand Cayman KY1 1106 BSN Holdings Limited 25.1 8 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 132 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions Other related undertakings Percentage Note
Unit 260102 0508 Azia Center No.
1233 Lu Jiazui Ring Road Pudon Shanghai Shanghai CFETSICAP International Money Broking Co.
Ltd.
Germany
CarlUlrichStrasse 26 63263 NeuIsenburg Tradition Financial Services GmbH 33.3 Hong Kong 22F Punfet Building 701 Nathan Road Kowloon Hong Kong Capital Shipbrokers Limited 50.0 15
8 Shenton Way 1301 AXA Tower Singapore Howe Robinson Partners Pte.
Limited 35.0 United States The Corporation Trust Company 1209 Orange Street Wilmington Delaware DE 19801 AcadiaSoft Inc.
CLS Aggregation Services LLC 42.5 9 TFSICAP LLC 23.0 9 15th Floor 4 Times Square New York NY 10036 BSN Capital Partners LLC 25.1 9 Corporation Service Company 2711 Centreville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware DE 19808 OpenGamma Inc.
National Corporate Research NCR 850 New Burton Road Suite 201 Dover Delaware DE 19904 TFSICAP Holdings LLC 45.0 9
1 Partnership interest 2 Directly held by NEX Group plc 3 Ordinary shares and R shares 4 In liquidation 5 Ordinary shares and junior redeemable noncumulative preference shares 6 Registered capital 7 A ordinary shares or A ordinary common stock 8 B ordinary shares or B ordinary common stock 9 Membership interest 10 D ordinary shares and E ordinary shares 11 Class A units 12 A ordinary shares 96.9% 13 Not consolidated or recognised using the equity method of accounting 14 Series A shares 15 A ordinary shares 50.0% and B ordinary shares 45.0% 16 Series B convertible preferred stock 11.1% and series D convertible preferred stock 37.4% 17 Series C preferred stock 74.5% and series D preferred stock 29.5% Group subsidiaries and related undertakings continued 133 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Definitions In the Annual Report the following words shall have the following meanings Basel III an international regulatory framework developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervisions to strengthen the regulation supervision and risk management of the banking sector
ICAP 2003 and 2013 Bonus Share Matching Plan
CDS credit default swaps
China Foreign Exchange Trade System
CNH represents the exchange rate of renminbi that trades offshore in Hong Kong
FRCs UK Corporate Governance Code published in September 2014 Companies Act Companies Act 2006 as amended Company or NEX NEX Group plc formerly ICAP Newco plc a public limited company incorporated in England and Wales with registered number whose registered office is at 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR
CRD
Capital Requirements Directive
Deloitte LLP dollar or unless otherwise specified all references to dollars or  dollar symbol are to the currency of the US
Deferred Share Bonus Plan
European Central Bank eMID eMID SIM S.
EMIR
European Market Infrastructure Regulation
ETR effective tax rate
European Union
European Securities and Markets Authority
Financial Conduct Authority
Fixed Income Clearing Corporation
Fitch Ratings Limited
Financial Reporting Council FTSE 100 index comprised of the 100 largest companies listed on the London Stock Exchange in terms of their market capitalisation FTSE 250 index comprised of mediumcapitalised companies listed on the London Stock Exchange not included in the FTSE 100 index FTSE AllShare the aggregation of the FTSE 100 FTSE 250 and FTSE Small Cap indices
Garban
Garban plc
GEMG
Global Executive Management Group
Group Finance Committee
Global Operating Committee
IAS
International Accounting Standards
International Accounting Standards Body
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process
ICAP plc a public limited company incorporated in England and Wales with registered number  whose registered office is at 2 Broadgate London EC2M 7UR ICAP Trust ICAP Employee Share Trust
International Financial Reporting Standards
134 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance and directors report Financial statements Definitions
ICAPs global hybrid voice broking and information business including ICAPs associated technology and broking platforms including iSwap and Fusion and certain of ICAPs joint ventures and associates
INCAP Finance BV
Intercapital Limited formerly Intercapital plc
IPGL Holdings Limited
International Swaps and Derivatives Association
Libid
London interbank bid rate
London interbank offered rate
ICAP Long Term Incentive Plan merger the merger of Garban and Intercapital on 9 September 1999
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive
Moodys Investors Services
NDF nondeliverable forward NEX Group shares NEX Group plc ordinary shares of 17 .5p each NEX Trust NEX Group Employee Share Trust nonbank encompassing the professional trading community including hedge funds trading houses and corporates nm not material
PSP
Performance Share Plan
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
REMIT
Regulation on Wholesale Energy Market Integrity and Transparency
SAYE
Sharesave Plan Scheme Effective Date 15 December 2016 Scheme of Arrangement the scheme of arrangement made under Part 26 of the Companies Act between ICAP plc and the Scheme Shareholders as defined therein
ICAP Senior Executive Equity Participation Plan
Statutory Audit Services Order the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014
Tokyo interbank offered rate TP ICAP TP ICAP plc formerly Tullett Prebon plc a public limited company registered in England and Wales with registered number whose registered office is at Tower 42 Level 37  25 Old Broad Street London EC2N 1HQ
30 December 2016
UCSOP
ICAP Unapproved Company Share Option Plan Forwardlooking statements The Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements with respect to the expectations plans and aims of the Group relating to future performance financial position and results.
All forwardlooking statements involve risk and uncertainty because they relate to future events and circumstances that are beyond the Groups control andor that may cause results and developments to differ materially from those anticipated.
The forwardlooking statements reflect knowledge and information available at the date of preparation of this Annual Report.
However we can give no assurance that expectations will not differ materially from actual outcomes and the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a profit forecast.
135 NEX Group plc Annual Report 2017 Printed by CPi Colour.
Cover and pages 1 to 72 are printed on Heaven42 and pages 73 to 136 are printed on Horizon Offset.
Both are FSC Mix grade materials manufactured at ISO14001 certified paper mills.
CPi Colour are ISO14001 certified and FSC chain of custody certified.
The inks used are vegetable oil based.
CPi Colour is also a CarbonNeutral printing company and reduces its CO omissions to net zero in accordance with The CarbonNeutral
This carbon offsetting supports the Uchindile Mapanda reforestation programme in Tanzania an environmental project to establish commercial forests at two locations in Africa.
