Dairy Crest Group plc Annual Report 2017 Dairy Crest Group plc Claygate House Littleworth Road
Surrey KT10 9PN Company No Visit our website at site httpsiteinvestors Dairy Crest Group plc Annual Report 2017
Dairy Crest is a leading British dairy company.
We have a wellestablished strategy a clear vision robust values and great people.
The companys success is driven by a strong portfolio of market leading brands including Cathedral City cheese Clover dairy spread Country Life butter and Frylight the original one calorie cooking spray.
The year ended 31 March 2017 marked a new chapter in our history as we started production of two functional ingredients demineralised whey powder and galactooligosaccharide GOS at our Davidstow facility.
This brings exciting new opportunities in the high growth global infant formula market.
We strive constantly to innovate bringing new products to market and introducing new ways of working across the business.
Our success has been built on our links to the countryside our dairy heritage and our people and we continue to ensure we are setting the standard for responsible business practice.
Dairy Crest is very well positioned for profitable and sustainable growth in our added value and branded markets.
ABouT uS The uKs No1 cheese brand The uKs No1 oil brand The uKs No1 dairy spread The uKs fastest growing major spreadable brand
Strategic report Dairy Crest Annual Report Net debt Total dividends per share pence
Adjusted prot before tax 1 All years have been restated to remove discontinued operations 2 Continuing operations before exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and pension interest The numbers Governance Strategic report 2 At a glance 4 Our business model 6 Our strategy and key performance indicators 8 Chairmans statement 9 Chief Executives review 12 Financial review 16 Principal risks and uncertainties 18 Performance 18  Cheese and functional ingredients 20  Butters spreads and oils 22 Corporate Responsibility
Board of Directors Executive Committee and Advisers 30 Corporate governance 41 Directors remuneration report 62 Directors report 65 Statement of Directors responsibilities The numbers 66 Independent auditors report 70 Consolidated income statement 71 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 72 Consolidated and Parent Company balance sheets 73 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 74 Parent Company statement of changes in equity 75 Consolidated and Parent Company statement of cash flows 76 Accounting policies 82 Notes to the financial statements 120 Group financial history 1 21 Shareholders information ConTenTS 2017 HiGHliGHTS notice limitations on Director liability  The purpose of the Annual Report and Accounts is to provide information to members of the Company and it has been prepared for and only for the members of the Company as a body.
The Company its Directors employees agents and advisers do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person to whom this document is shown or into whose hands it may come and any such responsibility is expressly disclaimed.
Under the Companies Act 2006 a safe harbour limits the liability of Directors in respect of statements in and omissions from the Directors report contained on pages 4 to 40 and 62 to 64 and from the Directors remuneration report at pages 41 to 61.
Under English law the Directors would be liable to the Company but not to any third party if the Directors report contained errors as a result of recklessness or knowing misstatement or dishonest concealment of a material fact but they would not otherwise be liable.
The Directors report and the Directors remuneration report have been drawn up and presented in accordance with and in reliance upon English company law.
Liabilities of the Directors in connection with those reports shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements The Groups reports including this Annual Report and Accounts and written information released or oral statements made to the public in the future by or on behalf of the Company and the Group may contain forwardlooking statements.
By their nature these statements involve uncertainty since future events and circumstances can cause results to differ materially from those anticipated.
The forwardlooking statements reflect knowledge and information available at the time of their preparation and except to the extent required by applicable regulations or by law the Company and the Group undertake no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
Nothing in this Annual Report and Accounts should be construed as a profit forecast.
NonGAAP measures of financial performance used throughout this Annual Report and Accounts are defined in the financial review on pages 12 to 15 and in Note 1 to the financial statements.
Statutory results Profit before tax from continuing operations 40.3 45.4 Profit from continuing operations 33.1 38.5 Profitloss from discontinued operations 5.2 151.5 Profitloss for the year 38.3 113.0 2 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 AT A GlAnCe Who we are Dairy Crest is a leading British dairy company
To generate growth by building strong positions in branded and added value markets To simplify make more resilient and reduce costs To generate cash and reduce risk To make acquisitions where they will generate value
From this we will grow through a shared passion to create exceptional food loved by every generation Dedicated West Country milk pool
Nuneaton
Cheese produced at Davidstow is matured and packed into the Cathedral City and Davidstow brands Products from Kirkby and Frome alongside Cathedral City and Davidstow cheese are efciently distributed to customers through our partnership with Fowler Welch
Harper Adams A unique collaboration between Dairy Crest and Harper Adams University.
The base for our research and development and technical teams Innovation Centre
Head Ofce
Kirkby
Home to our spray oil business MH Foods.
Manufactures Frylight one calorie cooking spray Manufactures Clover Country Life Utterly Butterly Vitalite and Willow brands Versatile cheese packing The UKs largest cheese creamery producing awardwinning cheddar demineralised whey and galactooligosaccharide
Frome o ur locations
2.5 billion Butter and spreads 1.2 billion
330 million Infant formula global 55 billion IRI market data 52 weeks ended 25 March 2017 Kantar market data 52 weeks ended 26 March 2017 Euromonitor estimate 2016 The infant formula market is growing by 8% year on year Retail sales of our four key brands British farms supply Dairy Crest 99% of people regularly consume dairy products c500m litres of raw milk purchased a year o ur retail markets Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 3 Strategic report Cheese and functional ingredients 63%
Contribution to Group % of total Group.
Revenue excludes other revenue.
Prot is product group prot excluding share of associates.
Market share source IRI 52 weeks ended 25 March 2017.
Prot Revenue 37% 37%
14% Market share Retail butter and spreads Market share Retail branded everyday cheese 54% 63% Dairy Crest produces and markets Cathedral City the UKs leading cheese brand and the premium Davidstow cheddar brand.
Our
This top quality milk is made into cheddar cheese at our highlyautomated creamery in Davidstow Cornwall.
The cheese then matures for on average nearly a year at our purposebuilt Nuneaton facility before being cut packed and distributed.
We have a second packing site in Frome Somerset for more complex and innovative packaging.
Whey is a byproduct of the cheese making process.
Our
Highlights
Cathedral City is Britains largest cheese brand 18th largest grocery brand and 7th largest online grocery brand Cathedral City is now bought by nearly 55% of UK households each year Cathedral City has been relaunched with new and improved packaging design across the range 100% of our milk comes from dedicated farmers in the South West of England Production and sales of demineralised whey and GOS are underway Dairy Crest manufactures a number of leading butters spreads and oil brands in the UK.
Key brands include Country Life butter and Clover spread which are produced at a single facility in Kirkby Merseyside alongside a portfolio of smaller brands in the spreads category.
Our subsidiary company MH Foods is based in Erith Kent and has a strong heritage in innovative food products spanning more than 30 years.
It produces Frylight the original one calorie cooking spray and now the UKs largest oil brand.
Highlights
Frylight continues to grow sales strongly growing volumes by 23% and increasing its lead as the UKs No1 oil brand Country Life spreadable gained share and grew sales by 7% No artificial ingredients Clover continued to gain share outgrowing a difficult spreads market by 4% Relaunched Vitalite our iconic dairy free brand grew sales by 3% Butters spreads and oils Product groups The UKs n o1 oil brand The UKs n o1 dairy spread The UKs fastest growing major spreadable brand The UKs n o1 cheese brand The UKs n o1 dairy free spread 4 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Cheese and functional ingredients Butters spreads and oils Bulk butter and oils c 500 million litres of fresh milk from 360 farms
Cheese
Functional ingredients
Demineralised whey Galactooligosaccharide GOS
Dairy spreads Packet butter and spreadable Butters and spreads oUr BUSineSS moDel Dairy Crest processes and markets branded dairy products and value added ingredients.
Our business depends on milk and we make sure we use every drop we buy.
This diagram shows how milk flows through our business and the products we make from it.
We have two product groups Cheese and functional ingredients and Butters spreads and oils.
Dairy Crest produces and markets Cathedral City the UKs leading cheese brand and the premium Davidstow cheddar brand.
Our
This top quality milk is made into cheddar cheese at our highlyautomated creamery in Davidstow
The cheese then matures for an average of nearly a year at our purposebuilt Nuneaton facility before being cut packed and distributed.
We have a second packing site in Frome Somerset for more complex and innovative packaging.
Dairy Crests functional ingredients business produces and sells demineralised whey GOS and other added value dairy ingredients including whey butter.
Whey is a byproduct of the cheese making process.
We have a new facility at Davidstow producing demineralised whey and GOS both ingredients for infant formula a highgrowth highmargin global market.
Cheese Functional ingredients Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 5 Strategic report Cheese and functional ingredients Butters spreads and oils Bulk butter and oils c 500 million litres of fresh milk from 360 farms
Cheese
Functional ingredients
Demineralised whey Galactooligosaccharide GOS
Dairy spreads Packet butter and spreadable Butters and spreads A sustainable supply of high quality milk is important to Dairy Crest.
We buy around 500 million litres annually from 360 farmers in the South West of England.
We are committed to working in partnership with our farmers to ensure that together we are best placed to take advantage of market growth opportunities.
Butters and spreads o ils Dairy Crest manufactures a number of leading butters and spreads brands in the
Key brands include Country Life butter and Clover spread which are produced at a single facility in Kirkby Merseyside alongside a portfolio of smaller brands in the spreads category.
Dairy Crest produces Frylight a one calorie cooking spray at its facility in Erith.
Since its acquisition in 2011 sales have more than doubled and Frylight is now the No1 oil brand in the UK.
Dedicated milk supply 6 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 oUr STrATeGy Dairy Crest has a clear strategy against which we continue to make progress.
Our key performance indicators KPIs are summarised opposite.
These KPIs are also used as measures for our Long Term Alignment Plan LTAP for Directors and senior employees.
Operational performance  pages 18 to 21 Financial performance  pages 12 to 15 Corporate responsibility performance pages 22 to 27 See how we make the most from milk through our integrated business model pages 4 to 5 Further details of our LTAP  pages 52 to 54 and 58 to 59 our strategy Progress 201617 Future priorities To generate growth by building strong positions in branded and added value markets Combined volumes of four key brands are flat Cathedral City master brand launch with support from TV advertising  growth in second half Clover and other spreads brands grow volumes well ahead of the market and take a combined 2 percentage points of share Country Life spreadable grew volumes by 6% Frylight volume growth of 23% increasing its lead as the UKs No1 oil brand and winning the IGD Health and Wellness product of the year entered into a research partnership with Danisco Animal n utrition part of Dupont to explore further the potential uses of Go S in animal nutrition improved level of demineralised whey hitting the infant formula quality target rate of 80% o ur focus will remain to grow the market share of our key brands Cathedral City Clover Country l ife and Frylight Continued investment in advertising and promotion Further develop our strong pipeline of innovation Accelerating returns from our investment in demineralised whey and Go S at Davidstow Further developing our Go S business in adult and animal nutrition To simplify make more resilient and reduce costs Post the sale of our Dairies business we are now a much simpler business We are driving further efficiencies and cost savings which remains an integral part of doing business at Dairy Crest We have started the implementation of new simplified iT systems which will drastically reduce the number of systems we use We signed an agreement with Fowler Welch Coolchain l td transferring our transport operations to them and will over time build a larger warehousing and logistics operation at our n uneaton site To continue to implement a two year programme to replace core iT systems to deliver a less costly and simpler iT infrastructure more appropriate for our smaller business and realise significant associated cost savings Continue to seek cost reductions and drive operational efficiency improvements across the business To generate cash and reduce risk Dairy Crest increased its cash inflow from operating activities by 11% but debt reduction was hampered by oneoff items Davidstow commissioning final settlement of consideration on the sale of the Dairies business and working capital increases as milk costs rose We now have five wellinvested manufacturing sites and hence capital expenditure has been significantly reduced We have put in place specific financing covering our new functional ingredients plant at Davidstow which has led to a cash inflow of 37.9 million n et debt expected to reduce in 201718 as a result of strong underlying cash generation and reduced oneoff costs Continued sales of properties will provide cash to the business We have a low future capital expenditure requirement For 201718 the sharply higher milk price will impact working capital but milk costs have now started to fall T o ma k e acquisitions where they will generate value o ur focus has been on organic growth and we have not made any acquisitions during the year ended 31 march 2017 We will continue to look for valueenhancing acquisitions which meet our stringent requirements Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 7 Strategic report Deliver progressive dividends with cover between 1.5 and 2.5 times.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Board is recommending a total dividend up 1.9%.
This is covered 1.6 times.
Grow earnings before interest tax and depreciation adjusted eBiTDA and adjusted profit before tax adjusted PBT.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 EBITDA was flat and adjusted PBT increased by 5%.
Deliver an acceptable return on capital employed roCe.
ROCE for the year ended 31 March 2017 was 15.4%. maintain net debteBiTDA within the range 1  2 times.
At 31 March 2017 net debtEBITDA was 2.9 times 31 March 2016 2.7 times.
Grow our four key brands ahead of the market.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 Clover Frylight and Country Life spreadable grew ahead of the market although Cathedral City did not 31 March 2016 3 of our key brands grew ahead of the market.
Deliver cost saving initiatives.
Cost reduction projects initiated in the year ended 31 March 2017 have delivered substantial benefits ahead of plan.
Achieve revenue targets for products developed in the last 3 years.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 around 13% of our revenue came from such sales against a target of 10% 31 March 2016 11% of revenue. improve corporate responsibility measures.
During the year we introduced our new corporate responsibility pledges.
There are fourteen pledges grouped under the four pillars of Climate Colleagues Consumers and Community.
See the corporate responsibility section on pages 22 to 27 for more detail.
ROCE is calculated as product group profit from continuing operations for the year divided by the average operating assets of the continuing operations over the year.
Operating assets are defined as property plant and equipment goodwill intangible assets inventories trade and other receivables trade and other payables and provisions.
Further details on page 14.
Definitions of the adjusted numbers are included in the financial review on pages 12 to 15.
There is a more detailed review of our performance against KPIs on pages 52 to 54 and 58 to 59.
To generate growth by building strong positions in branded and added value markets Combined volumes of four key brands are flat Cathedral City master brand launch with support from TV advertising  growth in second half Clover and other spreads brands grow volumes well ahead of the market and take a combined 2 percentage points of share Country Life spreadable grew volumes by 6% Frylight volume growth of 23% increasing its lead as the UKs No1 oil brand and winning the IGD Health and Wellness product of the year entered into a research partnership with Danisco Animal n utrition part of Dupont to explore further the potential uses of Go S in animal nutrition improved level of demineralised whey hitting the infant formula quality target rate of 80% o ur focus will remain to grow the market share of our key brands Cathedral City Clover Country l ife and Frylight Continued investment in advertising and promotion Further develop our strong pipeline of innovation Accelerating returns from our investment in demineralised whey and Go S at Davidstow Further developing our Go S business in adult and animal nutrition To simplify make more resilient and reduce costs Post the sale of our Dairies business we are now a much simpler business We are driving further efficiencies and cost savings which remains an integral part of doing business at Dairy Crest We have started the implementation of new simplified iT systems which will drastically reduce the number of systems we use We signed an agreement with Fowler Welch Coolchain l td transferring our transport operations to them and will over time build a larger warehousing and logistics operation at our n uneaton site To continue to implement a two year programme to replace core iT systems to deliver a less costly and simpler iT infrastructure more appropriate for our smaller business and realise significant associated cost savings Continue to seek cost reductions and drive operational efficiency improvements across the business To generate cash and reduce risk Dairy Crest increased its cash inflow from operating activities by 11% but debt reduction was hampered by oneoff items Davidstow commissioning final settlement of consideration on the sale of the Dairies business and working capital increases as milk costs rose We now have five wellinvested manufacturing sites and hence capital expenditure has been significantly reduced We have put in place specific financing covering our new functional ingredients plant at Davidstow which has led to a cash inflow of 37.9 million n et debt expected to reduce in 201718 as a result of strong underlying cash generation and reduced oneoff costs Continued sales of properties will provide cash to the business We have a low future capital expenditure requirement For 201718 the sharply higher milk price will impact working capital but milk costs have now started to fall T o ma k e acquisitions where they will generate value o ur focus has been on organic growth and we have not made any acquisitions during the year ended 31 march 2017 We will continue to look for valueenhancing acquisitions which meet our stringent requirements Key performance indicators and performance in the year ended 31 march 2017 8 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
CHAirmAnS STATemenT
This year we have delivered a set of results which demonstrate the underlying robustness of our business.
Adjusted profit before tax has increased by 5% to 60.6 million and profit margins have increased to 16.4%.
This performance has been delivered despite a highly volatile background in global dairy markets.
In the first half of the year milk volumes were strong across the UK and falling milk and cream prices reflected this.
However after two years of pronounced deflation UK and global dairy markets strengthened in the second half of the year as supply fell.
In this environment we increased the price we pay our farmers for milk by 38% between the summer of 2016 and March 2017.
The impact on cream prices was even more pronounced and butter input costs doubled in the second half of 2016.
Despite this background we increased profits and delivered a strong branded performance especially across our butters spreads and oils portfolio.
Furthermore 201617 saw the start of demineralised whey and GOS production at our Davidstow creamery.
Sales of functional ingredients represent an important future growth opportunity for the business.
Developing brands Developing brands is at the heart of our business and 201617 saw good progress across our portfolio.
Cathedral City Clover and Frylight have each benefited from refreshed packaging during the last 12 months and the level of overall marketing activity was increased compared to the prior year.
We aired two new TV advertisements for Cathedral City and Frylight and supported a significant programme of consumerfacing and instore advertising and promotional activity across our key brands.
I am delighted that our success in innovation and product development was recognised this year.
Clover won the spreads category Product of the Year 2017 award in the worlds largest consumer survey award for product innovation.
This is testimony to the work undertaken to remove all artificial ingredients from the recipe.
Furthermore in October 2016 Frylight won the Institute of Grocery and Distribution Health and Wellness award.
Innovation is critical in order to continue to grow our business and 13% of the Groups revenue in 201617 resulted from products that are less than three years old.
This is well ahead of the 10% target we set ourselves.
Valueadded ingredients We have now completed our investment at our cheese creamery at Davidstow Cornwall.
We are producing demineralised whey an added value byproduct of the cheesemaking process.
Demineralised whey is the base ingredient for infant formula and by March 2017 over 80% of production was meeting the exacting standards required for use in infant formula recipes.
Furthermore we have also started manufacturing GOS at
GOS is a prebiotic which is added into premium infant formula to help aid digestion and growth in babies.
Both of these products are being marketed and sold into global infant formula manufacturers by our partner Fonterra.
We also continue to research other potential applications for GOS in both human nutrition and animal feed.
In December 2016 Dairy Crest announced that it had entered into a research partnership with Danisco Animal Nutrition part of DuPont to explore further the potential uses of GOS in poultry and swine.
If successful this work would help to broaden the potential market for GOS beyond infant formula.
Our success has been built on our links to the countryside our dairy heritage and the people in our business.
From this foundation we will grow through a shared passion to create exceptional food loved by every generation.
Dairy Crest remains committed to doing the right thing in the way we conduct ourselves and do business.
Following the sale of the Dairies business we have refined our corporate responsibility agenda into 14 new pledges.
These pledges set demanding targets across areas such as environmental impact employee safety diversity and development delivering to our consumers and contributing to the communities in which we operate.
We will measure ourselves against these pledges and report on progress annually.
The Board is recommending a final dividend of 16.3 pence per share making a full year dividend of 22.5 pence per share.
In line with our progressive dividend policy this is a 1.9% increase on last year.
The dividend is covered 1.6 times by adjusted basic earnings per share.
A key part of our strategy remains to continue to increase dividends each year aiming for a target cover range of 1.5 to 2.5 times.
Summary
Our performance this year is not only a result of the Groups long term strategy but also a reflection of the significant contribution and dedication of all of our employees for which I would like to thank them.
The Board remains confident in the future prospects for Dairy
The business has a strong management team who are delivering against a clear business strategy of building brands adding value driving simplicity generating cash and reducing risk.
Stephen Alexander Chairman 17 May 2017 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 9 Strategic report Adjusted profit before tax up 5% to Cathedral City returns to volume growth in the second half Frylight Clover and Country Life spreadable all grow volume and increase market share Demineralised whey production meets targeted levels of infant formula grade Partnerships with DuPont and others to research GOS usage in animal nutrition trials underway Innovation  proportion of sales from recently launched products now 13% well above target Net debt increased as expected due to completion of Davidstow commissioning and final payment to Mller on sale of Dairies business Proposed final dividend up 1.9% to 16.3 pence
Summary margin improvement despite deflation Dairy Crest has implemented significant changes during the last two years.
We are a much leaner more focused organisation that makes predominantly branded and high valueadded products.
This allows management and the business to focus on those areas that will drive longterm value creation innovation brand building efficiency improvements and cost reduction.
I am particularly pleased that overall margins in the business have improved.
This is despite the difficult input cost environment and the longer than expected commissioning period of the new functional ingredients facility at Davidstow.
The strength of our brands our wellinvested supply chain and the quality of our people all ensure that the Company is well positioned for the future.
This will help us to maintain our strong track record of rewarding shareholders with higher dividends.
We are a major UK buyer of milk and last year we purchased around 500 million litres.
The past year has seen a turning point in dairy prices.
After a prolonged period of deflation dairy commodity prices have experienced strong gains.
Low milk prices had an effect on milk volumes.
They were down in most large milk producing countries across the world.
Consequently milk prices rose.
During the course of the year we have increased the price we pay farmers for milk by 38% to 30 pence per litre.
Since then we have announced a 1 pence per litre reduction from June and a further 1 pence per litre reduction from July.
We pay our farmers a fair competitive price for their milk and our price remains one of the highest in the country.
However these inflationary forces do take time to work their way through to the prices that consumers see in the shops.
In the first nine months of the financial year cheese retail prices fell or remained stable.
Since Christmas however we have seen evidence of prices increasing on shelf.
Butter has been even more affected than cheese.
Cream prices which determine the input costs for butter more than doubled during the year.
Inevitably this has impacted margins in our butters spreads and oils business.
Managing volatility is a challenge for both us and food retailers our principal customers.
For this reason we continue to work with our customers to help to grow our categories through innovation marketing and category merchandising.
Key brands perform robustly Overall revenues from our four key brands were down 6%.
This is in line with our expectations.
Most of this decline was due to the deflationary market place that we experienced for over three quarters of the year.
Key brand volumes were flat across the year.
Volume growth in Frylight Clover and Country Life spreadable was offset by declines in Country Life block butter which we promoted less and Cathedral City.
However as predicted the latter made good progress in the second half of the year with a return to volume growth.
Cheese
IRI data for the 52 weeks ended 25 March 2017 shows that the total cheese market grew by 3% in volume but was unchanged in value terms.
Within this the everyday cheese market grew by 2% in volume but fell by 3% in value a deflation of 5%.
For much of the year there were high levels of cheese stocks in the market.
In order to maintain the brands premium positioning within the category we decided against discounting aggressively.
Consequently Cathedral City slightly underperformed this market growth with volumes down 3% for the year.
However volumes improved in the second half and this positive momentum has continued into 201718.
CHieF exeCUTiVeS reVieW 10 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Brand market Dairy Crest volume growth Dairy Crest value growth Cathedral City Cheese 3% 9%
Butters spreads margarine 1% 9% Country Life Butters spreads margarine 0% 2% Frylight Oils 23% 19%
0% 6% Dairy Crest volume and value sales 12 months to 31 March 2017 vs 12 months to 31 March 2016 During the year we redesigned the pack to emphasise its no artificial ingredients credentials and this was highlighted in well received TV advertising in the fourth quarter.
This advertising has driven increased growth during the final quarter with market share climbing to 15% and the brand will be advertised again in the first quarter of this year.
We were delighted that during the year Frylight received the Institute of Grocery and Distribution IGD Health and Wellness product award.
The quality targets for infant formula grade demineralised whey are rightly demanding.
During the year we have continually improved our product so that by the year end we had met our target of 80% of our demineralised whey being of infant formula grade.
The feedback we have received from customers so far on the quality of our product has been very positive.
In partnership with Fonterra we are building our sales relationships with infant formula producers for both GOS and demineralised whey and expect strong growth in sales of these products during the coming year with the majority of this growth coming in the second half of the year.
Longterm demand for proteins looks robust.
Whey protein concentrate prices have risen strongly in the second half and demineralised whey prices are now starting to firm.
We are well positioned to deliver improved returns in 201718.
An important part of the longterm future for GOS is its potential beyond the infant formula market to extend its use into other areas such as animal and adult nutrition.
The research and development programme for GOS in animals has broadened and during the year we signed an agreement with Danisco Animal Nutrition part of DuPont.
Trials are now underway in this partnership that will provide an extensive level of research into the benefits of GOS in the animal husbandry industry.
The retained business is much more focused following the sale of the Dairies business.
The pace of innovation is and needs to be an important point of difference.
Future growth will be underpinned by innovation.
Our Innovation Centre on the Harper Adams University campus which opened in late 2015 is already helping to drive our ambitious target of 10% of sales each year coming from innovation in the previous three years.
This year helped by the relaunch of Clover with no artificial ingredients we achieved 13% of sales from innovation during the last three years.
This is an industry leading level of innovation.
CHIEF ExECUTIVES REVIEW CONTINUED
Cathedral City remains the nations favourite cheese brand.
It accounts for 54% of total branded everyday cheese sales in the UK and almost three fifths of households bought Cathedral City during the past year.
Earlier in the year we successfully rolled out a refreshed master brand identity for Cathedral City.
The new design simplifies the brand improves visibility on shelf and strengthens our range.
This allows our brand investment to work better across the whole of the growing cheese category.
It was supported by significant investment including a successful new TV advertisement The Rules of Cheese.
We have seen a positive consumer reaction both to the new packaging and the marketing campaign.
Spreads and butters IRI total market data for the 52 weeks ended 25 March 2017 shows that butter volumes grew by 2% but that spreads volumes declined by 7%.
Selling prices for spreads were down very slightly for the year and for butters were up slightly.
However for butter this full year number masks the change from heavy deflation in the first part of the year to price increases of 16% in the last quarter.
Our main spreads brand Clover had a very successful year growing volumes at 1% versus a significant market decline partly driven by increased promotional volumes.
Our other smaller spreads brands Utterly Butterly Vitalite and Willow also performed well and our total volume growth in spreads including Clover was 4% 11 percentage points better than the market.
This means that our overall spreads market share has climbed by 2 percentage points to 27.2%.
With Clover we continued to reinforce the no artificial ingredients positioning through a marketing campaign in the first half of the year and launched new packaging in the second half of the year.
We were pleased that the no artificial ingredients recipe received external recognition as Product of the Year 2017 in the spreads category in the worlds largest consumer survey award for product innovation.
Whilst Country Life overall volumes were flat for the year sales were up 2%.
Country Life spreadable which accounts for 65% of brand sales grew volumes by 6% and was the best performing major branded spreadable product over the year.
However the block product experienced a volume decline as we promoted less following the sharp rises in input costs.
Frylight another exceptional year Frylight our one calorie cooking spray has had another outstanding year.
Volumes grew by 23% and sales by 19% well ahead of market growth of 1% and 2% respectively Kantar data for the 52 weeks ended 26 March 2017.
Frylight has strengthened its lead as the UKs number one oil brand and increased its share of the market for the whole year to 11% with a household penetration rate of 23%.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 11 Strategic report
Innovation continues to drive our business forward.
As well as building on the success of the new Clover product in the year ended 31 March 2017 we brought a new Frylight product to market  avocado spray oil developed a new Frylight cap design to be launched in early launched a new Cathedral City snack bar range relaunched the Cathedral City spreadable range strengthened our dairy free Vitalite range with the launch of a new coconut variant and agreed a partnership with Fowler Welch Coolchain Ltd a logistics specialist to maximise the throughput at our Nuneaton distribution and warehousing site.
A simpler business Dairy Crest is a simple lean and responsive business.
We have five wellinvested manufacturing sites and fewer than 1200 employees.
There are opportunities to further simplify procedures and support structures within the business.
During the year we embarked on a change to our core IT systems which will bring benefits over the next two years.
This will deliver a more appropriate and cost effective IT infrastructure for a business of our scale and is also acting as a catalyst for us to simplify the processes that sit alongside these IT systems.
We continue to drive operational efficiency improvements. production onto one site in 2015.
We are confident that all our sites will contribute towards further improved productivity over the year to 31 March 2018.
Future prospects In the first full year since the transformational sale of our Dairies business we have delivered a robust performance in a tough market.
Our industry leading margins are the result of us driving long term value through innovation brand building investment in a world class supply chain and strong cost control.
Our key brands continue to perform well.
Cathedral City remains the nations favourite cheese and following its brand refresh at the start of the year the good progress and momentum we have seen in the last six months has continued in the new financial year.
Our overall spreads market share has climbed and Frylight had another outstanding year with sales growing 19% well ahead of the market.
The ongoing investment we are putting behind our brands gives me confidence that we can grow market share.
We have continued to make good progress in our demineralised whey operations at Davidstow.
We are now hitting our targeted level of demineralised whey being of infant formula grade.
Developing our sales of demineralised whey and GOS into the highmargin global infant formula market will be a key priority this year.
At the same time we are continuing our research into other potential animal and human applications for GOS.
Looking forward I am excited about the future for Dairy Crest.
The business is well positioned to deliver profitable sustainable growth and stronger cash generation underpinning our commitment to growing our dividends and reducing debt.
17 May 2017 12 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
FinAnCiAl reVieW
Product group prot Cash generated from used in operations m Prot on continuing operations before exceptional items and amortisation of acquired intangibles Butters spreads and oils Cheese and functional ingredients overview This year we have delivered a set of results which demonstrate the underlying robustness of our business.
Revenue is lower than last year despite flat volumes reflecting the deflationary environment that existed for much of the last two years.
However milk and butter input costs rose significantly as the year progressed.
Despite this highly volatile background we improved profit margins.
Continuing operations r evenue We continue to provide product group analysis consistent with prior years to assist the users of the financial statements although the Group operated as one segment throughout 2017.
Change
Change % Cheese and functional ingredients 254.8 263.7 8.9 3.4 Butters spreads and oils 150.7 152.6 1.9 1.2 Continuing operations 416.6 422.3 5.7 1.3 Revenue decreased by 1.3% to 416.6 million although revenue in the second half of the year was 3.7% ahead of the same period last year.
Despite sales volumes across our four key brands remaining broadly flat the Group faced price deflation in the first half which only partially reversed in the second half of the year.
Cheese and whey revenue fell by 8.9 million 3.4% with decreased sales volumes and prices.
Revenue in butters spreads and oils fell by 1.9 million 1.2% as price deflation across spreads and butter in the first half of the year more than offset the second half recovery and the strong value and volume growth in Frylight.
Other revenue comprised warehousing and distribution services provided to third parties.
Profit on continuing operations
Change % Cheese and functional ingredients 42.8 36.4 6.4 17.6 Butters spreads and oils 25.5 29.6 4.1 13.9 Total product group profit 68.3 66.0 2.3 3.5 Acquired intangible amortisation 0.4 0.4 Group profit on continuing operations preexceptional items 67.9 65.6 2.3 3.5 Overall total product group profit before interest acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items increased by 2.3 million to 68.3 million and the profit margin increased to 16.4% 2016 15.6%.
This margin is after charging all central corporate costs and includes 3.0 million profit 2016 3.6 million on the sale of closed depots that were not disposed of as part of the sale of the Dairies business in 2015 to Muller UK and Ireland Group LLP Mller.
These depot sales are expected to continue next year but will then cease.
Their treatment as operating income is consistent with the treatment in previous years of the related closure costs.
Future sales of exmanufacturing sites such as Fenstanton Cambridgeshire and Crudgington Shropshire will be classified as exceptional consistent with the historic treatment of the related closure costs.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 13 Strategic report Cheese and functional ingredients product group profits increased by 17.6% and the margin increased to 16.8% 2016 13.8%.
This is despite lower revenue which reflected lower selling prices during the year.
The profit and margin benefited from the reduction in milk costs in 201516 that resulted in lower cost of sales in 201617 due to the 12 month average cheese maturation cycle.
Milk costs increased significantly in the second half of the year and these costs will lead to higher cost of sales in 201718.
Butters spreads and oils product group profits at 25.5 million 2016 29.6 million were 3.5 million lower than 2016 with profit margins of 16.9% 2016 19.4% reflecting the competitive butters and spreads market and significantly higher butter input costs.
Pretax exceptional charges from continuing operations increased to 19.1 million 2016 11.3 million.
The Group incurred 19.0 million of exceptional costs in relation to the building and commissioning of the demineralised whey and GOS facilities at the Davidstow creamery in Cornwall 2016 16.2 million.
The principal elements of spend were duplicate running costs stock writeoffs commissioning expenses and project management.
In addition there was an exceptional charge of 2.3 million 2016 nil relating to the disposal costs of closed manufacturing sites at Totnes Fenstanton and
The treatment of this charge as an exceptional item is consistent with the treatment of closure costs in prior years.
These costs have been partly offset by the release of 2.2 million of an exceptional provision in relation to the settlement of historic claims between the Group Farmright Limited and Quadra Foods Limited at 1.0 million which was lower than the creditor balance held of 3.2 million.
In 2016 an exceptional provision of 1.8 million was created for dilapidation costs for leased properties in the retained business crystallised by the sale of the Dairies business and provisions relating to the closure of the Crudgington site totalling 0.7 million were released.
The Group also realised a gain in 2016 of 6.0 million on its investment in Promovita Ingredients Limited at the point that it acquired 100% control in December 2015.
Finance costs Finance costs of 7.7 million reduced by 0.6 million in the year.
This reflected the benefit from refinancing the 80 million of loan notes that matured in April 2016 with loan notes issued in March 2016 at a lower interest rate.
This was offset by a 0.7 million reduction in interest capitalised on the investment at Davidstow and increased interest costs on borrowings under the revolving credit facility as the total level of borrowings increased.
The interest cost will increase next year as the capitalisation of interest on the investment at Davidstow will cease.
Capitalised interest costs in the year amounted to 3.1 million 2016 3.8 million.
Interest cover excluding pension interest calculated on total product group profit was 9.0 times 2016 8.1 times.
Other finance expenses which comprise the net expected return on pension scheme assets after deducting the interest cost on the defined benefit obligation increased slightly to 0.8 million 2016 0.6 million.
These costs are dependent upon the pension scheme position at 31 March each year and are volatile being subject to market fluctuations.
We therefore exclude this item from headline adjusted profit before tax.
Profit before tax  continuing operations
Change % Total product group profit 68.3 66.0 2.3 3.5 Finance costs 7.7 8.3 0.6 7.2 Adjusted profit before tax 60.6 57.7 2.9 5.0 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 0.4 0.4 exceptional items 19.1 11.3 7.8 o ther finance expenses pensions 0.8 0.6 0.2 r eported profit before tax continuing operations 40.3 45.4 5.1 11.2 Adjusted profit before tax before exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and pension interest increased by 5.0% to 60.6 million.
This is managements key Group profit measure because it excludes exceptional items and therefore gives a better indication of underlying performance.
Reported profit before tax of 40.3 million represents a 5.1 million 11.2% decrease from 2016 predominantly due to the increase in exceptional items.
Taxation
The Groups effective preexceptional tax rate on continuing operations was 18.0% 2016 17.5%.
The effective tax rate is slightly below the headline rate of UK corporate tax as we continue to sell a small number of properties the profits on which are offset by brought forward capital losses or roll over relief.
The Groups adjusted basic earnings per share from continuing operations increased by 3.2% to 35.6 pence 2016 34.5 pence as a result of the increase in adjusted profit before tax and the lower tax charge.
Basic earnings per share from continuing operations which includes the impact of exceptional items pension interest expense and the amortisation of acquired intangibles amounted to 23.7 pence 2016 27.9 pence.
Discontinued operations The posttax profit on discontinued operations totalled 5.2 million.
A gain of 1.4 million relates to the disposal of the Dairies business which completed in 201516.
This gain includes additional costs of 2.1 million resulting from a reassessment of liabilities at the date of disposal the final consideration reduction of 2.5 million paid back to Mller following determination by an independent expert and a tax credit on these items of 6.0 million.
There is a discontinued credit of 3.8 million that relates to the release of tax provisions held in relation to the St Hubert business that was sold in August 2012.
These provisions are no longer required.
In 2016 the loss from discontinued operations was 151.5 million.
This reflected operating losses in the nine months to December 2015 of 33.3 million post tax 26.4 million post tax exceptional items totalling 14.4 million as the operations to be sold were carved out of the Dairy Crest Group and site restructuring continued in the Dairies business and a posttax loss on disposal of 110.7 million.
Full details of discontinued operations are set out in the notes to the financial statements.
Group result for the year The reported Group profit for the year from continuing operations was 33.1 million 2016 38.5 million.
The profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders was 38.3 million 2016 113.0 million loss.
14 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
We remain committed to a progressive dividend policy and have continued to deliver against that policy by increasing our proposed final dividend by 1.9%.
The proposed final dividend of 16.3 pence per share represents an increase of 0.3 pence per share.
Together with the interim dividend of 6.2 pence per share 2016 6.1 pence per share the total dividend for the year is 22.5 pence per share 2016 22.1 pence per share.
The final dividend will be paid on 11 August 2017 to shareholders on the register on 7 July 2017.
Dividend cover of 1.6 times is within the Boards target range of 1.5 to 2.5 times 2016 1.6 times.
Pensions
During the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group paid 13.1 million cash contributions into the closed defined benefit pension scheme 2016 20.8 million including an 8.3 million prepayment of future agreed cash contributions in relation to lease payments on three properties owned by the pension scheme.
The reported deficit under IAS 19 at 31 March 2017 was 109.6 million an increase of 67.1 million from March 2016.
The principal reason for the increase was falling corporate bond yields which are the reference point for the discount rate used to value scheme liabilities.
The March 2016 actuarial valuation and corresponding schedule of contributions has yet to be finalised.
This valuation will determine future cash contributions and will replace the existing funding plan which has cash contributions for 201718 of 17.2 million.
We continue to manage pension scheme liabilities and during the year a Flexible Retirement Option programme was undertaken resulting in 18.8 million of liabilities being permanently removed from the scheme.
Cash flow The business generates strong operating cash flows.
However the year saw a number of oneoff items in the form of final payments associated with the sale of the Dairies business and high levels of exceptional commissioning costs at Davidstow.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 cash generated from operations was 32.8 million 2016 31.3 million.
Operating cash flow was impacted by a 6.1 million increase in working capital 2016 14.0 million reduction.
This reflected higher stocks of demineralised whey and lower levels of creditors.
Exceptional cash costs of 25.6 million 2016 17.6 million relate principally to the commissioning of the demineralised whey and GOS plants at Davidstow.
This commissioning is now substantially complete.
Cash interest payments amounted to 12.2 million 2016 12.8 million reflecting lower costs on the Groups loan notes following the maturity of notes in April 2016.
Capital expenditure of 25.6 million represents a 41.2 million 62% reduction from last years 66.8 million.
This reflects the completion of the projects at
Capital expenditure next year is expected to be similar to this year.
Proceeds from depot disposals were 4.5 million 2016 5.4 million.
In addition the Group received 37.9 million from the sale of some of the assets at Davidstow relating to GOS and demineralised whey which were subsequently leased back on operating lease terms.
During the year the Group repaid a total of 28.4 million to Mller including 2.5 million following an independent experts determination of final adjustments to the consideration.
In 2016 the sale of our Dairies business resulted in initial cash proceeds of 54.5 million  comprising headline proceeds of 80.0 million less 15.0 million for the cost of the undertaking in lieu 7.5 million of property sales from which the Group had already received the cash proceeds and 3.0 million in relation to presale capital expenditure in the Dairies business
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
Against this the Group paid 5.5 million in related fees reflecting the extended review undertaken by the UK Competition and Markets Authority CMA.
The Group also paid 6 million for the outstanding 50% of the share capital of Promovita Ingredients Limited in 201516.
Overall the final payments to Mller the commissioning costs at Davidstow and the adverse movement in working capital offset by the sale and leaseback at Davidstow have resulted in a 20.8 million increase in net debt during the year 2016 30.3 million increase to 249.8 million 2016 229.0 million.
However looking ahead strong underlying cash generation will translate into lower levels of borrowing as these oneoff factors fall away  the Dairies business is sold Davidstow commissioning is complete and milk input costs are set to reduce in June 2017.
We remain committed to reducing net debtEBITDA to below 2.0 times.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 15 Strategic report Borrowing facilities Total borrowing facilities comprise 380 million Sterling equivalent.
The Group has a five year multicurrency revolving credit facility for 240 million which reduces by 80 million in October 2018.
At 31 March 2017 the Group had a swapped Sterling equivalent of 140 million of loan notes outstanding maturing between 2017 and 2026.
Post balance sheet events On 4 April 2017 the Group repaid 10.7 million 9.2 million Sterling equivalent and 2.8 million of 2007 fixed coupon loan notes on their maturity.
Treasury policies The Group operates a centralised treasury function which controls cash management and borrowings and the Groups financial risks.
The main treasury risks faced by the Group are liquidity interest rates and foreign currency.
The Group only uses derivatives to manage its foreign currency and interest rate risks arising from underlying business and financing activities.
Transactions of a speculative nature are prohibited.
The Groups treasury activities are governed by policies approved and monitored by the Board.
Tom Atherton Group Finance Director 17 May 2017
16 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 PrinCiPAl riSKS AnD UnCerTAinTieS We manage risk to help us achieve our strategic objectives and protect our reputation.
The Group faces a number of risks which should they materialise could affect our ability to achieve our strategic objectives.
The Board has overall responsibility for ensuring the effective management of risk across the Group.
It is supported by the Audit Committee which reviews the effectiveness of the Groups risk management processes and internal controls.
Responsibility for the daytoday management of risk is delegated to the Executive Committee which reviews the business performance and the risks and threats being managed at each of its meetings.
Executive Committee meeting minutes are routinely reviewed by the Board.
All functions of the Group are represented at Executive Committee enabling the Committee to manage the Groups risks on an ongoing basis. enables the delivery of longterm success.
It determines the nature and extent of significant risks the Company assumes to achieve its strategic objectives.
The
Directors have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks which the Company faces including those that would threaten the business model future performance solvency or liquidity. prepare a risk register for its area of accountability.
Functional risk registers are reviewed by the Executive Committee and from them the Group risk register is compiled.
It is formally reviewed by the Board when the Group sets its budget in
The Group Internal Audit function reviews the Group risk register at the start of each year.
It is a key component of the compilation of its annual audit plan.
All Group Internal Audit function reports are provided to the Executive and Audit
The Audit Committee reviews the Groups Internal Audits reports and progress against its work plan.
The Audit Committee reports to the Board after each meeting.
Group Internal Audit provides independent assurance over the management and mitigation mechanisms.
This process explicitly recognises the relationship between Group Internal Audit and risk management.
The Audit Committee is satisfied that the processes are adequate and appropriate.
Further details of the Groups approach to risk management and internal control are set out in the Corporate Governance report at pages 32 to 33. and on page 17.
Although the Group has an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group additional risks which are not presently known to management could also have an adverse effect on the Group.
The risks and uncertainties referred to in this Annual Report are not intended to be an exhaustive analysis of all risks facing the Group.
Commercial risks r educed profitability r isk area and potential impact We operate in competitive markets.
If we fail adequately to control our cost base to compete effectively or are subject to higher input prices that cannot be recovered by raising selling prices without losing volumes we could lose sales and profits.
We set ourselves the target of continually reducing our cost base and are able to invest in our supply chain to help achieve this.
Despite challenging trading conditions we continue to invest in marketing our key brands.
Our innovation programme continues to generate new products that reinforce our appeal to customers.
We recognise the importance of strong customer relationships and the executive team plays an active part in maintaining and developing these.
They are also involved in major customer negotiations.
We conduct customer surveys to benchmark our performance and we continuously monitor the service and quality levels provided to our customers and consumers and have procedures in place to react quickly to any issues.
Our commitment to corporate responsibility is an important part of our overall proposition to some customers.
Consumers could move away from dairy products for economic health ethical or other reasons leading to lower sales and profits.
Consumers are at the heart of our business and we regularly monitor consumer trends.
We continue to promote the health benefits provided by dairy products and develop healthier products.
We also continue to maintain our focus on developing a compelling new product development pipeline enabling us to react to consumer trends for example with more environmentallyfriendly packaging and healthier variants of our key brands.
We have a direct involvement with government to understand and influence future legislation that could affect future consumer demand.
We operate in markets in which our competitors are continually innovating in order to maintain customer and consumer interest in their products and to attract customer and consumer interest for new products.
If we do not successfully innovate we may lose customers and consumers and we may fail to attract new customers and consumers.
That would result in fewer sales loss of profit and failure to meet growth targets.
We have a strong new product development and innovation team who are based at our Innovation Centre on the Harper Adams University campus.
That team works closely with Harper Adams University leveraging the research and other expertise of the University including taking students on secondment into our innovation team.
The innovation teams brief includes enhancing the appeal of existing products driving product and manufacturing efficiencies and improvements and developing new exciting products and variants of existing products.
Continued investment in innovation enables our business to maintain or outstrip innovation in the rest of the market.
Focusing an element of senior management remuneration on innovation through the use of a balanced scorecard including an innovation target for the Groups share based longterm incentive plan helps to ensure continued focus on and drive behind innovation as does the publicly adopted target of achieving 10% of revenue from products developed in the last three years.
Volatile milk and nonmilk costs vegetable oils diesel electricity gas and packaging could reduce margins unless we can manage cost risk find other cost efficiencies elsewhere or increase selling prices.
Milk prices could remain volatile driven by global and European commodity market pressures as well as local market and environmental factors.
Key input cost trends are continually monitored by our experienced procurement team and are regularly reviewed by the Executive Committee.
Milk and vegetable oil are critical inputs for the Group.
Milk price negotiations are conducted following careful review with the Executive Committee which provides the procurement team with a specific mandate.
The use of a balancing contract with direct milk suppliers introduced in the first quarter of the financial year enables better balancing of milk supply and demand thereby reducing the risk of milk oversupply resulting in lower recoveries.
The balancing contract helps to reduce our exposure to lower value commodity markets thereby supporting the Groups strategy of focusing on branded and added value markets.
Vegetable oil is reviewed monthly by a risk committee which monitors and hedges forward vegetable oil purchases as appropriate.
We seek to absorb shortterm cost movements through supply chain efficiencies.
Our procurement and commercial teams have clear lines of communication between them to ensure customers are kept aware of changes to our cost base and requests for price increases can be fully justified.
The dynamics of new categories may not be in line with our expectations resulting in lower than anticipated margins lower than anticipated volumes longer than anticipated payback on investment and higher than expected costs to access markets.
We work with commercial partners who are already established in new categories and markets where the Group is not already operating or present.
Contractual relationships with these established commercial partners for the sale and distribution of products in new categories and markets enable the Group to have certainty over minimum levels of returns and known costs of accessing new markets.
Without milk we would not have a business.
Restricted milk supply could be caused by economic factors weather fuel availability or an epidemic which affects dairy cows.
This could lead to lower sales and profits.
Consumer confidence in dairy products could also be adversely affected.
We invest significant resources in maintaining strong relationships with our milk suppliers by attending forums and discussing current issues and pressures that affect both the farms and our business.
Our milk comes directly from farms on contracts that include a notice period of between three months and one year.
Our experienced milk procurement team understand milk production and are alert to changes in supply.
We aim to pay a fair market related milk price and closely monitor the milk price we pay to suppliers.
Significant effort is expended by our team of dedicated Farm Business Managers to make the Group an attractive purchaser of milk for our suppliers including working closely with our direct supplying farmers providing valuable support to them with their businesses.
We have contingency plans established for major incidents and work closely with DEFRA and industry bodies to ensure these are appropriate.
These plans are regularly tested and reviewed by the Executive Committee.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 17 Strategic report Failure of a key supplier r isk area and potential impact We are dependent on key suppliers and could lose sales and face financial penalties from customers if a suppliers failure leaves us unable to supply.
Failure of key information technology suppliers could adversely affect our financial systems.
Our procurement team regularly monitors suppliers ability to supply and puts in place alternative arrangements including dual purchasing if appropriate.
We have taken specific actions to reduce our dependency on information technology suppliers.
Disruption to production r isk area and potential impact An accident a fire product contamination the failure of equipment or systems a deliberate malicious act or industrial action could disrupt production affect food safety cause injury andor cause reputational damage with adverse consequences.
We are also reliant on information technology and are exposed to losses in the event that systems fail.
Plans are maintained to respond quickly to incidents and minimise any impact to the Group.
Our business is committed to the health and safety of all our employees and maintains systems aimed at ensuring everyone is able to work safely.
All of our manufacturing sites have a trained engineering resource are supported by our major equipment suppliers and hold appropriate stocks of spare parts.
They also all have fire protection systems and regular fire drills.
Our
Appropriate safeguards such as firewalls are in place to thwart cyber attack and the robustness of those safeguards is regularly and routinely tested as part of our cyber security programme.
We are also advised by a reputable insurance broker and maintain insurance cover for public and product liability product recall and property damage and business interruption risks with reputable insurers.
We maintain strong relations and communication with staff organisations and trade unions including at National Officer level.
Established grievance and disciplinary procedures are well embedded in the business and compliance with them is managed through a strong Employee Relations function.
Pay benchmarking processes and centrally controlled pay negotiations are in place to ensure pay remains competitive against the market and in line with the Groups stated remuneration aims.
Regular employee engagement surveys enable us to maintain a good ongoing understanding of staff satisfaction and to identify emerging issues or trends and understand the effectiveness of actions undertaken to manage them.
To remain competitive we periodically undertake major transformational projects following strategic reviews or have to undertake major projects or works in response to the changing condition of our infrastructure.
Successful execution of these projects is often key to delivering strategic objectives.
At the same time we have to ensure that major projects do not divert from the ongoing daytoday delivery of products and services to our customers.
We have a good track record of managing projects and use experienced and appropriately skilled senior managers to lead these.
Supervisory governance structures are also put in place to help successful delivery.
We are aware that too much change concentrated in too short a timescale can be detrimental and manage this by ensuring key project resource is full time with appropriate backfilling and use of third parties.
Product quality r isk area and potential impact Failure to maintain product quality could lead to reputational damage and loss of sales and profits.
As we start to manufacture ingredients for infant formula this risk could increase.
We have wellestablished supply chains and a close working relationship with our milk suppliers.
We have an independent quality team including experienced cheese graders.
Customer and consumer complaints are monitored and acted upon.
Where possible we have liability caps in our contracts and using the advice of a reputable insurance broker we have product recall liability insurance in place with reputable insurers.
Our contractual relationship with Fonterra who sell the infant formula ingredients we produce allows us to utilise its experience in this field.
If we dont meet stringent infant formula specifications for added value ingredients products we will not be able to sell those products for their intended use.
That could lead to lower than anticipated sales volumes of infant formula grade products associated with which would be lower than anticipated profits customer confidence may also be eroded as a result.
Implementation of and strict adherence to manufacturing procedures designed to ensure product meets specification.
Assurance over adherence to those procedures is provided by internal technical audit customer audit and external expert audit.
Our contractual relationship with Fonterra who sell the infant formula ingredients we produce allows us to utilise its experience in producing product which conforms to the required specification.
Focus on continual enhancement of site team capabilities through technical training and behavioural programmes coupled with ensuring appropriately experienced and skilled people are recruited into and retained in the team.
We have a short milk supply chain with good traceability and strict controls to ensure quality.
Farm audits ensure supplier compliance with quality requirements.
People risks r ecruitment and retention r isk area and potential impact We need to attract and retain high quality employees to provide customers and consumers with safe high quality products and services.
We carry out rigorous selection procedures and benchmark pay and benefits to ensure we can attract and retain the best people.
We have a widely applied bonus scheme and a range of other incentives to reward good performance.
Our share based longterm incentive plan aligns the interest of management to shareholders and helps to retain key senior employees.
We use a performance review and talent management scheme to identify and develop our own people.
We undertake regular surveys to monitor our relationship with our employees and their engagement communicate with them regularly and encourage them to ask questions.
Financial risks Pension scheme r isk area and potential impact Despite the action we have taken to reduce the risks associated with our pension scheme including closing the scheme to future accrual in 2010 and buying insurance to meet the liabilities associated with many of our retired members in 2008 and 2009 the deficit could continue to increase and we may then have to increase our contributions.
The risk of a need for higher cash contributions to the scheme over a longer than anticipated period may be increased by a persisting low gilt yield environment.
We continue to work closely with the Trustee of the Pension Fund to improve the Funds financial position at an acceptable cash cost to the business.
We have reduced the Funds exposure to equities and other higherrisk asset classes and aim to do so further.
The strength of the Companys covenant and ability to continue to fund contributions has been improved by the sale of the Dairies business.
Compliance with laws r isk area and potential impact Our sector is subject to a number of complex statutory requirements.
There is a risk of fines or lawsuits and reputational damage if we fail to comply.
We have a strong inhouse legal function supported by external advisers.
We have undertaken Groupwide training in respect of competition law and actively monitor and adjust to ongoing legal and regulatory changes.
We have Business Conduct and Data Protection Policies and programmes designed to ensure that all relevant employees understand what is and is not permissible under the Bribery and Data Protection Acts.
Food safety and product specification regulations affecting the UK and other jurisdictions where products are sold impact the products that we manufacture.
Regulatory authorities regularly enact changes to food safety and product specification legislation.
Changes to legislation could result in restrictions on the movement and sale of the Groups products and raw materials between territories or require changes to the production processes or specification of our products.
We have a strong technical function which routinely monitors planned and implemented changes to food and ingredients legislation in the UK and other relevant jurisdictions which might necessitate changes to our production processes or product specifications.
Our product development function works in tandem with the technical function and key supplier partners and customers to respond to anticipated or implemented legislative changes.
The Group has invested in its technical and product development functions and has its technical and innovation centre at Harper Adams University with which we have a cooperation agreement providing access to state of the art academic and technical expertise.
We are a member of recognised industry bodies who represent our interests along with others in the food and dairy industries and advise and lobby on our behalf.
We have close links with UK government and government representatives to help represent our interests in jurisdictions outside the UK together with commercial partners already established in other jurisdictions.
18 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Dairy Crest produces and markets Cathedral City the UKs leading cheese brand and the premium Davidstow cheddar brand.
Our worldclass supply chain starts with milk collected from around 360 farmers in the dairy heartlands of Cornwall and Devon.
This top quality milk is made into cheddar cheese at our highlyautomated creamery in Davidstow
The cheese then matures for around a year at our purposebuilt Nuneaton facility before being cut packed and distributed.
We have a second packing site in Frome Somerset for more complex and innovative packaging.
Whey is a byproduct of the cheese making process.
Our
Additionally we produce GOS a lactose based prebiotic which is also an ingredient for infant formula but has potential applications in other human life stages as well as in animal husbandry.
Market background 201617 was a turning point in the UK dairy market.
Having fallen for three years prices paid to farmers for milk started to rise in the summer and then rose quickly through the autumn and winter before stabilising in the spring.
The price we pay to farmers for the milk we use to make cheese rose from a low of 21.7p per litre in July to 30p per litre in February although in April 2017 we did announce a 1p reduction from 1 June and another 1p reduction from 1 July.
The maturation process means we sell cheese made with milk purchased around a year before the sale takes place.
Therefore the effect of these higher milk prices will not be seen in the profit and loss account until later in 201718 although the effect was seen in higher working capital balances for cheese at 201617 year end.
Meanwhile yearonyear cheese retail prices were falling in 201617 and only just started rising on a quarteronquarter basis in January.
Market cheese volumes have been reasonably robust during the year rising by 2% with little change throughout the year.
Global whey prices have also started to rise over the last six months.
Cathedral City A true market leader It is the UKs 18th largest grocery brand bigger than all other competitor cheddar brands combined and accounts for 54% of all branded everyday cheese sold by UK retailers.
For much of the year there were high levels of cheese stocks across the market driven by high milk supply in the preceding year.
In order to maintain the brands premium positioning within million 201617 201516 Revenue 254.8 263.7 Product group profit 42.8 36.4 Margin % 16.8 13.8 Others 46% 54% Dairy Crest Share of retail branded everyday cheese Source IRI 52 weeks ended 25 March 2017 the category we decided not to discount too aggressively.
Consequently Cathedral City slightly underperformed the market and volumes were down 3% for the year.
However volumes improved in the second half and we expect this performance to continue during 201718.
During the early part of the year we successfully rolled out a new master brand identity for Cathedral City.
The new design simplifies the brand improves visibility on shelf and strengthens our range.
This allows our brand investment to work better across the whole of the growing cheese category.
It was supported by significant investment including a successful new TV advertisement The Rules of Cheese.
We have seen a positive consumer reaction both to the new packaging and the marketing campaign.
Innovation remains at the heart of what we do and 201617 saw the relaunch of Cathedral City spreadable in three flavours Mature Extra Mature and Garlic and Herb.
We have launched a new flavour Lighter Mature and towards the end of the year our new snack bar was launched in front of store.
This is an important development for the longterm expansion of the brand into the onthego food section.
Innovation will remain key to our future growth.
A worldclass supply chain Our farmers play a vital role in our worldclass cheese supply chain with 100% of the milk we buy coming direct from around 360 farmers in the South West of England.
We pride ourselves on the close working relationship with our farmers through both our Farm Business Team and Dairy Crest Direct DCD the independently elected body which represents Dairy Crest farmers.
Thanks to our Davidstow Farm Standards all milk supplied to us meets the strict international standards for the production of infant formula and in 201617 we have further developed and enhanced our Davidstow farm audits.
New infant formula ingredients come on stream During the year we completed our investment at the Davidstow creamery in Cornwall to make demineralised whey and GOS.
The quality targets for infant formula grade demineralised whey are demanding.
We have been continually improving the quality of our product so that by the year end we had met our target of more than 80% of our whey being of infant formula grade.
In partnership with Fonterra we are building our sales relationships with infant formula producers in both GOS and demineralised whey and expect strong growth in sales of these products during the coming year.
These added value products give Dairy Crest access to new sales channels in fast growing global markets.
Cheese and functional ingredients Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 19 Strategic report Cathedral City is the UKs 18th largest grocery brand bigger than all other competitor cheddar brands combined and accounts for 54% of all branded everyday cheese sold by UK retailers.
Potentially exciting new applications for GOS We are investigating some potential further applications for GOS.
Promovita is the new brand name of our GOS for use in food applications.
In animal nutrition where we use the brand name in the animal husbandry industry.
During the year we signed an agreement with Danisco Animal Nutrition part of DuPont which will provide an extensive level of research into the benefits of GOS.
A business with huge potential Our cheese and functional ingredients business has state of the art facilities strong brands with marketleading positions and opportunities within new and exciting markets.
It remains well placed to generate attractive growth in the future.
GROWING
20 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 PERFORMANCE CONTINUED Share of retail butter and spreads market by value Source IRI 52 weeks ended 25 March 2017 Dairy Crest Unilever 17% Arla 34%
19% Others 16% 14% Dairy Crest manufactures a number of leading butters spreads and oil brands in the UK.
The key brands are Country Life butter Clover spread and Frylight spray oil.
Our secondary spreads brands are Vitalite Utterly Butterly and Willow.
All the butter and spreads brands are produced at a single facility in Kirkby Merseyside whilst Frylight is manufactured at our facility in erith Kent.
Butters and spreads market remains challenging The butters and spreads market has continued to see overall volume decline but price inflation during the second half resulted in the market reporting some value growth.
Within the category the longterm trend of butter gaining volume share was maintained and butter volumes were up 2% whilst spreads volumes declined 7%.
However during the second half of the year there was considerable inflation in butter prices and this has widened the price gap between the two categories.
Partly as a result butter volumes fell by 5% in the final quarter and spreads volume decline slowed to 5%.
Dairy Crest gaining share Clover is well placed to meet consumer needs within the changing market.
Over the past eighteen months we have relaunched and advertised Clover with no artificial ingredients positioning it as a dairy spread made with buttermilk.
The improved Clover original recipe was introduced in late 2015 and Clover lighter is due to be reformulated this year.
This positioning has been further reinforced by the launch of new packaging in late 2016 and an extensive marketing campaign which has resulted in Clover gaining another 1.1 percentage points of share during the year.
In recognition of our work in launching the improved recipe Clover won the spreads category Product of the Year 2017 award in the worlds largest consumer survey award for product innovation.
Our other spreads brands have all performed well and together Dairy Crest spreads have increased share by 2.2 percentage points.
Total spreads volumes are up 4% and Clover volumes are up 1% in a market that has declined by 7% a fantastic performance.
During the year we also launched a new Vitalite coconut variant which contributes to our share of the growing dairy free market.
Country Life has performed well against a backdrop of high input cost inflation.
The British themed packaging introduced last year resonates well with consumers and our new spreadable formulation has helped that product grow volumes by 6% to become the fastest growing major spreadable brand.
Managing this inflation and volatility resulted in us reducing the amount of block butter promotions during the second half and has led to some share loss in this sector.
Overall Country Life volumes were flat and the higher input prices for butter have had a negative impact on margins for the business.
Frylight another strong year Frylight has been a phenomenal success ever since Dairy Crest acquired the brand in 2011 and last year was no different.
During the year it was successfully relaunched with a new packaging design which emphasises Frylights no artificial ingredients credentials.
This was supported by a new TV advertising campaign across the important fourth quarter period which encompasses both the start of the New Year and Pancake
Sales during the campaign and around Pancake Day both increased by over 25%.
Innovation also continued with a new avocado variant launched early in 2017.
This follows on from the launch of a coconut variant last year which has already become our third biggest selling line.
All this has resulted in volume growth of 23% and a penetration rate of 23% of UK households.
This year has already seen the launch of the new cap design and the business is also exploring export opportunities in Europe to support its mediumterm growth ambitions.
We are also delighted that Frylight has been singled out by the industry winning the Institute of Grocery and Distribution IGD Health and Wellness product award in October 2016.
Simplified supply chain generating cash All our butters and spreads manufacturing has been consolidated on one site at Kirkby for the last two years.
We are well positioned to continue driving efficiency and to further lower manufacturing costs.
The simplified supply chain combined with improvements in brand performance will enable continued investment into this highmargin category and underpin ongoing cash generation.
All our butter and spreads manufacturing has been consolidated on one site at Kirkby for the last two years.
We are well positioned to continue driving efficiency and to lower manufacturing costs further.
Revenue 150.7 152.6 Product group profit 25.5 29.6 Margin % 16.9 19.4 Butters spreads and oils Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 21 Strategic report
22 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 2017 marks the 10th anniversary of our CR strategy.
During this time we have enjoyed a number of CR achievements and awards this strong heritage sets us up well for future success.
In the last year we have reviewed our objectives and how we will approach current and emerging issues.
An important change following this review was the simplification of our pledges and the introduction of four strategic pillars Climate Colleagues Consumers and Community which are championed by our Executive Committee this means that the spirit and intent of the pledges within the pillars are more alive than ever before.
In this section we report on what we have achieved in the first year of our five year CR programme.
We will describe areas of focus in our Climate pillar including our engagement with our A successful approach to corporate responsibility is an essential part of securing a sustainable business which thrives both today and in the future.
Dairy Crests Corporate Responsibility CR strategy is designed to cover our business activities and is reflected in our new four strategic pillars of Climate Colleagues Consumers and Community.
Corporate responsibility Greenhouse Gas r eport 201617 In line with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 our greenhouse gas GHG emissions are quantified below.
201617 201516 Scope 1 11438 79050 tonnes CO Scope 2 27581 57256 tonnes CO t otal scope 1and2 39019 136306 tonnes CO intensity ratio 64.40 81.37 kg CO e per tonne throughput Emissions from Biomass fuel 26102 22033 tonnes CO We follow the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard to calculate emissions from the combustion of fuels Scope 1 and from purchased electricity heat steam and cooling Scope 2.
Carbon emission factors are used to convert each activity that gives rise to GHG emissions to a carbon dioxide equivalent CO e using the latest UK Government conversion factors for company reporting.
The GHG data reported below relates to emissions from activities in the operational control of Dairy Crest Group plc from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 consistent with our financial reporting period. and distribution of intermediate and finished products.
Road fuel used in company cars operated by Dairy Crest for business travel is also included.
Minor losses of refrigerants used in cooling equipment have been converted to tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent and are included for completeness. manufacturing distribution and in offices.
We employ a per tonne of throughput denominator as the most effective measure of relative performance.
This measure is consistent with our internal target setting process and how we communicate relative performance.
Consistent with the GHG Protocol emissions from biologically sequestered carbon are reported separately from the other Scopes.
These comprise emissions from combustion of biomass fuel at our creamery in Davidstow that significantly reduce Scope 1 emissions from fossil fuels.
Emissions from combustion of biomass fuels are not included in the emissions intensity ratio reported above.
Scope 1 and 2 emissions reduced in 201617 by 71% compared to the previous year driven by the changes summarised in the chart below.
Divestment and outsourcing full year effect of the divestment of the Dairies business on 26 December 2015 reducing Scope 1 emissions fuels used in processing sites and depots and road fuel used for distribution and business travel and Scope 2 emissions electricity used in manufacturing sites and depots compared to April  December in this reporting year outsourcing of primary transport for distribution of finished products to Fowler Welch on the 5 June 2016 reducing Scope 1 emissions from HGV road fuel and refrigeration for the remainder of this reporting year o perational changes at manufacturing sites the biomass boilers at Davidstow returned to high levels of utilisation experienced in previous years providing around 80% of the heat to the creamery and reducing Scope 1 emissions from the use of fossil fuels.
In 201617 onsite renewable energy represented 41% of total energy 63% of fuel used by manufacturing sites.
The overall effect of the changes described above on the emissions intensity metric was a yearonyear decrease of 21%.
Divestment of Dairies
Biomass utilisation
Grid factor farmers and our progress on CO and waste reduction.
For our Colleagues pillar we have improved our industry leading health and safety performance and the wellbeing programmes for our employees.
Our commitments to health and nutrition contained in our Consumers pillar are supported by growth in Frylight volumes and additional Cathedral City Lighter product formats.
Our extensive research programmes continue including the exciting area of animal health benefits from functional ingredients such as GOS.
Finally in delivering our Community pillar we continue to support our local communities.
We have been very busy working with The Princes Countryside Fund Macmillan Cancer Support and Crisis at Christmas and promoted employee volunteering days.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 23 Strategic report r esponsible stewardship on farm Our wellestablished farmer support package consists of our Farm Business Centre field based Farm Business Managers our farmers portal plus independent advisory and audit services.
We work closely with Dairy Crest Direct DCD our farmer representative body and actively supported their successful application to become the first Dairy Producer Organisation in the UK.
Our Davidstow Farm Standards have proven an effective way to reflect the shared priorities of Dairy Crest and our direct supplying dairy farmers.
These standards are designed to reflect best practice on farm and ensure the highest quality of milk supply.
Each of our direct supplying farms achieves a ranking under the standards.
Our pledge is to assist and support farmers in achieving the highest ranking which is currently achieved by around 70% of our supplying farms.
We are engaging with other stakeholders and supply chain partners in the South West to assess further cost effective best practice standards for example in relation to environmental controls that support local healthy ecosystems.
We are committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions associated with our direct operations by reducing energy demand and switching to less carbon intensive forms of energy.
Our site teams continue to make good progress in improving the efficiency of generation and use of energy with relative energy use reducing across Kirkby Frome and Nuneaton by 4%.
A wide range of projects included investment in low energy lighting heat recovery from air compressors and efficient refrigeration systems.
At Davidstow the introduction of new processes to manufacture functional ingredients and the new and enhanced assets for the treatment of process waste water has increased relative energy demand.
Our investment in detailed metering of demand patterns will help us further to optimise energy use for these new processes.
Around 80% of the heat required by the Davidstow creamery was provided from biomass significantly reducing energy from fossil fuels.
Energy from the biomass boilers represented more than 40% of total energy use meeting our pledge for more than one third of total energy to come from onsite renewables.
The combined effect for our manufacturing sites was a lower than forecast increase in relative energy use of 2% with an associated reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of 13%.
This represents significant progress towards our pledge to reduce emissions from our direct operations by 20% over the next five years.
Water stewardship Securing sufficient high quality freshwater is essential to our business strategy.
We have invested in advanced water treatment technologies to enable the reuse of process waste water at Davidstow reducing longterm reliance on freshwater imports.
Towards the end of the year higher recovery rates meant that around 45% of water used came from recycled sources.
Maintaining high water recovery rates at Davidstow is key to the achievement of our pledge for more than 50% of the water required to manufacture our products to come from recycled sources.
Reducing demand for water also remains important to us and we continue to prioritise efficiency projects such as enhanced cleaning of process equipment and plant areas.
In 201617 we again achieved our shortterm objective to send zero waste to landfill and acknowledged that this was an early albeit important stage of achieving our pledge to increase the value generated from unavoidable nonedible wastes.
Our focus remains on reducing nonedible wastes at source converting wastes into byproducts and moving materials up the waste hierarchy.
We track the proportion of operational wastes segregated on site and were pleased to exceed our target of 80% segregation by the year end.
We have worked with WRAP as part of the Courtauld 2025 agreement and The Grocers Waste Not Want Not campaign to reduce household food waste.
Climate
As a leading dairy manufacturer we are determined to play an active role in mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change reducing waste and looking after our natural resources.
Working with The Grocers Waste Not Want Not campaign T argeting 50% of water from recycled sources 40% of total energy use comes from biomass boilers 80% waste segregation target exceeded 24 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 WE LEARN We take time to listen understand and learn WE RESPECT We value people we work with and are stronger together WE CARE We act responsibly with a passion to do the right thing WE CREATE We seek new ideas to grow our business WE LEAD We drive for success and deliver at pace OUR VISION Our success has been built on our links to the countryside our dairy heritage and the people in our business.
From this we will grow through a shared passion to create exceptional food loved by every generation.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITy CONTINUED At Dairy Crest we continually work to improve the excellent safety record we have achieved we engage with our people and fully utilise their expertise.
We are developing our approach to Diversity and Inclusion to strengthen our skill base and we continue to develop our people to drive our business forward.
We have seen over the years that a commitment to health and safety is key to building a great business.
Our track record during 201617 shows further improvement on an already strong performance.
At the end of March 2017 we have reduced our Lost Time Accident Frequency Rate from 0.19 to 0.13 due to a 43% reduction in the number of reportable incidents against the 2013 baseline.
Having set ourselves what appeared to be a challenging objective of a 50% reduction in Accident Incident Rate by 2018 versus the 2013 baseline we have achieved 69% reduction in the last year.
Encouraging employees to report near misses is key to achieving sustainable longterm change in safety behaviour.
Against our target of 1001 ratio of near miss and behavioural conversations versus all types of accident by 2018 we achieved a ratio of 4231 an improvement on last years 1751 performance.
Another important way of engaging our teams in safety is through our cultural change programme encouraging employees to Stop Think Assess Review STAR and complete STAR cards where they see safety related conditions or actions.
By discussing and addressing these issues we have created greater levels of dialogue involvement and a safety first culture.
To build on this programme in 2016 we introduced the STAR safe system of work SSoW conversations where front line managers initiate a conversation with a work colleague based on the recognised safe system of working.
Through this discussion better and safer ways of working have been identified reducing our risks and injuries.
Wellbeing for our people 201617 has seen continued growth in free wellbeing checks for employees with 256 members of our staff receiving this valuable service that is open to all.
Our wellbeing days continue to attract high staff attendance.
Comprised of practical health and safety advice for work and home these events are run across the business and receive very positive feedback from our teams.
Our busy Occupational Health team also delivered 924 mandatory health checks throughout the year.
Creating an environment where all employees understand they have a key role to play in the Companys success is crucial to achieving the objectives and targets we set.
201617 has seen a number of people initiatives aimed at further engaging our employees.
An employee roadshow presented by members of the Executive Committee visited all Dairy Crest sites and offices.
Over
The roadshows were very well received by employees with structured feedback reporting high levels of engagement.
We continue to develop our other employee communication channels with a weekly news roundup regular business performance updates and our staff intranet.
Feeling valued and part of the wider Dairy Crest team is key to employee engagement.
We support this in three ways All employees have the opportunity to be part of a bonus or incentive scheme which is linked to either personal site andor company performance Dairy Crest runs share save schemes whereby employees can invest in Dairy Crest and take a real ownership role.
Two share save schemes are currently in operation with circa 40% of staff investing their money up to 500 a month and Our Reward and Recognition scheme continues to benefit employees who go the extra mile.
Bronze and Silver awards that attract a monetary benefit recognise excellent behaviour in line with our values.
Silver award winners are selected by a committee of staff to receive one of three prestigious Gold awards.
In 201617 462 Bronze and Silver awards were awarded.
In 201617 Dairy Crest has maintained its focus on induction training and manufacturing compliance skills development.
These now achieve consistently high levels of compliance with our internal targets for timing of completion respectively 99% and 98% at year end.
Colleagues
Through our refreshed Corporate Responsibility pledges Dairy Crest employees have a volunteering day each year to help support local causes.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 25 Strategic report An important emphasis this year has been on management development for all our team leaders from first line to Director level.
The training provided focussed on the skills required to enhance high performance from individuals and teams and included coaching skills feedback objective setting and development planning.
This programme was attended by 150 managers from all disciplines within the business.
We are in the process of evaluating the outcomes of this programme and defining next steps however initial feedback has been very positive and we aim to build upon this to ensure continued improvements in the management and development of our employees.
To enhance access to learning further Dairy Crest has launched a new Learning Management System mydevelopment incorporating elearning programmes on a diverse range of business topics including Dairy Crests specific environmental awareness module and how to tool kits.
This new platform allows Dairy Crest to drive blended and dynamic learning initiatives across the business.
The Dairy Crest Talent Management Review is undertaken annually and is the foundation of our talent assessment process and succession planning.
As recognised in the CR pledges there has been additional emphasis this year on identifying all business critical roles and the succession and development plans for these.
This will continue into 201718 to ensure Dairy Crest is in the best position to secure and retain the right skills for the business.
Dairy Crest continues to invest in apprenticeship programmes to provide a pipeline of talent into key skill areas.
Our Eden apprenticeships develop competence in the core areas of dairy processing manufacturing and engineering.
Dairy Crest currently supports three technology apprentices and five engineering apprentices.
Our first two Eden engineering trainees graduated this year and both went straight into shift engineer and maintenance engineer roles within the Group.
Turnover of employees has stabilised during 201617 and now sits at 15%.
Although some turnover of staff is positive in refreshing our skill base the current level is higher than desired and Dairy Crest will be looking to the Employee Survey undertaken in April 2017 to help identify any areas where we can improve on this key metric.
With regard to absence this now sits at 2.7% slightly above last years level of 2.6% but in line with our objective to maintain absence below 3%.
Diversity and inclusion Businesses are more sustainable and perform better when they attract and develop talent from the broadest possible base.
It is this understanding that drives our Diversity and Inclusion agenda.
We also know that people are at their most productive when they can achieve an appropriate balance between work and home life.
At Dairy Crest we wish to employ and grow a diverse workforce who feel they are treated flexibly with regard to their ways of working according to business needs.
Employees are encouraged to reach their full potential regardless of their age gender marital status including civil partnerships disability nationality colour ethnic origin sexual orientation or religious affiliation.
Dairy Crest does not tolerate discrimination or harassment on any of these grounds.
To help us achieve our aims our polices include the right to apply for flexible working hours a sabbatical support with taking time off to study and we provide maternity pay above the statutory minimum and full pay during paternity leave.
During 201617 we have refreshed our Diversity and Inclusion programme the objective of which is enshrined in our CR pledge to develop employment policies and working practices that encourage a diverse and inclusive workforce.
Already we have reviewed the Diversity training and development provided and will look to enhance this during 201718.
Further action will include a review of policies and communications.
Working with trade unions Dairy Crest has enjoyed good relationships with the recognised unions USDAW and Unite for many years.
We acknowledge the positive role trade unions can play in the development of our business and the constructive way we have worked together.
Colleagues
GENDER PROFILE Gender prole All employees Female 31% Male 69% Senior management Female 24% Male 76% Our very first Eden engineering apprenticeship trainees at their graduation ceremony.
Our Procurement team enjoying a volunteering day at Brooklands Museum.
26 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITy CONTINUED Healthier choices Dairy Crest has continued to invest in its portfolio of lower fat options.
Market data shows that volumes of the lower fat variants of our cheese butters and spreads brands grew by 1% from 201516 and now account for 13.8% of our overall branded cheese butters and spreads volumes an increase from 13.2% in 201516.
Collectively along with Frylight our one calorie cooking spray our lower fat variants reached a retail sales value of 84.0 million an increase of 3.2% over 201516.
Cathedral City has expanded its extensive range of lower fat options with the addition of two new variants  Cathedral City Lighter snack bar and Cathedral City Lighter spreadable.
This has helped retail sales of lower fat options from Cathedral City to grow to 34.1 million.
Our lower fat spreads  Clover Light Utterly Butterly Lightly and Country Life Lighter spreadable  have a collective retail sales value of 20.0 million and sales of our no artificial ingredients Clover have been strong outperforming the spreads market.
Frylight enjoyed another impressive year reaching a record retail sales value of 29.9 million a growth of 19% allowing it to become the UKs biggest oil brand.
It is now bought by over a fifth of UK households and its contribution to healthier cooking was recognised in winning the 2016 IGD Health and Wellness product award.
Our dedicated Innovation Centre and partnership with Harper Adams University gives us the opportunity to develop even more healthy products.
In 2016 we won Most Innovative Contribution to BusinessUniversity Collaboration at the Times Higher Education Awards in recognition of numerous researchled projects that Dairy Crest and Harper Adams University are engaged in together.
Our colleagues take enormous pride in the quality of the food we produce this is a founding principle at the heart of our quality agenda.
Our quality management systems are regularly reviewed and audited by our own technical teams and third parties to ensure they comply with industry standards.
Demineralised Whey and Gos Our plant at Davidstow is now producing high quality ingredients for infant formula manufacturers and is showing high levels of consistent quality.
We produce demineralised whey which forms the base of infant formula and GOS a lactose based prebiotic that has been shown to help aid digestive health in infants.
In addition we have commenced an extensive research programme with universities and commercial partners to illustrate the benefits of GOS in animal and human nutrition.
GOS may improve animal health as well as food uptake potentially leading to the need for lower levels of antibiotics in the animal husbandry industry.
Dairy Crest works with its suppliers to exceed best practice around areas including quality and traceability.
We can trace milk and raw materials from farms and suppliers through to finished product.
Thanks to our Davidstow Farm Standards all milk supplied to us meets the strict international standards for the production of infant formula.
In 2016 we commenced a project to review the Davidstow farm audits with a view to further developing and enhancing the standards in 2017.
Since 1 April 2016 all palm oil used in our spreads products comes from RSPO certified sustainable sources more than four years ahead of our original committed date.
To avoid sending waste to landfill we are investing in new ways of packaging our products so they are not only made with less material and more recycled material but also that the packaging itself is recyclable.
We are pleased to report that all of the tubs and lids used in our spreads business are now recyclable.
We are committed to providing healthier tasty products that make it easier for consumers to choose healthier foods and to play our part in helping to improve the nations health.
Consumers light and bright future Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 27 Strategic report Our community programme supports and enhances the communities in which we work and live.
Our three key priorities are supporting rural communities working with The Princes Countryside Fund supporting local communities and employee volunteering.
Dairy Crest recognises that the countryside continues to face significant challenges across a wide range of complex social and economic issues.
Dairy Crest has a long standing relationship with The Princes Countryside Fund.
The charity set up by HRH The Prince of Wales in 2010 exists to improve the prospects of family farm businesses and the quality of rural life.
The Funds vision is of a confident robust and sustainable agricultural and rural community which is appreciated for its vital contribution to the UK.
Dairy Crest donated 50000 to the Fund in 201617 through brand partnerships with Davidstow cheddar and Country Life butter.
We are also sponsors of The Princes Dairy Initiative launched in 2012.
The initiative has brought the dairy sector together to take practical action to support the sustainability of a diverse British dairy industry.
Dairy Crest is committed to supporting local good causes in the communities where we work and live that improve health education youth engagement employability skills the environment and the countryside.
Each Dairy Crest site is allocated a community budget.
In total during 201617 we spent over 100000 supporting over 75 local good causes.
We are proud to have supported local schools care homes hospices scout and girl guiding groups and health charities to name but a few.
During December 2016 we donated 318 cases of Cathedral City cheddar 71 cases of Country Life spreadable and 3000 slices of Cathedral City to the 45th Crisis at Christmas.
This enabled the homeless charity to support approximately 4000 homeless guests attending the ten Crisis London centres.
In total 36000 meals were served across the eight days that the Crisis centres were open.
Dairy Crest also donated 40kg of Cathedral City cheddar for the Chelsea Pensioners Ceremony of the Cheeses to enjoy over the festive season.
Dairy Crest operates a staff lottery which is open to all Dairy Crest employees.
This year staff have supported over 30 charitable causes through financial donations including Surrey Search and Rescue Metro Blind Sport The Stroke Association MS Society Cerebral Palsy Lady Taverners and Macmillan Cancer
Dairy Crest also participated in the Calling London 2016 Winter Coat Drive helping reach a target of 3500 coats which were distributed across London.
All Dairy Crest employees are encouraged to take up their fully paid volunteering day each year.
Measured as people days equivalent compared to total number of employees this represents more than 1000 volunteering days per annum.
Dairy Crest staff voluntarily deliver healthy fresh food to vulnerable people in our local communities through Meals On
We also support release time for staff to volunteer with the Fire Service and other services.
We host visits to our sites for local schools The Womens Institute and young Farmer Groups.
Staff also volunteer at various local events including providing support at days out for children with special needs.
Community
In 201617 we spent over 100000 supporting over 75 local good causes 28 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Stephen Alexander
Appointed as a Nonexecutive Director in January 2011 as Chairman in September 2014 and Chairman of the Nomination Committee in March 2015.
He is an Operating Partner at OpCapita LLP and Chairman of the charitable organisation Look Ahead Care Support and Housing.
Stephen was Chairman of Immediate Media Company Ltd until January 2017 and Chairman of Rhubarb Food Design Ltd until December 2016.
Previously he was Chairman of Maltby Capital Ltd parent company of EMI Group Chairman of Odeon Cinemas Chief Executive of Hillsdown Holdings Ltd and held senior positions with Allied Domecq PLC and Imperial Foods.
He was also Senior Independent Director at Devro plc.
Richard Macdonald NonExecutive Director Appointed as a Nonexecutive Director in November 2010 as Senior Independent Director in May 2012 and as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee in November 2014 prior to which he was Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee.
Richard had a 30 year career with the National Farmers Union serving as Director General for 13 years.
He is a Nonexecutive Director of Moy Park Limited Vice Chairman of the National Institute of Agricultural Botany and Chairman of Farm Africa.
Richard is a Non executive Director and Deputy Chairman of the Environment Agency.
Andrew CarrLocke NonExecutive Director Appointed as a Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee in August 2009.
A Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants he has previously held senior finance positions at Courtaulds Textiles Diageo Bowater Scott and Kodak and was Group Finance Director at George Wimpey plc until 2007.
More recently he was Executive Chairman of Countryside
He is a Nonexecutive Director of Grainger plc and has previously held Non executive directorships at Royal Mail Holdings Venture Production and AWG.
BoARD of DiRECtoRS ExECutivE CoMMittEE AND ADviSERS Dairy Crest is led by an experienced Board of Directors which comprises three Executive Directors one Nonexecutive Chairman and three independent Non executive Directors.
Together the Executive Directors have over 50 years experience of the business. monitors progress.
Daytoday matters are the responsibility of the Executive Committee which comprises the three Executive Directors the Company Secretary and General Counsel the Group Supply Chain Director and the Group HR Director. managers attend by invitation. meets weekly.
Auditor
Ernst and Young LLP
Eversheds
Sutherland international LLP Principal Bankers the Royal Bank of Scotland plc Rabobank London Lloyds Bank plc Santander uK plc Corporate Brokers Shore Capital Group Ltd Peel Hunt LLP Registered Office Claygate House Littleworth Road Esher Surrey Kt10 9PN Registered in
No.
Audit Committee Member Remuneration Committee
Nomination Committee Member Corporate Responsibility Committee Member Executive Committee Member Not a Board Member Sue f arr NonExecutive Director Appointed as a Nonexecutive Director in November 2011 and Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee in November 2014.
She is a special advisor to Chime Communications plc having previously been a member of the Executive Management team.
Sue has extensive marketing communications experience having served as Marketing Director of the BBC for 7 years Director of Corporate Affairs Thames Television for 3 years and Director of Corporate Communications Vauxhall Motors.
Sue is a Nonexecutive Director of Millennium and Copthorne Hotels plc Accsys Technologies PLC and British American Tobacco p.
She has previously held positions as a Trustee of the Historic Royal Palaces and as a Non executive Director of Motivcom Limited.
She was appointed as a Nonexecutive Director of Dolphin Capital Investors Limited in July 2016.
Board of Directors Advisers Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 29
Mark Allen Chief Executive Appointed as an Executive Director in 2002 and became Chief Executive in January 2007.
Mark joined Dairy Crest in August 1991.
He was formerly with Shell UK Ltd.
He is a Trustee for The Princes Countryside Fund and a Nonexecutive Director of Howdens Joinery Group Plc.
He was appointed a Non executive Director of Warburtons Limited in January 2017.
Group f inance Director Appointed as an Executive Director in May 2013.
A Chartered Accountant who has worked for Dairy Crest since 2005.
Prior to his appointment to the Board Tom served as Director of Financial Control.
He is a member of the Board of Dairy UK and a member of BiTCs Finance and Risk Committee.
He has previously held senior finance positions in Logica plc and Thorn plc.
Adam Braithwaite Executive Director Appointed as an Executive Director in July 2016.
Adam joined Dairy Crest in 2002 and has held a number of senior management positions within the business.
He was appointed Group Commercial Director in April 2013.
Robin Miller Company Secretary and General
Appointed in April 2008.
Robin is a solicitor having worked in private practice and inhouse in both retail and international manufacturing.
Mike Barrington Group Supply Chain Director Before joining Dairy Crest in 2011 Mike held senior management positions with Cadbury Schweppes and Kraft Foods latterly Manufacturing Director for Cadbury in the UK and Ireland.
Mike joined Dairy Crest as Supply Chain Director Dairies and was appointed to his current role in April 2013.
Robert Willock Group HR Director Robert joined Dairy Crest 11 years ago as HR Director Dairies from The Maersk Company where he was Director of Human Resources.
He was appointed to his current role in April 2013.
Nonboard Executive Committee members Board of Directors 30 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 CoRPoRAtE GovERNANCE As I mentioned in my Chairmans statement earlier in this report market conditions continued to be challenging during the year.
Despite these the Company has continued to focus on the ongoing execution of the Groups strategy of generating growth in our branded and functional ingredients businesses particularly following the commencement of manufacture of our new demineralised whey and GOS ingredients.
During the year the Management Board has been renamed the Executive Committee and this Committee continues to execute its responsibilities with the same membership and terms of reference.
Chairmans introduction In addition following the implementation of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 the Group has published its first Modern Slavery transparency statement for the financial year 201516.
The statement for financial year 201617 will be published in September 2017.
The Board is committed to high standards of corporate governance and supports the principles laid down in the UK Corporate Governance Code published in September 2014 by the Financial Reporting Council Code.
A copy of the Code can be found at www. rc. with all relevant provisions of the Code.
The Board recognises its collective responsibility for the governance of the Company.
Its strong governance framework is supported by a combination of clear values appropriate policy and an environment of transparency and accountability.
The Boards central role is to work alongside the executive team providing support challenge guidance and leadership.
I believe that the Board is well balanced with a broad range of skills diversity and experience.
Stephen Alexander Chairman 17 May 2017 t he Board Role The Board is responsible for the longterm success of the Group corporate governance strategy risk management and financial performance.
The Board meets regularly throughout the year to approve the Groups strategic objectives to lead the Group within a framework of effective controls which enable risk to be assessed and managed and to ensure sufficient resources are available to meet the objectives set.
There are a number of matters which are specifically reserved for the Boards approval strategy and management structure and share capital corporate governance approval of dividends remuneration approval of significant transactions capital expenditure and contracts.
In addition the Board is responsible for ensuring appropriate values ethics and behaviours for the conduct of the Company are agreed and that appropriate procedures and training are in place to ensure that these are observed throughout the Company.
The work of the Board complements enhances and supports the work of the Executive Committee.
We believe that effective governance is realised through leadership and team work.
Collaboration across all levels within the Board structure drives a culture of continuous improvement in standards and performance across our business.
The Board and its Committee structure is set out below.
Board Committees The Board has established five Committees Audit Committee Corporate Responsibility Committee Executive Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee The terms of reference of these Committees can be found on our website and the reports of each Committee are on pages 34 to 61.
The Board delegates to the Executive Committee the execution of the Groups strategy and the daytoday management and operations of the Groups business.
Board Composition The Board consists of three Executive Directors and four Nonexecutive Directors including the Chairman.
A list of the current Directors their roles on the Board and its Committees and their experience is set out on pages 28 to 29.
Further details on the roles and responsibilities of the Chairman and Chief Executive are in the document entitled ChairmanChief Executive Division of Responsibilities on the Groups website.
Richard Macdonald is the Companys Senior Independent Director.
Board effectiveness review.
The Chairman is committed to ensuring that the Board comprises a majority of independent Nonexecutive Directors who objectively challenge management balanced against the need to ensure continuity on the Board.
The Board considers that all the Nonexecutive Directors bring strong independent oversight and continue to demonstrate independence.
The Board recognises the recommended term of appointment for Non executive Directors within the Code.
It is mindful of the need for suitable succession and therefore maintains a clear framework of the time each Nonexecutive Director has served the Company and the skill sets that each provide.
The Chairman periodically meets individually or collectively with the Nonexecutive Directors in the absence of the Executive Directors.
Remuneration
Committee
Audit
Committee
Group
Board
Nomination
Committee
CR
Committee
Demand HR Finance
Committee
Supply Legal Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 31
Board meetings A minimum of eight face to face meetings are planned throughout the year to consider for example half year and full year announcements and the strategy of the Group.
Other ad hoc meetings are held as and when required.
Details of the Board and Committee meetings held during the 201617 year are set out in the table below.
Board and main Committee meetings The Directors named in the table below held office during the year.
The number of Board and Committee meetings attended by Directors in the year is shown in the table below.
The numbers in brackets show the maximum number of meetings Directors could have attended during 201617.
Board Audit Remuneration Nomination Corporate
Executive
Committee
Mr M Allen 88    33 Mr t Atherton 88    33 Mr A Braithwaite 88    22 Mr S Alexander 88 55 66 22 Mr A CarrLocke 88 55 66 22 33 Ms S farr 88 55 66 12 33 Mr R Macdonald 88 55 66 22 33 Attendance The attendance of the Directors at Board and Committee meetings during the year is shown in the table below.
The numbers in brackets show the maximum number of meetings Directors could have attended during 201617.
Board effectiveness review Each year the performance of the Board and its Committees is reviewed.
The last externally facilitated review was carried out during the 201516 financial year with the assistance of Russell Reynolds Associates.
During the year the Chairman oversaw the implementation of various recommendations arising from the last review.
This year the Board and its Committees carried out an effectiveness review without external assistance.
The use of questionnaires based on the framework provided by Russell Reynolds Associates last year ensured yearonyear consistency and enabled progress against the previous year to be tracked and assessed.
They were completed by Directors in March 2017 and the output from the questionnaires was used to inform a review discussion at the Boards meeting in April 2017.
That discussion included an evaluation of the Chairman of the Boards performance without the Chairman present which was led by the Senior Independent Director.
Evaluation questions for the Board were grouped into four key areas strategy structure and process people and composition and stakeholders.
Those four key areas were subdivided into more specific areas of focus including amongst other matters the performance of the Chairman of the Board the performance of the Chairmen of the Committees and the performance of Directors individually.
Directors were also asked to comment on progress made against specific development opportunities identified for the Board in the 201516 effectiveness review.
Committee questionnaires which were also based on the framework used the prior year to allow consistency and for progress to be tracked were completed in March 2017.
Each of the Committees reviewed the output of the questionnaires alongside their terms of reference at their meetings in May 2017.
Committee questionnaires focussed on amongst other matters the quality of leadership the quality of debate performance against and suitability of Committee terms of reference and the quality of Committee reporting.
The Board effectiveness review concluded that All Directors perform well and all continue to make valuable contributions to the work of the Board Further enhancements to the skills and experience represented amongst the Directors in the area of FMCG marketing andor international ingredients businesses would be beneficial  more detail of the continued work of the Nomination Committee in that regard can be found on pages 38 to 39 of this Annual Report The Board initially through the work of the Nomination Committee needed to ensure continued focus on the requirement in the near future to ensure appropriate refreshment of Nonexecutive Director appointments The effectiveness reviews of the Committees concluded that the Committees continue to perform well and to fulfil their briefs against their terms of reference.
The review process identified amongst other matters and in particular The need for greater rigour in the reporting of all Committees to the Board That the importance of the Corporate Responsibility Committee needed further emphasis so that it is demonstrably given as much prominence and focus as the longer standing Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
To that end it was decided that progress by the Group against the four pillars of the CR strategy should be added to the Executive Committees work programme for quarterly review in addition to the existing regular reviews of health and safety and technical quality and environmental performance.
Doing so will ensure continuous rigorous operational focus on all of the pillars of the CR strategy.
In addition on days when the Board has Committee meetings the Corporate Responsibility Committee meeting shall be scheduled as the first of the Committee meetings to ensure that it receives appropriate focus and that sufficient time is devoted to it equivalent to that of the more established Committees.
32 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Director induction and training All new Directors undergo a comprehensive induction programme on appointment.
In addition to equipping Directors with sufficiently detailed knowledge of the operations of the Groups business to enable them effectively to carry out their duties the induction programme is tailored to their experience background and particular areas of focus.
Ongoing
On appointment Adam Braithwaite received one to one training on directors duties and responsibilities from the Groups external solicitors Eversheds Sutherland International LLP.
During the year the Market Abuse Regulation which came into effect in July 2016 was a particular point of focus and the Board was fully briefed on the updated inside information and share dealing policies and procedures arising from the new regulations.
Conflicts of interest The Companys Articles of Association Articles allow the Directors where appropriate to authorise conflicts or possible conflicts of interest between Directors and the
In addition Nonexecutive Directors letters of appointment require them to obtain the prior approval of the Board to appointments external to the Company where those appointments might affect the time they are able to devote to their role.
When considering conflicts or potential conflicts of interest the conflicted or potentially conflicted Director is excluded from participation in the Boards consideration of the conflict or potential conflict situation.
Procedures are in place for Directors to disclose conflicts or potential conflicts of interest.
As at April 2017 the Directors all confirmed that they had no present or anticipated conflicts of interest.
No Director had a material interest in any significant contract with the Company or any of its subsidiaries during the year.
Appointment and reelection of Directors The Articles provide that the Directors or the members by ordinary resolution may appoint a Director to fill a vacancy or as an additional director.
The
Articles require all Directors to be reelected annually.
All Directors will stand for reelection at the Companys 2017 Annual General Meeting AGM except for Adam Braithwaite who consistent with the Articles will stand for election having been appointed since the last AGM.
Having regard to the roles performed by each of the Directors the individual input and contribution they make and their individual expertise and experience the Board is satisfied that each Directors performance justifies nomination for election or reelection by shareholders.
Service agreements and letters of appointment Details of the Executive Directors service agreements and the Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors letters of appointment are published on the Companys website and appear in the Directors Remuneration report on page 47.
These documents are available for inspection at the registered office of the Company during normal business hours or at the AGM.
Directors to take independent professional advice at the Companys expense if necessary.
No such advice was sought by any Director during the year.
In addition the Directors have direct access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
Shareholder engagement The Company recognises its responsibility for ensuring that a satisfactory dialogue takes place with shareholders.
This continued engagement is highly beneficial to all parties as it helps to build a greater understanding of our investors views opinions and concerns.
The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director have primary responsibility for investor relations.
Throughout the year the Board has continued to maintain an active programme of engagement with investors with regular meetings held with key institutional shareholders to discuss strategy financial performance and investment activities.
This year the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director met with over 90 investors in eleven major cities in the UK Europe North America and Canada.
Analysts and investors are invited to our capital markets day each year and this year it was held at our Davidstow creamery.
It focussed on the dairy market the Companys strategy and performance and included a tour of the new demineralised whey and GOS manufacturing facilities.
The event was attended by the Chief Executive Group Finance Director Group Commercial Director and other senior management.
In addition there were further shareholder visits to both Davidstow and our Nuneaton site.
Presentation slides are made available in the investors section of the Companys website along with audio recordings annual and interim reports interim management statements trading updates and company announcements.
All the Nonexecutive Directors and in particular the Chairman and Senior Independent Director are available to meet with shareholders.
Feedback from meetings with shareholders is provided to the Board to ensure that all Directors have a balanced understanding of the issues and concerns of shareholders.
The
Board receives feedback from the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director on their meetings with shareholders periodic reports on investor relations and independent feedback from the Companys brokers on the views of major shareholders.
Risk management and internal control The Board determines the nature and extent of the significant risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
It has overall responsibility for monitoring the Groups risk management and internal control systems and the effectiveness of those systems.
It is assisted in that task by the Audit Committee and the Group Internal Audit function.
There is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the principal risks facing the Group.
The
Board has delegated responsibility for management of daytoday operational risks to the Executive Committee.
The Audit Committee conducts reviews of the internal control systems and the Board reviews them annually.
The principal risks and uncertainties identified by the Group are set out on pages 16 to 17 along with the steps which are taken to mitigate and manage them.
The Board has satisfied itself that its systems accord with the FRCs Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting and that satisfactory internal control procedures and systems have been in place throughout the year and up to and including the date of this Report in compliance with the requirements of the Code.
A rolling audit programme conducted by Group Internal Audit across the Group forms a key facet of the Groups systems of internal control.
The Head of Group Internal Audit reports independently to the Chairman of the Audit Committee on assurance matters.
Under its terms of reference the Audit Committee amongst other matters approves the appointment or dismissal of the Head of Group Internal CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 33
Audit and the Audit Committee Chairman approves the remuneration of the Head of Group Internal Audit.
It is not possible to eliminate risk entirely.
Accordingly although the Groups systems are designed to manage risks they cannot provide absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
They provide reasonable assurance that potential issues can be identified promptly and remedied appropriately.
The key components of the risk management and internal control systems include The adoption and communication of clearly documented values policies procedures and processes including amongst others the Groups Business Conduct Policy Reservation to the Board of control of amongst other matters all significant strategic financial and organisational risks A management structure which includes clear lines of responsibility and documented delegations of authority with appropriate policies levels and rules for amongst other matters incurring capital expenditure or divesting of the Groups assets The operation of comprehensive financial and strategic planning forecasting and review processes Exercise of oversight by the Audit Committee with input from the Head of Group Internal Audit over the Groups control processes designed to ensure the integrity of internal and external financial reporting The preparation of monthly management accounts packs for the business including KPI dashboards for each constituent part of the Groups business trading results balance sheet and cash flow information with comparison against prior year and budget all of which are reviewed by the Executive Committee and the Board Monthly scrutiny of performance against budget including analysis of key trends variances and key risks and plans for mitigation as well as the continued appropriateness of those risks in monthly meetings referred to as Accounts Reviews where each key constituent part of the Group and key departments report performance yeartodate and forecast against budget to a panel comprising the Executive Committee and other senior managers Formal documented financial controls and procedures including specific procedures for treasury transactions and the approval of significant contracts Quarterly completion by each key constituent part of the Group of a selfassessment controls questionnaire that requires the approval of management Preparation and refreshment of risk registers which are reviewed by senior management the Executive Committee and the Board with the assignment of individual responsibility for the ownership and mitigation of significant risks to members of the Executive Committee and independent assurance over the appropriate implementation and operation of mitigating activities provided by Group Internal Audit Review by the Audit Committee of the Groups risk register processes Review and approval of the audit plan for the Group Internal Audit function together with progress against and revision of the plan as appropriate throughout the year Receipt by the Audit Committee and the Executive Committee of all Group Internal Audit reports detailing audit issues noted corrective action plans and progress against those plans The operation of an integrated business planning process with formal procedures for highlighting on a monthly cycle financial performance and risks to budgetary delivery together with associated opportunities to counteract or mitigate those risks to performance f air balanced and understandable Provision C.1 of the Code requires the Directors to present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Companys position and prospects.
When the provision was first introduced to the Code the Audit Committee adopted a detailed process to enable the Board to report against this principle of the Code.
The resultant more structured approach see table below to the preparation of the Report and Accounts has been applied in the production of this Report and Accounts which the Board formally signed off at its meeting in May 2017.
Januaryf ebruaryMarch April May initial content production Prepare content not dependent on year end results e. sections.
Project Manager PM considers whether content collated is itself and collectively fair balanced and understandable FBU review and amend.
Identify material events performance issues that will need to be reported.
Agree key messages Start completing and collating performance related content e. report.
Consider new regulations and consistency with key messages and
PM considers whether content collated is itself and collectively FBU review and amend.
Review and sign off Confirmation from contributors as to completeness of input.
Appropriate review of full content for consistency completeness and messaging review and amend.
Signoff by section owners.
Bring together all section owners to agree that whole Annual Report and Accounts ARA is
Consider formal sign off from section owners to the Board.
Consider level of assurance obtained over nonfinancial information in the
Where applicable Audit Committee to formally report to the Board on how it has satisfied itself that ARA is FBU.
Board to minute consideration of FBU with Board paper showing the process and results.
The Boards assessment of the fair balanced and understandable nature of the Annual Report and Accounts is further assisted by amongst other matters the following The Annual Report and Accounts is drafted by senior management with overall coordination by the Company Secretary and General Counsel.
An internal validation process is undertaken by Group Internal Audit to ensure factual accuracy.
Comprehensive reviews of the draft Annual Report and Accounts are undertaken by Executive Committee members and in relation to certain sections by the Companys external lawyers the external auditor and other advisers.
The drafts of each relevant section are reviewed as they are prepared through an iterative drafting process by the Chairmen of appropriate Committees of the Board and the final draft is reviewed by those Committees prior to consideration by the
At its May 2017 meeting the Board reviewed and was satisfied that the Annual Report and Accounts for financial year 201617 taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and the Board believes that the information contained therein provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys and Groups performance position business model and strategy.
34 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED As Chairman of the Audit Committee I am pleased to present the Audit Committees report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
During the year the Committee has continued to play a key role within the Groups governance framework to support the Board in matters relating to internal control risk management and financial reporting.
Over the following pages we provide insight into the workings of the Committee and its activities during the year.
The report provides an overview of the significant issues the Committee has assessed and the Committees opinion on the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts as a whole including how it has assessed the narrative reporting in the front of the report to accurately report the financial statements in the back.
Audit Committee report The Committee members as Directors of the Company have an in depth understanding and ownership of the Companys strategy.
They receive regular updates on strategic progress together with insight concerning daytoday performance through the receipt of the Executive Committee meeting minutes and monthly management accounts.
This enables the Committee to determine areas of focus in addition to its regular work programme.
During the year we paid particular attention to controls following the major reorganisation arising from the disposal of the Dairies business and the large scale investment programme at Davidstow.
Of specific importance this year has been the oversight of a formal tender process for the Groups statutory auditor contract following the retirement by rotation of the Groups current auditor Ernst and Young EY.
Following the audit tender and the recommendations of the Audit Committee the Board has appointed Deloitte LLP Deloitte as its external auditor for the year commencing 1 April 2017.
The appointment will be subject to shareholder approval at the 2017 AGM.
Looking forward to the next 12 months the Committee will continue to focus on the audit assurance and risks processes within the business as well as monitoring changes in EU and UK regulation including the impact of Brexit.
We will also implement a more formal appraisal process of the quality of our external audit.
I would like to thank the other members of the Committee and Dairy Crests Internal Audit and Finance teams for their ongoing support. to the Committee and the Company over many years.
Andrew CarrLocke Chairman of the Audit Committee 17 May 2017 Summary of the more significant risks and financial reporting issues The Committee is responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups framework for risk management and financial controls and ensuring that the Groups procedures are updated as and when required.
On behalf of the Board the Committee has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company.
The
Committee has discussed with management the key estimations and judgements applied to the Groups financial statements and the impact of significant accounting matters arising during the year.
The main items discussed were Revenue recognition The Groups accounting policy for promotional accruals provides that the Group accrues for agreed promotional funding which is calculated based on a number of estimates and judgements relating to promotions.
The Committee has reviewed the levels of promotional accruals and considered the results of the interim review and the audit conducted by EY which assessed the design of controls around this area and tested samples to underlying documentation.
The Committee was satisfied with the judgements made by management in respect of the accounting policy for promotional accruals and that the revenue reported for the year had been appropriately recognised.
Exceptional items The Groups accounting policy on exceptional items provides that items of a material oneoff nature are classified as exceptional.
The
Committee considered the nature and levels of exceptional items associated with both the continuing and discontinued operations together with the results of the interim review and the audit conducted by EY.
The Committee was satisfied that exceptional items had been appropriately classified and disclosed treated consistently and that discussions with management were transparent.
Goodwill
The goodwill held by the Group is reviewed for impairment on an annual basis.
This exercise requires management to make an estimate of future cash flows.
The Committee has considered the impairment review completed by management and the findings of the external auditor it is satisfied that the assumptions made in concluding that no impairment has been required are appropriate.
Retirement benefit obligations The valuation of the Groups retirement benefit obligations is made at each reporting date in accordance with international financial reporting standards.
The valuation is subject to a number of assumptions and estimates and the Committee is satisfied that those made at 31 March 2017 are appropriate.
The Group recognises the profit on disposal of closed depots as Other Income  Property.
The Committee has considered this treatment both the Committee and the external auditor are satisfied that it is appropriate.
Noncurrent assets held for sale The Group has classified some closed properties as noncurrent assets held for sale on the basis that they meet the criteria under international financial reporting standards.
The Committee is satisfied that the assumptions made around the timing of the disposals are appropriate.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 35
Dilapidations liability A contingent liability has been disclosed in respect of a potential dilapidation liability relating to Chadwell Heath a manufacturing site disposed of with the Dairies business.
The Committee has considered the Groups position and together with the external auditor is satisfied that the disclosure as a contingent liability is appropriate.
Litigation liability There are a number of contractual disputes in relation to the demineralised whey and GOS capital project at Davidstow.
Both claims made by and against the Group remain outstanding at 31 March 2017.
The Committee has considered the Groups position and both the Committee and the external auditor are satisfied that the disclosure as a contingent liability is appropriate.
Management has judged that the Group operates as one segment under international financial reporting standards.
This judgement has remained unchanged from the prior year and the Committee is satisfied this is appropriate and supports the voluntary disclosure provided in Note 1 to the Accounts.
Deferred tax The Committee has considered the recoverability of tax losses that have arisen from various unprofitable operations and rationalisation initiatives of the Group.
The Committee discussed with both management and the external auditor the key judgements which had been made and was satisfied that the judgements were reasonable and that accordingly the deferred tax asset recognised in the accounts is appropriate.
The Committee has considered whether the 2017 Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
The Committee was satisfied with the process which had been followed for the preparation of the 2017 Report and Accounts it has reviewed and provided feedback on the content of the draft Report for consideration by the Board and the Report was amended to incorporate this feedback.
Following this review the Committee was of the opinion that the 2017 Report and Accounts is representative of the year and presents a fair balanced and understandable overview providing the necessary information for shareholders.
Going concern The Committee reviewed managements assessment of the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in line with the guidance published by the Financial Reporting Council FRC.
The assessment included a review of the principal risks facing the Group their financial impact how they were being managed together with a discussion as to the appropriate period for assessment.
The
Groups viability statement is included in the Directors report on page 62.
Effectiveness of internal Audit The Committee engaged a third party to conduct a review of the effectiveness of the Groups Internal Audit function.
Overall the Internal Audit function substantially meets key stakeholders expectations and provides a good source of assurance for the
The Committee supported the recommendations made and has worked with the Head of Internal Audit to implement them.
Membership The Committee is composed entirely of independent Nonexecutive Directors.
The current members and details of their attendance at meetings are set out on page 31.
The Committee members have between them a wide range of business and financial experience appropriate to the sector in which the Company operates.
The Board considers that Andrew CarrLocke has recent and relevant financial experience for the purposes of the Code.
Director and the Group Commercial Director to attend the Committees meetings.
The Group Financial Controller Head of Internal Audit and representatives of the external auditor attend all meetings.
In addition the Committee holds private meetings with the Head of Internal Audit and with the external auditor.
Role The Committee oversees and reviews the Groups financial reporting processes the consistency of the Groups accounting policies the effectiveness of the Groups accounting and business risk systems and the Groups Internal Audit function the external audit process and relationship with the external auditor and the Groups process for monitoring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. legislation and recommended good practice.
The terms of reference were reviewed in March 2017 and can be found on the Groups website.
36 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED Meetings The Committee has a regular work programme of activity agreed between the Chairman of the Committee the Groups management and the external auditor.
The Committee undertakes additional work in response to the evolving audit landscape.
A summary of some of the key matters considered at each meeting during the year are set out below Meeting Key matters considered 12 May External auditor  EYs 201516 year end final report Annual Report and Accounts for the year ending 31 March 2016 including fair balanced and understandable review External audit  reappointment of EY as external auditor and external control effectiveness Going concern review Group Internal Audits report on financial and operational controls audits whistleblowing notifications and work plan for 201617 12 September Review of financial controls including failures EYs audit planning report Group Internal Audits report on financial and operational controls audits and whistleblowing notifications External audit tender process update FRC audit quality review Committee training on forthcoming technical changes 7 November Draft interim financial statements Financial controls update External audit  EYs interim review report External audit tender process update Group IT security update Review of the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function 2 December Recommendation of appointment of new external audit firm 13 March Group Internal Audits report on financial and operational controls audits whistleblowing notifications and budget for Review of Group Internal Audits audit universe to ensure alignment to the Groups risk management framework External audit  EYs update to planning report Transition plan for new external auditor Group IT security update Committees terms of reference and 201718 work programme Financial controls update Impact of IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers Private meeting with Head of Internal Audit Private meeting with external auditor EY External Auditor The Committee considers that the relationship with the current auditor is working well and is satisfied with the effectiveness.
As reported in the 2016 Annual Report the Committee concluded that a tender for the external audit contract should take place during 2016 to enable the appointment of a new external auditor for the start of the 201718 financial year.
EY has been the Companys and Groups external auditor since 1996 and the external audit appointment has not been tendered competitively since EYs appointment.
Accordingly EY is retiring by rotation and was not invited to tender.
External auditor tender process Process and selection criteria The tender process was overseen by the Chairman of the Committee and carried out in compliance with the provisions of the Competition and Markets Authority Audit Order 2014 CMA Order.
A selection committee was appointed comprising the Chairman of the Committee a Nonexecutive Director who is also a member of the Audit Committee the Group Finance Director and Group Financial Controller.
The process was supported by the Groups third party procurement specialists.
The selection criteria adopted by the selection committee closely followed those detailed in the Audit Tender notes of best practice set out by the FRC as at July 2013 namely quality and clarity of approach understanding of the business and risks appropriate geographic breadth appropriate team structure and experience cultural fit and approach to independence and conflict issues.
Due to the nature and size of the Groups business a midtier accountancy firm was invited to tender alongside other larger firms but investors views were not sought on the list of tender participants.
Process summary from 9 August 2016 to 2 December 2016 A Request for Proposal RFP was issued by the Chairman of the Committee to these firms on 9 August 2016.
Knowledge and information meetings were held between RFP firms and senior management from key functions as well as the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and the Chairman of the
In addition the firms all took up the opportunity to visit two of the Groups factories.
The firms submitted their final written tenders on 3 October 2016 which were measured against the selection criteria and agreed by the selection committee.
This was followed by a formal presentation to the selection committee on 24 November 2016 at which each firm was questioned in relation to its audit approach and on issues of independence.
An Audit Committee meeting was convened on 2 December 2016 to consider the outcome of the selection committees review of the tender responses.
The selection committee recommended Deloitte as its preferred firm and Deloitte was invited to present to the
On the recommendation of the Audit Committee and subject to shareholder approval the Board appointed Deloitte as the Groups new external auditor.
A resolution to appoint Deloitte as the Groups external auditor is included in the Notice of 2017 AGM.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 37
Auditors independency policy The Committee has an established policy to safeguard and support the independence and objectivity of the Groups external auditor which complies with the provisions of the CMA Order.
The key principle of the policy is that the Groups external auditor may be engaged to provide services only in cases where those services do not impair its independence and objectivity and provided that the total annual fees for nonaudit services are below the sum of annual fees for audit and auditrelated services.
The external auditor may not be engaged to provide services if the provision of such services would result in the external auditor having a mutual or conflicting interest with any Group company being placed in the position of auditing its own work acting as a manager or employee of any Group company or being placed in the position of advocate for any Group company.
The Committees assessment of EYs independence during the year was underpinned by the Groups policy on the use of the external auditor for the provision of nonaudit services.
The policy contains a presumption against the use of the external auditor for nonaudit services.
The external auditor may only be engaged for the provision of nonaudit services in contravention of that presumption where those services are expressly permitted under the policy and where there is a demonstrable efficiency audit enhancement or cost benefit resulting from the engagement of the external auditor.
Furthermore before it may be engaged for the provision of such nonaudit services alternative providers must have been considered and discounted.
This policy has been updated to reflect the FRCs revised ethical standard 2016 and revised guidance on audit committees 2016 including an update to expand the list of prohibited nonaudit services.
Services which the external auditor is prohibited from providing to the Group include amongst others Bookkeeping services and preparation of financial information The design supply or implementation of financial information systems Appraisal or valuation services Internal audit services Actuarial services A breakdown of audit and nonaudit fees paid to EY in 201617 is summarised in the following table together with a comparison with fees paid in 201516 t otal audit fees 0.5 0.4 Nonaudit fees Taxation services 0.1 0.1 Other nonaudit services 0.1 0.1 t otal nonaudit fees 0.2 0.2 total f ees 0.7 0.6 Details of the nonaudit work undertaken by EY during the year are set out at Note 2 to the Accounts at page 84.
The Committee was satisfied that the overall levels of audit related and nonaudit fees were not material relative to the income of the external auditor firm as a whole.
It was satisfied that the objectivity and independence of the external auditor was maintained throughout the year.
38 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 In addition to considering the need for additional skills and experience to help us with the development of our business on which I comment further below the Committee has given consideration during the year to succession planning for Non executive Directors and to strengthening further the Executive Director presence on the Board.
As a result in July the Committee made its recommendation to the Board that Adam Braithwaite should be appointed to the Board as an Executive Director.
The Committee considered the benefit of bringing new talent onto the Board as well as ensuring senior representation of the sales and marketing function at the Board now and into the future.
Adams promotion to the Board recognised that in his service to Dairy Crest of more than 14 years during which time he has held a variety of senior management positions Adam possesses a depth of knowledge of the business which would not be brought to the Board through external recruitment.
He was appointed to the role of Group Commercial Director in 2013 with responsibility for sales and marketing and his promotion to the Board recognised his deep knowledge of the business and his relationships with key stakeholders as well as the significance of his role and his valuable contribution to Dairy Crest.
In addition to considering the bench strength of the Executive Directors the Committee considered the need to augment further the experience of the wider Board.
The effectiveness review conducted with the assistance of Russell Reynolds Associates last year identified that the majority of Directors believed that it would be beneficial to increase the number of Nonexecutive Directors from four to five.
The Nomination Committee has appointed the Zygos Partnership as headhunters to conduct a search for an additional Nonexecutive
The Zygos Partnership has been used by the Company in previous Nonexecutive Director searches but has no other connections with the Company.
They have been asked to prepare a long list of candidates with international experience in either FMCG andor ingredients businesses.
The Committee will narrow the long list to a shortlist for interview and recommendation to the Board.
In compiling a long list Zygos has been instructed to include candidates representing the most diverse range of backgrounds possible including but not limited to gender ethnicity nationality and personal background.
The Committee has also spent time during the year considering succession for Nonexecutive Directors in light of their length of service and the requirements of the Code.
Andrew CarrLocke is the longest serving of the independent Nonexecutive Directors having been appointed to the Board in August 2009.
By the end of this year Nomination Committee report he will have served 8 years on the Board and the Committee intends to conduct a search exercise for his replacement during late 2017 early 2018.
Andrew is an exceptionally able Audit Committee Chairman and the Committee will be looking for candidates with recent and relevant financial experience which will enable them to take on the role of chairing the Audit Committee.
It is the Committees intention to ensure that sufficient time is allowed for an appropriate handover period from Andrew to his successor.
Accordingly it is the Committees intention to have concluded the search process in time to make recommendations to the Board so that an appointment may be made by April 2018 enabling the incoming Audit Committee chairman to shadow the Audit Committees activities related to the 201718 financial yearend process.
In addition to the matters referred to above during the new 201718 financial year the Committee will also be focussing on mapping out the succession requirements associated with other Nonexecutive
In November this year Richard Macdonald will have completed 7 years service on the Board including 3 years as chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
The Committee is conscious of the recommendation that before being appointed to chair a remuneration committee individuals should have served at least a year on a board as a nonexecutive.
The effect of that is to require even longer forward planning for the recruitment of remuneration committee chair successors than was previously the case.
With that in mind the Committee is conscious that the recruitment of a successor for Richard would need to have been concluded by November 2018.
Moreover the Committee is conscious that the burden associated with chairing a remuneration committee has increased significantly over recent years.
As a result the pool of individuals with the requisite experience for the role may not be as broad as for other roles.
Accordingly sufficient time needs to be allowed for a longer more challenging search process.
Although there remains ample time to conduct a search the Committee is thinking ahead and intends to start a search in mid 2018 to allow time for recruitment of the best possible candidate.
The Committee is satisfied that it has performed its duties under its terms of reference including Director appointments The Committees primary responsibility is to consider and recommend to the Board candidates who are appropriate for appointment as Executive and Nonexecutive
Its objective is to maintain an appropriate balance of skills and experience on the Board and to ensure progressive refreshment of the Board.
Processes for Director appointments The process for the appointment of new Directors is rigorous and transparent.
The
Committee ensures that the recruitment exercise for Directors is conducted against a documented brief setting out the requirements of the role and the skills and experience required of the person to fill it.
In the past the Company has engaged the services of external search consultancies and as referred to above it is anticipated in the ordinary course that it would do so in the future.
Were it not to do so open advertising would be used as an alternative.
Prospective appointees are interviewed by the Committee and the Committee makes a recommendation to the Board.
The Board makes the decision whether to appoint the recommended individual.
The
Committee reports the outcome of its meetings to the Board.
Director commitments The Committee evaluates the commitments of individual Directors.
The Board believes that it is in the best interests of the Company that Executive Directors take up opportunities to act as nonexecutive directors in other appropriate I am pleased to present my report for the 201617 financial year as Chairman of the Nomination
Last year I reported that the Committees main focus would be on considering expanding the Board.
The Committees aim in particular was to explore adding further relevant skills and experience to those of the existing Directors reflecting the demands of our changing business following the successful sale of the Dairies business and the establishment of our added value ingredients business.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 39 companies.
Unless the Board approves otherwise Executive Directors may serve in a nonexecutive capacity on the board of one other company.
Nonexecutive Directors may serve as directors executive or otherwise on the boards of other companies or appropriate organisations.
Nonexecutive Directors letters of appointment require them to seek prior approval from the Board before accepting any additional commitment that might affect the time that they are able to devote to their role as a Nonexecutive Director of the Company.
The Board has the opportunity to satisfy itself that Nonexecutive Directors other commitments allow them to devote adequate time to their commitments to the Company.
The
Board approved all new appointments of Directors during the year and is satisfied that all Directors continue to have sufficient time to devote themselves properly to their duties for the Company.
Diversity The Committee monitors diversity on behalf of the Board.
The Group interprets diversity in its widest sense and aims to achieve the best possible leadership for the Group by ensuring an appropriate mix of skills backgrounds gender experience and knowledge amongst its Directors senior managers and other employees.
The Committee considers that first and foremost appointments must be made based on an objective assessment of who is the best person to fill a role with candidates drawn from a diverse range of backgrounds.
The Company has not adopted targets for female representation amongst the Directors.
The Group will continue to operate policies giving equal opportunities to all irrespective of age gender marital status disability nationality colour ethnic origin sexual orientation or religious affiliation.
Board effectiveness The Board normally undertakes an annual effectiveness review.
In accordance with the Code every three years it uses the services of an external facilitator to facilitate its effectiveness review.
Last years review of the effectiveness of the Board its Committees and of me as Chairman was conducted with the assistance of Russell Reynolds Associates.
This year I led a review of the effectiveness of the Board and its Committees with the assistance of the Company Secretary and the Senior Independent Director who led the review of my performance.
Details of that review can be found at page 31.
Stephen Alexander Chairman of the Nomination Committee 17 May 2017 40 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED During the year we have concluded our review of our corporate responsibility strategy resulting in the approval by the Committee and the adoption by the Group of a simplified strategy centred around four key pillars Climate Colleagues Consumers and
Having previously adopted the language of Business in the Communitys corporate responsibility structure we felt that our corporate responsibility programme was sufficiently established to allow us to move away from slavishly aping that structure.
We also believed it was important to adopt language which would resonate better with our employees hence the change to the four new strategic pillars.
We have also reaffirmed ownership of each of the pillars by a member of the senior management team.
We felt that direct individual accountability for each of the pillars of our strategy would help to drive ownership within the business and thereby help to drive progress.
Mike Barrington our Group Supply Chain Director owns Climate Colleagues is owned by Robert Willock our Group HR Director Adam Braithwaite our Group Commercial Director owns Consumers and finally Community is owned by Tom Atherton our Group Finance Director.
In addition to adopting new pillars for our corporate responsibility strategy we have adopted new simplified pledges which reflect the simpler structure of our business following the sale of the Dairies business.
We have been careful to ensure though that with these key pledges we remain able to track progress from the beginning of our new five year corporate responsibility programme.
More detail on our achievements and progress can be found on pages 22 to 27 of this Annual Report but I wanted to pull out the following highlights for your attention We increased the amount of onsite renewable energy to 63% of fuel used by manufacturing sites in our business from 51% in the prior year Our focus on low carbon manufacturing has seen a 4% reduction in relative energy use at our Kirkby Frome and Nuneaton sites compared to the prior year Around 80% of the heat required by our Davidstow creamery was produced from biomass with energy from biomass boilers representing more than 40% of the Groups total energy use in the year.
This means we met our pledge that more than one third of total energy used should come from onsite renewables Higher water recovery rates towards the end of the year meant that around 45% of water used in manufacturing by our business came from recycled sources I am pleased to present the report of the Corporate Responsibility Committee to shareholders.
Full details of our corporate responsibility programme can be found at pages 22 to 27.
The
Committee oversees the Groups corporate responsibility programme and ensures that key social ethical and environmental issues are assessed and prioritised including reviewing the Companys corporate responsibility pledges.
In addition to me as Chairman the Committee comprises Richard Macdonald Mark Allen Tom Atherton Robin Miller Robert Willock Adam Braithwaite and Simon Hewitt Group Technical Director.
Corporate Responsibility Committee report The Chief Executive chairs the Executive Committee which comprises the other Executive Directors and senior members of the Groups executive team.
Details of the members of the Executive Committee can be found at page 29.
The Executive Committee is responsible amongst other matters for implementing the Groups strategic direction and monitoring the performance of the business and its control procedures on a daytoday basis as well as the daytoday operations of the Groups business its performance against forecasts and budgets and profitability.
The Executive Committee normally meets weekly.
Certain information fulfilling the requirements of the Corporate Governance report can be found in the Directors report at pages 62 to 64 under the headings Substantial shareholdings Rights and obligations attaching to shares Articles of association and Purchase of own shares and is incorporated into this Corporate Governance report by reference.
By order of the Board Robin Miller Company Secretary and General Counsel 17 May 2017 Executive Committee We exceeded our target of 80% segregation of operational waste on site by year end We achieved a 69% reduction in Accident Incident Rate in the last year versus the 2013 baseline against which we measure ourselves During 201617 we managed to achieve zero RIDDORS.
We are particularly proud of this achievement especially as we have continued to hold ourselves to account against the more stretching but superseded definition of a RIDDOR where incapacitation is suffered for more than 3 days rather than the softer definition which the HSE has adopted where an incident needs to result in incapacitation for more than 7 days to be classified as a RIDDOR 80% of the Groups employees attended a roadshow presented by members of the Executive Committee which covered topics ranging from the Groups Vision and Values to our business plans and progress against them Lower fat variants of our products collectively achieved a retail sales value of 84.0 million an increase of 3.2% on the prior year Last year I talked of the Committees recognition of the need continually to evolve our corporate responsibility strategy in order to meet the changing demands of our customers employees and the consumers of the great products we make.
By evolving our corporate responsibility strategy and pledges as we have during the year the Committee has demonstrated that commitment to evolution.
A successful approach to corporate responsibility is we believe an essential part of securing a sustainable business which thrives both today and in the future.
Sue f arr Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee 17 May 2017 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 41
Company performance over the year 201617 has been the first full year following the successful sale of our Dairies business to Mller in December 2015.
Our business is now almost entirely branded or added value and we have a clear strategy for future growth.
We have delivered another good branded performance this year through investment in product innovation promotional activity and advertising.
We will continue to develop our portfolio.
Our innovation is beginning to generate new business opportunities by selling demineralised whey and GOS into growing infant formula markets globally.
Overall the Group has delivered increased adjusted profit before tax and adjusted earnings per share and is recommending an increased final dividend of 16.3 pence per share.
DireCtors remuneration report r eview of remuneration policy In carrying out the remuneration review this year the Committee was mindful of the significant changes to Dairy Crests business model since our existing Policy was adopted in combination with the evolving external executive pay environment.
Over the last three years many shareholders have been supportive of the nature of the current longterm incentive plan within our existing policy a performanceongrant model called the Long Term Alignment Plan LTAP in particular noting the alignment with the business strategy achieved through the scorecard.
However the Committee also recognises the challenges raised by some shareholders in relation to the operation of the scheme and a more general dislike of performanceongrant models and that as such some would be unlikely to be supportive of it as part of Dairy Crests future policy.
Therefore the last grant under the LTAP will be made this year based on the assessment of performance against the scorecard which was disclosed in last years Remuneration report.
In developing a revised longterm arrangement to be included in the future policy the Committee considered the full spectrum of alternatives with the aim of creating the best alignment with the business and its strategy.
We have transformed the Group into a high margin added value and branded business.
However our operating model and sector does continue to result in potential earnings volatility.
Our primary raw material milk is subject to significant price volatility which cannot be hedged and as a result of the manufacturing process there is a lag between when the cost of raw materials is incurred in manufacturing cheese and when the product sales are recognised on average nearly 12 months later the average maturity of our cheese.
This dynamic is unique to companies such as Dairy Crest and results in potential margin volatility which is not consistent with a smooth progression in earnings over several years.
In light of this volatility setting robust longterm financial earnings or cash targets which are appropriately stretching is extremely challenging as price volatility can generate a boom or bust vesting outcome which is not within managements control.
The Committee also wanted to simplify the arrangements increase transparency and maximise alignment with shareholders.
As a result of these factors we concluded that a restricted share arrangement would be optimal for the business to achieve these goals.
Our proposed approach for restricted shares included a number of tradeoffs to reflect the increased certainty of the award for management comprising a significantly reduced opportunity level a vesting period of five years and the inclusion of a dividend underpin.
We consulted with our largest shareholders and shareholder bodies on this proposal and whilst many were supportive a number of shareholders and a proxy body were not able to confirm their support for our proposed approach.
In the current environment and given this uncertainty the Committee therefore determined that it would not be appropriate to put restricted shares forward as a proposal at the 2017 AGM.
Since this decision was made the House of Commons Select Committee on Corporate Governance published its findings which included support for restricted shares in line with the approach we were considering.
As such we intend to continue to monitor the evolution of views within the market and may revisit restricted shares in the future as the acceptability of this model in the market evolves.
Dear shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration report for the 201617 financial year.
The current Directors Remuneration Policy Policy was approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM and applies from 1 April 2015 until the 2017 AGM.
We have therefore undertaken a process during the year to develop a revised Policy to be put to a shareholder binding vote at the 2017 AGM which is also included within this report.
As part of the remuneration review I met with a large number of our shareholders and the shareholder representative bodies to consult on the details of the Policy and I would like to thank them for their input and helpful guidance.
The revised Policy continues to be based upon a core set of principles which supports the strategic and financial ambitions of the Company The remuneration package should support a performance based culture attract and retain talented personnel and align executives and shareholders interests The remuneration structure should be both uncomplicated and transparent and we remain committed to open disclosure The measures used for incentive plans should reflect the strategic priorities which the Committee considers critical to the future success of the Company The Committee is confident that the Policy we are proposing fulfils these principles to the fullest extent possible within the current climate and I hope we are able to depend on your support at the upcoming AGM.
Chairmans statement 42 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
In light of the shareholder consultation the Committee decided to revisit the possible incentive alternatives and after much deliberation we are now proposing to return to the use of a traditional long term incentive plan LTIP.
Dairy Crest had a traditional LTIP in place prior to the LTAP the Long Term Incentive Share Plan LTISP and the new LTIP will replicate many of the features of this plan but with some amendments such that it reflects the current business strategy and market. an expected value equal to that of our current LTAP.
In particular given the challenges the Company faces in setting longterm financial targets the LTIP will be based primarily on relative Total Shareholder Return TSR performance.
TSR is a robust financial measure which achieves shareholder alignment whilst being a measure for which it is straightforward to calibrate targets which are acceptable to shareholders given its relative nature.
We believe share price and ultimately shareholder return are critical measures of the successful implementation of strategy and the performance and growth of the business and ensure that management is rewarded in the case where Dairy Crests shareholders have experienced a higher overall return than the market.
Therefore our proposed Policy states that at least 75% of the overall award will be based on financial measures with at least 50% of the overall award based on TSR versus a broad comparator group.
The remaining part of the award may be based on strategic measures and we will retain discretion to determine the appropriate measures year on year based on strategic priorities at the time.
As stated we will not be making a grant under this award until 2018.
Taking into account business strategy and context at that time we will determine the specific measures for the first grant.
We will ensure transparency on the measures set.
The plan will also incorporate elements in line with best practice including malus clawback and the addition of a twoyear holding period post the three year vesting period in order to align further managements interests with those of shareholders.
Other than changes to the longterm incentive plan we have made no other significant changes to our revised Policy.
We were pleased to welcome the Group Commercial Director Adam Braithwaite to the Board on 19 July 2016.
His remuneration upon joining the Board was fully in line with the current Remuneration Policy with his salary set at 255000 a level competitive against the market for similar roles in FTSe 250 companies.
As set out in last years report our annual bonus has been assessed against three metrics profit before tax free cashflow and personal objectives.
This approach was applied to all scheme participants across the Group.
The economic and trading circumstances faced by the business over the year in particular significant cost inflation in the second half resulted in the Company achieving below threshold in respect of the cashflow measure albeit above threshold in respect of the profit measure.
Whilst the reported results against the targets set would result in a payout under the profit element of the bonus the executive Committee supported by the Remuneration Committee determined that this would not be appropriate given the extended commissioning of demineralised whey and GOS plants at Davidstow which resulted in a higher than anticipated exceptional charge for the year.
However it was agreed that given the profit threshold level was met a payout under the personal objectives element of the bonus was warranted.
This results in bonus outcomes of 18.75% of salary for Mark Allen 18.75% for Tom Atherton and 15.63% for Adam Braithwaite reflecting their achievement against challenging personal objectives for the year. determines the level of grant.
The award is subject to a dividend performance underpin for the first 3 years of the vesting period with awards vesting in two equal tranches four and five years after grant.
The 201617 grant level of 67.2% was determined based on the performance of the Company over 201617 against the scorecard disclosed in the previous years report.
Details of the achievement against each scorecard measure are included in this report and reflect a consistent performance in a challenging year.
Mark Allen received an annual salary increase effective as of 1 January 2017.
This figure reflects the longer period of 18 months before the next salary review in July 2018.
Mark received a salary increase of 3.6% equivalent to 2.4% per annum over 18 months Salary increases for Tom Atherton and Adam Braithwaite will be 2.6% in line with that of the general workforce.
The increases will be effective from 1 July 2017. n onexecutive Director fees have also increased during the year.
Full details are provided on page 60.
In light of the importance to Dairy Crest of reducing net debt over the shortterm the Committee has reviewed the weightings of measures under the bonus plan.
To reflect this the Committee decided to increase the proportion of bonus relating to free cash flow generation.
The bonus quantum is unchanged.
The performance period under the oneoff Transformational Incentive Award TIA completes in December 2017.
This award supported the retention and motivation of Mark Allen through the critical period of the sale of the Dairies business to Mller in which his knowledge and experience were vital to a successful outcome.
Further details of the TIA objectives and performance against these to date are set out in this report.
Finally I would like to thank my fellow Committee members and internal and external teams who supported us with their commitment and hard work over the past year.
We remain committed to hearing your views as shareholders.
If you would like to discuss any aspect of our remuneration further I would welcome your comments.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by r ichard macdonald Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
17 May 2017 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 43
How the element supports our strategic objectives o peration of the element maximum opportunity under the element performance metrics used and time period applicable Base salary Reflect assessment of market practice based on role and experience.
Benchmarked against executives with similar responsibilities in companies of comparable size and complexity in particular the constituent companies of the FTSe 250 index excluding financial services.
Paid in 12 equal monthly instalments during the year.
Reviewed annually and any changes are in the ordinary course effective from 1 July.
Increases will normally be broadly in line with inflation and the wider employee population.
The Committee retains the flexibility to award higher base salary increases and to position salaries in such a way that ensures Dairy Crest remains competitive in the market and to take into account an individuals personal performance and experience in the role  as such the Committee may apply increases over time as appropriate to achieve alignment with market levels.
Changes may also be made in the case of a change in role or responsibility. n ot applicable.
Provide a market competitive level of provision with appropriate flexibility whilst minimising risk to the Group.
There is a defined contribution scheme and or salary supplement in place. scheme from 1 April 2010. supplements.
Overall employer contributions including cash supplements will not exceed 23% of salary. n ot applicable.
Benefits
Provide market competitive benefits.
Includes company car benefit life assurance cover permanent health insurance and medical insurance.
Dairy Crest pays the cost of providing the benefits on a monthly basis or as required for oneoff events.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to add to or remove these benefits as required.
All executive Directors receive a company carcar allowance and private medical insurance commensurate with market levels. cover of 7 x annual salary. n ot applicable.
Bonus ensure that annual reward is consistent with successfully achieving the shortterm financial targets and strategic objectives of the
To deliver an appropriate balance between longterm and shortterm reward any bonus earned over 50% of annual salary is deferred into shares see below.
The remainder is paid as cash.
The cash element of the bonus is ordinarily paid three months after the end of the financial year to which it relates.
Clawback applies to cash payments for 3 years from the date this element is paid.
Current maximum award 100% of salary.
Target award 50% of salary.
Threshold award 0% of salary.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to increase the maximum award to 150% of salary in exceptional circumstances.
The
Committee is not aware of any such circumstances and so does not currently expect to make awards above the maximum of 100% of salary.
Performance is measured by reference to the financial year.
Metrics used to determine performance under the bonus will be based on a mix of financial operational and personal measures.
The metrics that apply for 201718 are set out on page 60 of the Annual Report.
The Committee has the flexibility to vary the performance measures and weighting of metrics under this plan.
Directors r emuneration policy We seek to ensure that the remuneration packages contribute to the delivery of longterm shareholder value.
This is reflected in the Companys annual bonus scheme and longterm incentive plan which are explained in more detail below.
The Committee will be requesting shareholder approval of the following remuneration policy at the AGM on 18 July 2017 to cover a period of three years from that date.
Directors r emuneration policy Future policy table The remuneration structure for executive and nonexecutive Directors who are paid fees and receive no additional benefits at Dairy Crest and the underlying principles on which each element of the package is based are set out below.
44 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
How the element supports our strategic objectives o peration of the element maximum opportunity under the element performance metrics used and time period applicable Deferred bonus Deliver appropriate balance between longterm and shortterm reward and to build up with Policy.
Any bonus over 50% of annual salary is deferred for three years conditional on continued employment until vesting date.
Delivered in shares.
Participants will normally be entitled to an amount payable in shares on vesting equal in value to the dividends payable on deferred bonus shares over the deferral period.
Malus applies to deferred bonus.
Policy maximum award 50% of salary maximum potential deferral.
In the exceptional event the Remuneration Committee exercises discretion to award a bonus above 100% of salary any bonus earned above 50% of salary would be deferred into shares. n one.
Value growth is achieved only through change in share price and dividend equivalents paid.
Long term incentive plan
Groups performance over the longer term.
Alignment of interest between participants and shareholders.
Awards will take the form of either nil cost options to acquire shares or conditional awards to acquire shares.
The Committee will determine the appropriate level of grant each year subject to the maximum award of 150% of base salary.
For recruitment purposes only where there is a need to provide replacement awards grants can be made in excess of 150% of base salary. performance conditions.
Awards granted for recruitment purposes may vest before the expiry of 3 years from the date of grant and may not be subject to performance conditions.
A 2 year holding period will normally apply after the vesting period subject to the Committees discretion to reduce or not apply a holding period in exceptional circumstances.
Vested shares accrue dividend equivalents.
Awards and dividend equivalents may be settled in shares or cash.
Malus and clawback apply to the LTIP.
Maximum award 150% of base salary other than where an award is made in connection with recruitment.
Threshold award 25% of the maximum award Performance is measured by reference to the three financial years starting with the year of grant.
Metrics used to determine performance under the LTIP will be based on a mix of financial and strategic measures.
The Committee has the flexibility to vary the performance measures and weighting of metrics under this plan.
However at least 75% of the overall award will be based on financial measures with at least 50% of the overall award based on relative TSR versus a broad comparator group.
The remaining part of the award may be based on strategic measures.
Further to extensive shareholder consultation where the future acceptability of the LTAP was questioned and after subsequent consideration of a restricted stock plan it has been decided to implement a traditional LTIP.
To achieve shareholder alignment the LTIP is predominantly financially based with the primary measure being TSR incorporating an extended vestingholding period.
The maximum award of 150% is set at the lower quartile of the FTSe250 and is equal to the maximum under the previous LTISP with an expected value equal to the current LTAP.
Company.
The SAYe Scheme is an allemployee HMRC approved savingsrelated share option scheme and no performance conditions are attached to SAYe options. in the allemployee SAYe.
The maximum participation levels will be set based on the applicable limits set by HMRC. n ot applicable. subsidiaries.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 45
How the element supports our strategic objectives o peration of the element maximum opportunity under the element performance metrics used and time period applicable shareholding requirement Alignment of interest between participants and shareholders. shareholding in the Company.
Such shareholdings exclude unvested options under the LTISP and LTIP but include unvested deferred shares granted to executive Directors as part payment of bonuses and unvested LTAP awards. reached.
The shareholding requirement for executive Directors is 200% of salary. n ot applicable.
Directors fees
Directors and attracts n on executive Directors of suitable calibre.
Benchmarked against n onexecutive Directors with similar responsibilities in companies of comparable size and complexity.
The remuneration of the nonexecutive Chairman is determined by the Board following recommendations from the Remuneration Committee and Chief executive.
The remuneration of non executive Directors is determined by the Board following recommendations from the Chief executive having reviewed appropriate market levels. n onexecutive Directors are paid a fee only.
The total fees for n onexecutive Directors remain within the limit of 600000 set out in the Articles of Association. n ot applicable.
Long t erm alignment plan
Groups performance over the longer term.
Alignment of interest between participants and shareholders.
Measures identified are central to Dairy Crests strategy and are considered by Directors in overseeing the operation of the business.
Annual grant of share awards.
Awards will be subject to a phased vesting requirement with 50% of the award vesting in year 4 and 50% in year 5 following grant.
Participants will normally be entitled to an amount on vesting paid in shares equal in value to the dividends payable on shares awarded.
Malus and clawback apply to the LTAP.
The
Board may at any time up to and on vesting reduce the number of shares that vest should material misstatement or misconduct occur.
Maximum award 90% of salary.
If performance falls below a minimum level against the scorecard no award will be made.
Achievements over the prior year against a pregrant performance scorecard comprising measures aligned to Dairy Crests strategic priorities.
The Committee has flexibility to amend the relevant measures weightings and KPIs which determine the size of the awards granted.
The weighting of financial KPIs in determining annual grant levels will be at least 60% of the scorecard.
Vesting is subject to continued employment.
The level of vesting may be reduced dependent on a dividend underpin over the first three years of the vesting period.
An amount of the award proportional to the percentage decrease in dividend may not vest in the event of a decline of up to 50%.
If
In such circumstances not more than 50% of the award will vest.
Dividend cover must be maintained in a specific range over the threeyear measurement period.
The Remuneration Committee retains discretion to reduce the vesting of awards as appropriate should dividend cover be outside this range.
Vesting of awards could be reduced to zero.
The dividend cover range will be determined by the Committee annually and may be adjusted if the Committee determines this to be appropriate.
46 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
Performance measures for incentive plans and bonus reflect the strategic priorities which the Committee considers critical to the future success of the Company.
Targets are set by reference to budgeted financials wider Group targets external market consensus and stretching strategic growth outcomes.
Differences in remuneration for all employees All employees participate in some form of bonus plan.
The size of award and the weighting of performance conditions vary by grade with specific measures incorporated where relevant.
All employees have the opportunity to participate in a pension arrangement at levels of employer contribution which vary by grade.
Members of senior management participated in the LTAP at an award level appropriate to their role which will be replaced subject to shareholder approval by the new LTIP with the same individuals eligible.
Ceo oneoff t ransformational incentive a ward At the eGM held in December 2014 shareholders approved the grant of a oneoff Transformational Incentive Award TIA outside of policy to the CeO connected to the key business change of the sale of the Dairies business.
The key terms of the TIA are detailed below with further detail in the 2016 Directors Remuneration report The award will vest in December 2017 to the extent that the stretching performance conditions set in relation to the award are achieved over the three year period December 20142017 The award is structured as a base award over Ordinary Shares having a market value at grant equivalent to 75% of Mark Allens base salary.
A multiplier of between 0 and 3 times the number of Ordinary Shares subject to the base award will be applied to it at the end of the three year performance period depending on the level of performance achieved The Committee will determine the level of vesting of the TIA based on performance objectives which are intended to be demanding.
In measuring performance in this regard the Committee has identified three categories of objectives on which the assessment of performance will be based.
These relate to the restructuring of the business and its future success as follows Managing the competition approval process relating to the sale of the Dairies business requiring strong leadership and a high level of personal involvement from a chief executive officer who is an acknowledged leader in the sector as well as managing the business as a whole through a period of extended uncertainty Appropriately reshaping the Group taking account of the outcome of the competition approval process establishing a successful future business by reference to the development of the Group and its principal business streams including the delivery of value to shareholders An update on the performance against these objectives to date is provided on pages 54 to 55 statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company As the Committee has oversight of remuneration matters for the broader senior management population it brings the reward of these individuals into consideration when discussing packages for executive Directors.
The Committee does not specifically ask employees to comment on matters related to the remuneration of executive Directors but any comments received are taken into account.
The level of salary increases for the general Dairy Crest employee population is considered when setting increases for the executive Directors.
In addition salary benchmark information for companies of comparable size and complexity within the FTSe250 excluding financial services is taken into consideration.
The Committee has oversight of statutory matters in relation to wider employee pay for example in respect of the n ational Living Wage and Gender Pay Gap and receives regular updates on such matters.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 47
The Committees approach to recruitment remuneration is to pay a competitive salary as appropriate to attract and motivate the right talent in the role.
The following table sets out the various components which would be considered for inclusion in the remuneration package for the appointment of an executive Director.
In respect of a promotion any remuneration commitments made prior to such promotion will be honoured.
Any new executive Directors remuneration package would include the same elements and be subject to the same constraints as those of the existing executive Directors performing similar roles as shown below Component policy and principles Base salary and benefits The salary level will be set taking into account the responsibilities of the individual and the salaries paid for similar roles in comparable companies.
Depending on the circumstances of any particular appointment the Committee may choose to set base salary above market median to attract the right talent or below market median with increases applied over a period of time to achieve alignment with market levels for the role with reference to the experience and performance of the individual all subject to the Companys ability to pay.
Should relocation of a newly recruited executive Director be required reasonable costs associated with this relocation will be met by the
Such relocation support could include but not be limited to payment of legal fees removal costs temporary accommodationhotel cost a contribution to stamp duty and replacement of nontransferrable household items.
In addition the Committee may grant additional support as appropriate.
Other benefits provided will be aligned to those set out on pages 43 to 45. payment above this.
The total benefit will not exceed 23% of Basic Salary. annual bonus The executive Director will be eligible to participate in the annual bonus scheme as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
The Policy maximum award under the bonus will be 100% of salary.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to increase the maximum award to 150% of salary in exceptional circumstances.
Any bonus over 50% of salary is deferred into shares for three years as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
Long term incentive awards The executive Director will be eligible to participate in the LTIP at the Remuneration Committees discretion.
The maximum annual award under this scheme is 150% of base salary and associated conditions would apply as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
The Committee may grant additional awards under the LTIP as replacement awards.
In such cases the level of award and timing of vesting could be different from that in the Remuneration Policy in order to replicate as practically as possible the value and timing of the remuneration forgone.
The Committee will seek to structure any replacement awards so that overall they are no more generous in terms of expected value or vesting period than the awards forfeited from a new recruits previous employer.
The Committee has the flexibility not to apply performance conditions or a holding period and to use cash andor shares as the format for delivery of any replacement awards.
Service contracts and letters of appointment include the following terms.
M Allen 18 July 2002 12 months T Atherton 23 May 2013 12 months A Braithwaite 19 July 2016 12 months executive Directors service agreements are available on the Companys website site n onexecutive Director Letters of appointment notice period A CarrLocke 15 July 2009 3 months R Macdonald 4 October 2010 3 months S Alexander 4 October 2010 3 months S Farr 6 October 2011 3 months It is the Companys policy that n onexecutive Directors should not normally serve for more than nine years.
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
Any external appointment must not conflict with a Directors duties and commitments to Dairy Crest.
Fees may be retained by Directors for such appointments.
The Remuneration Committees approach when considering payments in the event of termination is to take account of the individual circumstances including the reason for termination contractual obligations of both parties as well as share plan and pension scheme rules including relevant performance conditions.
The table below summarises the key elements of the executive Director service contract and policy on payment for loss of office.
Component policy and principles notice period 12 months notice from Company.
12 months notice from Director.
Compensation for loss of office in service contracts u p to 12 months salary plus an additional 3% to account for presumed salary increases from any salary review that may have taken place in the notice period.
Payable monthly and subject to mitigation if the Director obtains alternative employment up to 12 months after termination.
Other payments to the Director in question include medical benefits cost of company car and a sum equivalent to 23% of annual salary representing pension contribution for the unexpired part of the contractual notice period. benefits pension plus 50% of maximum bonus opportunity for the notice period.
This will not be the Companys policy going forward for other executive Directors.
Contractual provisions in respect of compensation for loss of office for Mark Allen are therefore grandfathered.
In the event of a compromise or settlement agreement the Remuneration Committee may make payments it considers reasonable in settlement of potential legal claims.
This may include an entitlement to compensation in respect of their statutory rights under employment protection legislation in the u K or in other jurisdictions.
The Remuneration Committee may also include in such payments reasonable reimbursement of professional fees in connection with such agreements.
The reimbursement of repatriation costs or fees for professional or outplacement advice may also be included in the termination package as deemed reasonable by the Committee as may the continuation of benefits for a limited period.
If termination is by way of death injury illness disability redundancy retirement or any other circumstances the Committee determines deferred bonus share awards may be released in full on termination.
Otherwise the proportion of awards released will be determined at the discretion of the Board.
Ltap plan awards under plan rules In relation to the LTAP Any outstanding award will lapse at cessation of employment with the Company unless the reason for cessation is by way of injury illhealth disability redundancy retirement the business or company in which the award holder works being sold outside of the Group or any other circumstances the Committee determines when the award will vest at the normal vesting date with the underpin and other conditions considered at the time of vesting subject to proration for time served.
The Committee may determine not to prorate if deemed appropriate.
Alternatively the Committee may determine that a proportion of the award will vest immediately with the proportion determined by the Committee taking into account satisfaction of the underpin and any other factors the Committee considers relevant.
In relation to the LTIP Any outstanding award will lapse at cessation of employment with the Company unless the reason for cessation is by way of injury illhealth disability redundancy retirement the business or company in which the award holder works being sold outside of the Group or any other circumstances the Committee determines when the award will vest at the normal vesting date with the performance conditions considered at the time of vesting subject to proration for time served.
The Committee may determine not to prorate if deemed appropriate.
Alternatively the Committee may determine that a proportion of the award will vest immediately with the proportion determined by the Committee taking into account satisfaction of the performance conditions and any other factors the Committee considers relevant.
A proportion of the LTIPLTAP will vest immediately on death prorated for time.
Any discretion available in determining treatment of incentives on termination of employment is intended only to be relied upon to provide flexibility in certain circumstances.
The Remuneration Committees determination will take into account the particular circumstances of the Directors departure and the recent performance of the Company.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 49
Component policy and principles Change of control Outstanding awards and options would normally vest and become exercisable on a change of control to the extent that any performance condition has been satisfied.
The proportion of awards that vest under the LTIPLTAP will be determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Deferred bonus awards would normally be released in full.
Payments under the bonus scheme would be prorated for service from the start of the relevant bonus year to the date of the change of control.
For SAYe participants can at the Boards discretion exercise options up to six months after the change of control.
Contributions to SAYe can continue up to the date of exercise.
The Committee reserves the right to alter the performance period or the performance measures and targets of the annual bonus plan or of any outstanding awards under the annual bonus plan or the LTIPLTAP in the event of a change of control to ensure that the performance conditions remain relevant but challenging.
The Committee has the discretion to test performance at the point of change of control or to allow awards to continue or rollover in any reasonable manner with agreement of the acquirer taking into account the circumstances of the change of control.
There are no predetermined special provisions for n onexecutive Directors with regard to compensation in the event of loss of office.
A significant proportion of an executive Directors total remuneration package is variable being subject to the achievement of specified shortterm and longterm business objectives.
The charts below show the composition of total remuneration at minimum target and maximum performance scenarios for the executive Directors.
The TIA and SAYe are excluded.
Director Value of package 000s m allen t a therton a Braithwaite n otes to the scenarios Fixed This element comprises salary as of 1 July 2017 see page 59 pension benefits including salary supplement and other fixed benefits company car etc as per the last known number. scenario and 50% of salary in the target scenario.
Longterm variable remuneration This element shows remuneration in respect of the LTIP at 150% of salary in the maximum scenario and 75% of salary in the target scenario. accordance with the requirements of rules governing disclosure.
During 201617 the Committee consulted extensively with our largest shareholders as well as shareholder representative bodies on our new remuneration structure.
We were grateful to shareholders for the level and quality of engagement many of whom were supportive of our proposed approach to move to a restricted share arrangement.
When the Committee decided to continue no longer with this proposed approach a second round of consultation took place.
The Committee values highly the quality of input from its engagement with shareholders.
Shareholder consultation helps the Committee set meaningful remuneration policies that achieve clear alignment of the interests of shareholders and management.
The Committee looks forward to continuing the productive dialogue with the Companys shareholders.
Maximum
Target
Minimum Fixed
Fixed Remuneration Annual Variable Remuneration Longterm Variable Remuneration 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Target
Minimum Fixed 34% 51% 40% 2122 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed tel800 1000 34% 51% 40% 994 29% 26% 20% 100% tel1200 1500 34% 51% 40% 1321 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed
Fixed Remuneration Annual Variable Remuneration Longterm Variable Remuneration 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Target
Minimum Fixed 34% 51% 40% 2122 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed tel800 1000 34% 51% 40% 994 29% 26% 20% 100% tel1200 1500 34% 51% 40% 1321 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed
Fixed Remuneration Annual Variable Remuneration Longterm Variable Remuneration 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Target
Minimum Fixed 34% 51% 40% 2122 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed tel800 1000 34% 51% 40% 994 29% 26% 20% 100% tel1200 1500 34% 51% 40% 1321 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed
Fixed Remuneration Annual Variable Remuneration Longterm Variable Remuneration 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Target
Minimum Fixed 34% 51% 40% 2122 29% 26% 20% 100%
Target
Minimum Fixed tel800 1000 34% 51% 40% 994 29% 26% 20% 100% tel1200 1500 34% 51% 40% 1321 29% 26% 20% 100% 449 50 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
The table below sets out the analysis of total remuneration for each Director.
An explanation of how the figures are calculated follows the table.
The total remuneration for each Director reflects the performance of the Company and the contribution each individual has made to the ongoing success of the Company.
It is important to note that the LTAP award included in the column LTAP for 201617 is incorporated in the single total figure of remuneration for regulatory reasons with no shares vesting in the year.
The 2014 LTAP vests 50% in 201819 and 50% in 201920.
Therefore the actual remuneration earned in 201617 for Mark Allen Tom Atherton and Adam Braithwaite was 805k 501k and 261k iii respectively.
Director
Base salaryfees t axable benefits
Ltap pension ii t otal 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 nonexecutive
S Alexander 155 155         155 155 executive Directors M Allen 545 523 33 3tel529 125 120 1344 1439 T Atherton telA Braithwaite iii nonexecutive
A CarrLocke 49 43         49 43 R Macdonald 55 48         55 48 i For 201516 the values included are for the 2013 LTAP.
These shares have not vested therefore the value of the awards has been calculated using the average middle market price during the final quarter of 201617.
For 201617 the values included are for the 2014 LTAP.
Awards were subject to a dividend underpin over the period April 2014  March 2017.
The conditions under the dividend underpin were met and the awards are not subject to any further performance conditions  they are therefore included in the single figure.
The value of the awards has been calculated using the average middle market price during the final quarter of 201617.
50% of awards will vest on 16 December 2018 and 50% will vest on 16 December 2019.
As the vesting period for this award has not yet been completed no value will be delivered to participants until 20182019. ii Pension amounts include employers pension contribution and salary supplement.
Base salary bonus and LTAP are defined on pages 43 to 45. iii Amounts shown in relation to Adam Braithwaite relate to the period since 19 July 2016 when he was appointed to the Board. iv There has been an increase to n onexecutive Director fees in the year effective from 1 December 2016.
For further details see page 60.
Taxable benefits are valued at the taxable value and include company carcar allowance and private medical insurance.
During the year Mark Allen held the position of nonexecutive Director including Audit Committee member and Remuneration Committee member at Howdens Joinery Group plc with retained fees in association with this work totalling 55k 2016 47k.
From January 2017 he also held the position of n onexecutive Director at Warburtons Limited with retained fees in association with this work totalling 9k.
Payment of the bonus is subject to the achievement of demanding shortterm financial targets and personal objectives.
To ensure that an appropriate balance is maintained between longterm and shortterm reward any bonus earned over 50% of annual salary is paid in Company shares and deferred for a threeyear period subject to continued employment.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 51
A summary of some of the key personal bonus objectives set for each of the executive Directors and their performance against these during the year are provided below mark allen performance measure performance outcome new r evenue streams With Mark overseeing the governance of this major investment demineralised whey and GOS production have achieved substantial improvements in quality efficiency yields and mineral consistency.
This is key in establishing sales to infant formula manufacturers who require exacting high standards t alent Development Mark has overseen formal development planning for both Tom Atherton and Adam Braithwaite and led a full developmentsuccession plan for business critical roles shareholderCustomer engagement Mark has maintained excellent links with all major customers meeting senior contacts throughout the year.
In addition Mark has undertaken investor roadshows both in the u K and u SA the latter bringing new shareholders on to the register t om atherton performance measure performance outcome pension Liability Tom oversaw a successful programme offering Flexible Retirement Options to deferred scheme members.
This attracted considerable interest with an in year financial benefit of 2 million excluding fees information t echnology Functionally responsible for IT Tom developed a revised strategy incorporating fundamental hardware and software changes providing a better fit IT solution for the Group post the sale of the Dairies business Frylight As Chairman of the company producing Frylight Tom has guided and supported the leadership team in gaining further market share consolidating its position as the u Ks number one cooking oil brand and expanding the manufacturing footprint to enhance capacity adam Braithwaite performance measure performance outcome
Adam has continued to build excellent relationships with our customer base.
Strong growth has been achieved in a number of the brands during the year new Business Growth Adam has overseen the formulation trial and delivery of three spreadable cheese varieties and the launch of cheese snack bars.
Revenue from new product development in the last three years remains above our target of 10% Developing the team Completion of team review and action plans implemented.
Succession plan delivered Bonus payouts for the 201617 performance year are set out below measure Details maximum potential as a % of salary t hreshold target maximum actual o utcome as a % of salary m allen t a therton a Braithwaite profit before tax Stretching targets based on budget with a sliding scale between threshold and maximum.
60% 57.7m 61.3m 67.4m 60.6m 0% 0% 0% Free cash flow Stretching targets based on budget with a sliding scale between threshold and maximum.
15% 40.0m 42.8m 50.0m 38.7m 0% 0% 0% personal objectives A range of nonfinancial operational and strategic objectives will be assessed by the Committee with an appropriate award level set under this element with reference to the overall performance of the business.
25% See description above 18.75% 18.75% 15.63% t otal  100% of salary 18.75% 18.75% 15.63% Deferred into shares n il n il n il i Amounts shown in relation to Adam Braithwaite relate to his prorated salary over the period since 19 July 2016 when he was appointed to the Board.
A profit before tax performance of 60.6m was within the range for a payment against this bonus target.
However the executive Committee supported by the Remuneration Committee determined that a payout was not appropriate given the extended commissioning of the demineralised whey and GOS plants at Davidstow which resulted in a higher than anticipated exceptional charge.
The Remuneration Committee supported this proposal and confirmed that no payment would be made for this bonus element.
The free cash flow outturn of 38.7m was outside of the bonus range and resulted in no payout.
52 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
Given the profit threshold was surpassed a payment under the personal objectives component was warranted albeit the stretching nature of the personal objectives resulted in partial payment.
Ltap 2014 Awards under the 2014 LTAP were subject to a dividend underpin over the period April 2014  March 2017.
The conditions under the dividend underpin were met and the awards are not subject to any further performance conditions  they are therefore included in the single figure.
Director Grant date Face value granted 000s n umber of shares granted Dividend underpin conditions
Value of awards at 31 march 000s end of vesting period mark allen 16 December 414 84406 To increase the dividend over the period April 2014 to March 2017 in line with progressive dividend policy whilst maintaining dividend cover within 1.52.5 x range for the period April 2013 to March 2016 Yes 539 50% on 16 December 2018 50% on 16 December 2019 t om atherton 16 December 208 42397 Yes 271 50% on 16 December 2018 50% on 16 December 2019 adam Braithwaite 16 December 81 16510 Yes 105 50% on 16 December 2018 50% on 16 December 2019 i The value of the awards has been calculated using the average middle market price during the final quarter of 201617 and includes the dividends accrued to date over the vesting period Current position on other outstanding Ltap awards  not subject to audit The outstanding LTAP awards are subject to a dividend underpin for three years following the award being made.
The award may be reduced by an amount proportional to the percentage decrease in dividend in the event of a decline of up to 50%.
If the decline exceeds 50% the Committee will use its discretion to determine the proportion of the award that shall vest.
Dividend cover must also be maintained in the range 1.5  2.5 over the threeyear measurement period.
Ltap 2015 The dividend increase over the period following the award is currently 5.4% and the dividend cover is 1.9 times.
Ltap 2016 The dividend increase over the period following the award is currently 5.3% and the dividend cover is 2.1 times.
Following the closure of the Dairy Crest Group Pension Fund a defined benefit scheme to future accruals there is no increase in accrued pension during the year other than inflationary increases.
The scheme closed to future accrual at 31 March 2010.
Mark Allen decided to draw benefits from 31 March 2010 and receives an annual pension.
Mark Allen Tom Atherton and Adam Braithwaite were members of the defined contribution scheme throughout 201617.
The
Company made contributions of 10000 for Mark Allen and 6656 for Tom Atherton incorporating both employee and employer contributions.
For Adam Braithwaite zero contributions were made since his appointment to the Board 10000 of contributions incorporating both employer and employee contributions were made in 201617 but were processed prior to his promotion to the Board.
Further cash supplements were paid such that the total of cash supplements and employer contributions amounted to 23% of basic salary for Mark Allen and Tom Atherton.
Adam Braithwaite received contributions of 23% of salary for the period since joining the Board. n o payments for loss of office were made in the year under review. n o payments to past Directors were made in the year under review.
Ltap 2016 award The award made under the LTAP in 2016 was made on 3 June 2016.
The award level is determined based on achievements over the prior year against the pregrant performance scorecard comprising measures aligned to Dairy Crests strategic priorities.
Outcomes against the 2016 scorecard are summarised in the second table below and detail on these outcomes against the targets set and context in which decisions were made is included thereafter.
The outcome against the LTAP scorecard may fall between 0% and 100% based on assessment of performance against each measure as determined by the Committee and the weighting attributable to each in the table below.
This scorecard percentage outcome then determines the proportion of the award that will be granted in the range of 50% to 90% of salary for executive Directors.
As set out in the approved policy in any year in the event of performance below a certain threshold or where the performance against the scorecard for that year is determined not to be a fair reflection of the overall performance of the business the Committee may determine that no award will be granted.
The maximum opportunity under the LTAP 90% of salary is lower than the typical longterm incentive level in the market whilst certainty of payout for participants is higher.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 53 n ote that this award is subject to a dividend underpin for the first three years of the vesting period and is settled through nil cost share options.
Director
Level of award % of salary Face value on grant percentage vesting at threshold performance n umber of shares end of vesting period mark allen 67.6% 365 n A 64268 50% 4 years after the award date 50% 5 years after the award date t om atherton 67.6% 230 n A 40465 50% 4 years after the award date 50% 5 years after the award date adam Braithwaite 38.8% 79 n A 13935 50% 4 years after the award date 50% 5 years after the award date The LTAP award granted to Adam Braithwaite was made before he became a Board Director.
The number of shares was calculated based on the middle market price on 2 June 2016.
Determination of 2016 grant measure Kpi alignment with strategy Weighting o utcome profit Adjusted eBITDA target each year Delivery of profit is core to the business and supports the progressive dividend policy 30% 0% Balance sheet efficiency ROCe target each year whilst maintaining net debteBITDA in the 1.02.0 x range ensuring acceptable return on investment within a sustainable level of gearing 20% 0%
Delivery of annual cost savings targets Delivery of synergies and return on investment following acquisitions or successful divestments when relevant ensuring cost savings are delivered on an ongoing basis ensuring that major acquisitions divestments deliver against relevant synergy and return targets 15% 15% Brand Growth Key brand value growth over one and three years versus markets in which they operate Brand growth is key to longer term business growth 20% 15% innovation Achieve each year the targeted proportion of revenue from innovation in previous three years Innovation is a key driver of productivity and growth 10% 10%
Range of metrics aligned to the 40 pledges including improvements in accident incident rates reduced CO emissions and improvedmaintained BITC score Delivering results in a sustainable way which enhances reputation and stakeholder engagement 5% 4% t otal 44% For executive Directors this converts to an award of 67.6% of salary profit Weighting 30%. disposal.
It reflected the challenges faced throughout the year versus the Groups budget expectations in a heavily deflating dairy environment with the added pressure that a prolonged Dairies business disposal had on the commercial performance of the liquid milk business.
This weaker than expected eBITDA outcome resulted in 0% pay out.
Balance sheet efficiency Weighting 20%.
The KPI is targeted ROCe operating profitaverage operating assets with an additional requirement that gearing should be between 1.0 and 2.0 times.
With regard to ROCe the longterm objective was to maintain this above 12% with individual targets and ranges set each year by reference to budget.
The ROCe for 201516 based on a postdisposal operating asset position was 15%.
This demonstrates the transformational effect on ROCe that the disposal of the Dairies business delivered.
However yearend gearing net debteBITDA was above the upper end of the target range of between 1.0 and 2.0 times.
Staying within the range is an underpinning requirement for an award under the balance sheet efficiency measure and therefore no award was made under this element.
54 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
Corporate activity and efficiencies Weighting 15%.
The KPI is targeted full year effect of cost efficiency projects initiated in any year and delivery of synergies and returns on acquisitions.
Where there is no acquisition activity the cost efficiency projects can deliver the full 15% award and this was the case in 201516.
In 201516 great success was achieved in removing costs ahead of target up until the disposal of the Dairies business.
For the final quarter cost saving could not be maintained at this level given that the Dairies business accounted for much of the scale of the organisation.
Although there was no relevant delivered MandA integration activity in 201516 related activity that was successfully delivered included the acquisition of the outstanding 50% of Promovita Ingredients Limited for a consideration of 6 million giving Dairy Crest sole control over the development of the GOS business and the segmentation of the Dairies business from the combined Group.
The Remuneration Committee recognised the cost savings achieved ahead of target up to the point of sale of the Dairies business and the successful business split along with the longterm strategic importance of the acquisition of the balance of ownership of Promovita Ingredients
On the basis of this performance it decided that a 15% payout for this element was merited.
Brand growth Weighting 20%.
Key brand performance was strong in a deflationary marketplace.
The Remuneration Committee considered robust quantitative IRI and Kantar Worldpanel data for all brands in reviewing this element.
Cathedral City Country Life and Frylight all grew share over 12 months.
Over a three year timeframe Cathedral City Clover and Frylight have all grown value share.
On this basis the Remuneration Committee considered an award of 15% was appropriate.
Weighting 10%.
The Groups target for innovation is that 10% of revenue should be from product innovation over the last three years.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 a number of new innovations were brought to market including relaunched Clover with no artificial ingredients and new coconut and rapeseed variants of Frylight which helped drive the percentage of key brand revenue from innovation in the preceding three years to 11%.
In addition the Remuneration Committee recognised innovation in other areas of the business including the opening of the new innovation centre at Harper Adams u niversity new supplier arrangements for spreadable cheese with Hochland who are helping us to develop further a stronger cheese n PD pipeline and the arrangement with Fowler Welch Coolchain Ltd that gives us the opportunity to grow warehousing volumes whilst planning for the completion of the distribution agreement with Mller.
On this basis an award of 10% was made.
Corporate responsibility Weighting 5%.
Our 201516 safety record has been better than was targeted.
Customer complaints generally have been low and any quality issues have been addressed fully to investigate root cause and implement improved procedures. emissions were better than target and 13% below last year. impact of the sale of the Dairies business.
However considerable effort was put into maintaining employee engagement via enhanced communications and the inclusion of a sale related component in the bonus scheme for all Hay employees.
The Remuneration Committee felt that corporate responsibility performance had generally been better than target and a payout of 4% was agreed.
Dividend underpin The level of vesting of this award may be reduced to the extent that a dividend underpin over the period April 2016  March 2019 is not met.
The award may be reduced by an amount proportional to the percentage decrease in dividend in the event of a decline of up to 50%.
If the decline exceeds 50% the Remuneration Committee will use its discretion to determine the proportion of the award that shall vest.
In such circumstances not more than 50% of the award will vest.
Dividend cover must be maintained in a specific range over the threeyear measurement period.
The Committee retains discretion to reduce the vesting of awards as appropriate should dividend cover be outside this range.
Ceo o neoff t ransformational incentive a ward  update on objectives and performance against objectives This year also marked the final full financial year of performance under the oneoff TIA related to the sales of the Dairies business granted to Mark Allen in December 2014 and which is due to vest later this year.
This award supported the retention and motivation of Mark Allen through this critical period in which his knowledge and experience were vital to a successful outcome.
In line with the commitment made by the Committee in the 201415 Remuneration report and following the comprehensive update provided in last years report we have set out detailed information on the performance against the objectives set under this plan over the past year which were split into three categories as shown below.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 55
The sale of the Dairies business required strong leadership and a high level of personal involvement from a chief executive officer who is an acknowledged leader in the sector.
Mark Allen was set a number of objectives relating to the success of negotiations and discussions with Mller and the u K Competition and Markets Authority CMA whilst managing the business as a whole through a period of extended uncertainty.
Mark Allen performed exceptionally in securing the successful completion of the sale to Mller in December 2015 positioning Dairy Crest as a branded and addedvalue business focussed on growth cash generation and enhanced shareholder value.
In 201516 the Committee determined that all objectives in this category had been successfully completed.
Full details are disclosed in the 201516 Remuneration report.
A number of TIA objectives were built around a strategic review of the Group following the sale of the Dairies business implementation of associated structural changes and the delivery of significant cost savings.
Mark has led the organisational review process carried out over the past year covering all areas of the Group and his leadership was instrumental in identifying both immediate cost savings and opportunities for the business to leverage from this and facilitate further cost savings in the future.
The initial part of this work was an organisational design activity which was undertaken immediately post the sale of the Dairies business covering all functions that streamlined the Group and delivered a management and administrative structure template appropriate for a smaller business.
Marks leadership of this work and the principles he established on which it was built were integral to its success.
He personally led the review of outputs and ultimately sanctioned the agreed changes which were critical to delivery and implementation in this area throughout 201617.
In addition recognising the need to build a systems and process infrastructure suited to the post Dairies business Mark established a major project under the title evolve that commenced in 2016 and has already set a clear roadmap for systems and process development for all parts of the business over the next 2 years.
Starting with financial systems this project will deliver change within supply chain demand business systems and HR resulting in highly effective systems improved processes and reduced costs.
As a consequence of the above the Company is ontarget to achieve savings of 5m and will be in excellent shape to deliver continued value to our customers and shareholders through streamlined improved ways of working and further cost reductions.
The TIA performance period is three quarters complete and considerable progress has been made across the business.
Brands continue to develop through product innovation Cathedral City spreadable and snack bar Frylight avocado packaging changes Clover Cathedral City and Frylight all had packaging refreshes advertising Cathedral City and Frylight were both advertised on TV and other brands were advertised through other channels and promotional activity.
Marks objectives also required the delivery of new product streams to enhance the profitability of the business and develop shareholder returns.
He led the project that has made significant progress in delivering both the highly demanding demineralised whey infant formula quality standard and the necessary quality and tonnage targets for GOS.
Mark has overseen the governance process maintained focus and control over a highly complex multidimensional project whilst also leading the key commercial relationships with our partner Fonterra.
201617 has also seen further investment in the research into the uses of GOS outside the infant formula market.
The research partnership with Danisco Animal n utrition part of DuPont will help the Company understand the beneficial effects of GOS on poultry and swine production building on the positive academic research already undertaken earlier in the year.
In respect of succession planning Mark has identified the critical roles for which there may be potential future gaps and overseen a thorough succession planning process to secure the future skills required by the business.
In addition he has conducted a full review of executive Director development adopting a range of development processes and engaging specialist independent support using the output of this to inform development discussions and plans for the Directors.
Mark has also reviewed the senior management population more generally developing plans to refresh the talent pool where necessary.
Mark has sponsored and personally led an intensive employee engagement process including a full Group roadshow to which every employee was invited and a refresh of the Groups Vision and Values.
This was a key activity post the sale of the Dairies business in ensuring employees were engaged throughout this period of significant change but more importantly remained informed and committed to the future plans and growth of the Company.
Mark Allen has delivered outstanding progress to date with regard to the objectives set under the TIA.
Marks exceptional performance in delivering the sale of the Dairies business and his subsequent work in transforming Dairy Crest has resulted in the Company delivering industry leading margins of 16% compared to c.5% before the disposal of the Dairies business.
Dairy Crest is in a strong position to deliver sustained future growth.
In the view of the Remuneration Committee Mark has delivered on and in some cases exceeded the targets set to date.
A significant proportion of the business transformation that the TIA was designed to engender and recognise has now been implemented and delivered.
Given the level of positive progress and achievements against the TIA objectives vesting at the maximum end is currently anticipated.
56 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
In accordance with the guidelines set by the Investment Association IA the Remuneration Committee can satisfy awards under all its share plans with new issue shares or shares issued from treasury up to a maximum of 10% of its issued share capital in a rolling 10 year period to employees under all its share plans.
Within this 10% limit the Company can only issue as newly issued shares or from treasury 5% of its issued share capital to satisfy awards under discretionary or executive plans.
Currently awards over shares equalling 7.9% of the issued share capital have been made under share plans during a rolling 10 year period with awards over shares equalling 2.7% under discretionary or executive schemes.
50% of net proceeds from share plans and deferred bonus share awards until that shareholding is achieved.
Shareholdings exclude unvested options under the LTISP and include unvested deferred shares granted to executive Directors as part payment of bonuses and unvested LTAP awards.
Mark Allen and Tom Atherton have satisfied the shareholding requirement.
Adam Braithwaite has not met the requirements and will continue to grow his shareholding.
The interests of the Directors at the end of the year in the ordinary share capital of the Company were as follows
Vested but unexercised Ltisp 2012 shares u nvested Ltap 2013 shares ii u nvested Ltap 2014 shares iii u nvested Ltap 2015 shares iv u nvested Ltap 2016 shares u nvested tia shares vi
M Allen 170865 40584 90590 92324 77487 66766 262374 39241 4336 844567 T Atherton 6097 5488 35003 46373 44909 42038  14753 4787 199448 A Braithwaite   14767 18059 15418 14477   4336 67057 A CarrLocke 2000         2000 R Macdonald 1000         1000 S Alexander 1000         1000 S Farr 4465         4465 i Vested but unexercised LTISP 2012 nil cost share options ii Long term Alignment Plan 2013 nil cost share options The period for the dividend underpin condition ended on 31 March 2016.
50% of awards will vest on 15 August 2017 and 50% will vest on 15 August 2018.
Amounts shown include grant and options related to accrued dividends to the date of this Report iii Long term Alignment Plan 2014 nil cost share options The period for the dividend underpin condition ended on 31 March 2017.
50% of awards will vest on 16 December 2018 and 50% will vest on 16 December 2019.
Amounts shown include grant and options related to accrued dividends to the date of this Report iv Long term Alignment Plan 2015 nil cost share options The period for the dividend underpin condition will end on 31 March 2018.
50% of awards will vest on 26 May 2019 and 50% will vest on 26 May 2020.
Amounts shown include grant and options related to accrued dividends to the date of this Report v Long term Alignment Plan 2016 nil cost share options The period for the dividend underpin condition will end on 31 March 2019.
50% of awards will vest on 3 June 2020 and 50% will vest on 3 June 2021.
Amounts shown include grant and options related to accrued dividends to the date of this Report vi Oneoff transformational award to the CeO nil cost share options The performance period will end 23 December 2017 and awards will vest thereafter.
Amounts shown include grant and options related to accrued dividends to the date of this Report vii Deferred bonus scheme nil cost share options viii Save As You earn Scheme 2014 cost options.
The exercise price for these options is 376 pence per share and the exercise period is 92017  22018.
There are no applicable performance conditions Save As You earn Scheme 2016 cost options.
The exercise price for these options is 463 pence per share and the exercise period is 92019  22020.
There are no applicable performance conditions ix u nvested TIA shares and SAYe are not considered when calculating shareholding requirements There have been no changes in Directors shareholdings between 31 March 2017 and 17 May 2017 Gain on exercise of share options
Gain on exercise of share options s M Allen n il n il n il n il T Atherton n il n il n il n il A Braithwaite n il n il n il n il Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 57
The graph below sets out for the eight years ended 31 March 2017 the total shareholder return of Dairy Crest Group plc and of the FTSe 250 index excluding investment companies of which the Company is a constituent member.
The table below sets out CeO pay over the same period.
Ceo pay 200910 201011 201112 201213 201314 201415 201516 201617 t otal remuneration 101tel1247 991 1439 1344 annual bonus % max 94% 54% 50% 52.5% 81.7% 18.8% 45% 18.8% Long term incentive % max 0% 0% 0% 0% 23.5% 20.8% 89% 89% This figure represents the LTAP 2013 award as shown in the single figure table as a percentage of the maximum annual award under this plan.
The vesting period for this award has not yet been completed  50% will vest on 15 August 2017 and 50% will vest on 15 August 2018 This figure represents the LTAP 2014 award as shown in the single figure table as a percentage of the maximum annual award under this plan.
The vesting period for this award has not yet been completed  50% will vest on 16 December 2018 and 50% will vest on 16 December 2019 percentage change in Ceo s remuneration The table below sets out the percentage change in the CeOs salary benefits and bonus between 201516 and 201617 compared with the percentage change in the average of each of these components of pay for those salaried members of the clerical administrative supervisory and management population allocated to Hay bands.
This group comprises 42% of the total workforce and has been identified as the most appropriate for this table in view of the comparable nature of employment and incentive arrangements salary t axable benefits Bonus 201617 201516 % change 201617 201516 % change 201617 201516 % change Ceo 000s 545 523 4% 33 32 3% 102 235 57% average pay for wider employee population 49 47 5% 6.8 5.1 33% 1.5 4.6 67% r elative importance of spend on pay The table below illustrates the relative importance of spend on pay at Dairy Crest compared with distributions made to shareholders in 201516 and 201617 m 201617 201516 % change employee remuneration costs 41.2 44.3 7% Dividends 31.1 30.0 4% Dairy Crest  Total Shareholder Returns for 100 invested Dairy Crest Group plc FTSE 250 excluding investment companies March 09 March 10 March 11 March 12 March 13 March 14 March 15 March 16 March 17 8tel16tel240 260 58 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
Ltap 2017 award The award to be made under the LTAP 2017 is based on achievements over the prior year against the pregrant performance scorecard comprising measures aligned to Dairy Crests strategic priorities.
This award will be granted later in 2017.
Outcomes against the 2017 scorecard are summarised in the second table below and detail on outcomes against the targets set and the context in which decisions were made is included thereafter.
The outcome against the LTAP scorecard may fall between 0% and 100% based on assessment of performance against each measure as determined by the Committee and the weighting attributable to each in the table below.
This scorecard percentage outcome then determines the proportion of the award that will be granted in the range of 50% to 90% of salary for executive Directors.
As set out in the approved Policy in any year in the event of performance below a certain threshold or where the performance against the scorecard for that year is determined not to be a fair reflection of the overall performance of the business the Committee may determine that no award will be granted.
The maximum opportunity under the LTAP 90% of salary is lower than the typical longterm incentive level in the market whilst certainty of payout for participants is higher.
Director Level of award % of salary Face value 000s end of vesting period mark allen 67.2% 376 50% 4 years after the award date 50% 5 years after the award date t om atherton 67.2% 228 50% 4 years after the award date 50% 5 years after the award date adam Braithwaite 67.2% 171 50% 4 years after the award date 50% 5 years after the award date The number of shares granted will be calculated in accordance with the rules approved by shareholders at the 2013 AGM.
Determination of 2017 grant measure Kpi alignment with strategy Weighting outcome profit Adjusted eBITDA target Delivery of profit is core to the business and supports the progressive dividend policy 30% 0% Balance sheet efficiency ROCe target whilst maintaining net debt eBITDA in the 12 range ensuring acceptable return on investment within a sustainable level of gearing 20% 0% Corporate activity and efficiencies Delivery of annual cost savings targets Delivery of synergies and return on investment following acquisitions or successful divestments when relevant ensuring cost savings are delivered on an ongoing basis ensuring that major acquisitions divestments deliver against relevant synergy and return targets 15% 15% Brand Growth Key brand value growth over one and three years versus markets in which they operate Brand growth is key to longer term business growth 20% 14% revenue Growth through innovation Achieve each year the targeted proportion of revenue from innovation in previous three years Innovation is a key driver of productivity and growth 10% 10% Corporate responsibility Range of metrics aligned to the CR pledges including improvements in accident incident rates reduced CO emissions and improvedmaintained BITC score Delivering results in a sustainable way which enhances reputation and stakeholder engagement 5% 4% t otal 43% For executive Directors this converts to an award of 67.2% of salary profit Weighting 30%. plants at Davidstow.
Balance sheet efficiency Weighting 20%.
The KPI is targeted ROCe operating profitaverage operating assets with an additional requirement that gearing should be between 1.0 and 2.0 times.
With regard to ROCe the longterm objective is to maintain this above 12% with individual targets and ranges set each year by reference to budget.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 59
For 201617 a stretching vesting target of 15.8% ROCe was set.
A ROCe of 15.4% was achieved which was just below the vesting level but above the ROCe outcome in 201516.
In addition yearend gearing net debt e BITDA was above the upper end of the target range of between 1.0 and 2.0 times.
Given both the ROCe target and the gearing range were not met no award was made under this element.
Corporate activity and efficiencies Weighting 15%.
The KPI is targeted full year effect of cost efficiency projects initiated in any year and delivery of synergies and returns on acquisitions.
Where there is no acquisition activity the cost efficiency projects can deliver the full 15% award and this was the case in 201617.
In 201617 success was achieved in removing costs with corporate costs below budget and procurement savings ahead of budget.
Overall
With regard to efficiency projects considerable progress has been made in defining a revised IT strategy which will deliver cost savings and improved ways of working.
On the basis of this performance it was decided that a 15% payout for this element was merited.
Brand growth Weighting 20%.
Key brand performance was broadly strong in the year.
The Remuneration Committee considered robust quantitative IRI data for all brands in reviewing this element.
Clover and Frylight grew share over 12 months as did Country Life spreadable.
Cathedral City lost value share but strengthened in the second half of the year.
Over a three year timeframe Cathedral City Clover and Frylight have all grown value share.
On this basis an award of 14% was agreed.
Weighting 10%.
The Groups target for innovation is that 10% of revenue should be from product innovation over the last three years.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 product innovation drove the percentage of key brand revenue from innovation in the preceding three years to 13%.
The development of Cathedral City spreadable launch of cheese snack bars and the continued growth of Clover with no artificial ingredients all supported this result.
The Remuneration Committee decided on this basis an award of 10% should be made.
Corporate responsibility Weighting 5%.
Our 201617 safety record achieved the best performance yet with zero reportable accidents in the year.
Customer complaints generally have been low across our brands albeit we did see some increase in cheese complaints.
With regard to energy usage this improved and better than target performance was achieved as did carbon emissions which were 13% below last years level. employee roadshow to which all employees were invited.
The Remuneration Committee assessed that corporate responsibility performance had generally been better than target especially in the area of health and safety and a payout of 4% was merited.
Dividend underpin The level of vesting of this award may be reduced to the extent that a dividend underpin over the period April 2017  March 2020 is not met.
The award may be reduced by an amount proportional to the percentage decrease in dividend in the event of a decline of up to 50%.
If the decline exceeds 50% the Remuneration Committee will use its discretion to determine the proportion of the award that shall vest.
In such circumstances not more than 50% of the award will vest.
Dividend cover must be maintained in a specific range over the threeyear measurement period.
The Committee retains discretion to reduce the vesting of awards as appropriate should dividend cover be outside this range.
The Directors Remuneration Policy will be implemented for the 201718 financial year as follows Base salary  000s Director 2016 2017 mark allen 540 560 t om atherton 340 349 adam Braithwaite 255 262 Mark Allens base salary increased on 1 January 2017 and he will not be eligible for a further increase until 1 July 2018.
Base salary increases for Tom Atherton and Adam Braithwaite will be in line with increases across the general workforce and will be effective from 1 July 2017.
60 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017
DIReCTORS ReMuneRATIOn RePORT COnTInueD
Corporate responsibility Chair 5 10 remuneration Committee Chair 5 10 senior independent Director 5 10 The Board noted that n onexecutive Directors fees had not been increased since 2008 and were below the level of comparable roles within companies of similar size and complexity.
Further to a review of market levels and recognising the need to recruit appropriately skilled and experienced new n onexecutive Directors the Chief executive recommended to the Board that the fees were increased as above.
It was therefore determined that the fees be increased effective from 1 December 2016.
Bonus measures Maximum opportunity for executive Directors under the 201718 bonus remains at 100% of salary.
Recognising the importance of reducing debt the weightings under the bonus plan have been reviewed and the proportion of 201718 bonus relating to free cash flow generation will increase.
Performance will therefore be assessed against the following measures Profit before tax  50% of award Free cash flow  25% of award Personal objectives  25% of award The targets for the 201718 annual bonus measures are considered commercially sensitive because of the information that this provides to the Companys competitors.
The targets and payout against them will be disclosed in the 201718 report.
Categories in respect of the personal objectives include establishing new revenue streams and acquisition opportunities for Mark Allen further managing pension liability delivering systems change projects and managing the debt position for Tom Atherton and brand development sales growth and establishing new sales channels for Adam Braithwaite.
Malus and clawback provisions will operate in respect of the 201718 bonus.
The malus provision will apply to the deferred share awards up to vesting.
The clawback provision will apply to the cash award for three years from the date of payment.
Clawback may be operated in the event of gross misconduct on the part of the employee andor material misstatement in Company or Group financial statements.
Long term incentive plan n o grant of LTIP will be made in 2017.
The first grant under this new incentive structure will be made in 2018 subject to approval of the Policy and to approval by shareholders of the LTIP.
The Sharesave Scheme is open to all eligible employees and full time executive Directors. over a three year term to make monthly contributions up to an overall maximum of 500 per month.
At the end of the term members have the right to buy ordinary shares in the Company at a price fixed at the time of the option grant.
Options may not be granted at less than 80% of the market price at the time of grant.
Consideration by the Directors of matters relating to remuneration members of the r emuneration Committee The Board has appointed a Remuneration Committee of independent nonexecutive Directors of the Company.
During the year the Committee consisted of Richard Macdonald Chairman Andrew CarrLocke Sue Farr Stephen Alexander in his capacity as Company Chairman and Mark Allen Chief executive attended the Remuneration Committee by invitation.
Members of the Remuneration Committee have no potential conflicts of interest arising from crossdirectorships and they are not involved in the daytoday running of the Company.
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for the broad Policy with respect to senior executives salary and other remuneration.
It specifically determines within remuneration principles agreed with the Board the total remuneration package of each executive Director and reviews with the Chief executive the remuneration packages for other senior executives.
A copy of the terms of reference of the Committee can be found on the Companys website site Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 61
In 201617 the Committee met six times.
Attendance at meetings by members of the Committee is shown on page 31.
The Committee discussed amongst other matters the following meeting agenda items discussed may 2016 Approval of 201516 Bonus LTAP outcomes Approval of 201617 Bonus rules 201617 Bonus targets and LTAP targets executive Directors Remuneration Pension changes for Senior Management
Approval of Remuneration Report
July 2016 Remuneration of new executive Director november 2016 Review of Remuneration Advisors executive Directors Remuneration December 2016 Remuneration Policy Review January 2017 Review Terms of Reference Remuneration Policy Review march 2017 Review of potential bonus and longterm incentive outcomes Remuneration Policy update Review draft of Directors Remuneration Report advisers to the r emuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee has appointed PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC to provide advice on executive remuneration.
PwC has provided such advice historically and was originally appointed through a competitive tendering process.
Work undertaken by PwC for the Committee included updates to the Remuneration Committee on remuneration and governance trends and market practice providing remuneration benchmarking information for executive Directors and advice in respect of the review of the Remuneration Policy.
In this financial year PwC was paid 99000.
This is based on an agreed fee for business as usual support with additional work charged at hourly rates.
During the year PwC also provided other consultancy services to the Group including tax pensions network security and structuring work.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the independence and objectivity of the advice it receives from PwC at a private meeting held in May each year.
It is satisfied that PwC is providing objective and robust professional advice.
PwC is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and has signed up to that groups Code of Conduct.
The Remuneration Committee also received materials assistance and advice on remuneration policy from Robert Willock the Group HR Director of Dairy Crest.
The Chief executive attends all meetings by invitation but is not present at any discussions relating specifically to his own remuneration.
The table below shows the advisory vote on the 201516 remuneration report at the 2016 AGM and the latest advisory vote on the remuneration policy at the 2014 AGM.
remuneration report
2016 aGm 75832012 69996972 92.31% 7.69% approval of Directors remuneration policy 2014 aGm 70936887 68099552 96.00% 4.00% The Remuneration Committee noted the outcome of the advisory vote at the 2016 AGM and remains committed to an open dialogue with investors with engagement planned through the period ahead of the AGM.
The Directors Remuneration report from pages 41 to 61 has been approved by the Board and is signed on its behalf by r ichard macdonald Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 17 May 2017 62 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Directors report Dairy Crest Group plc Company is the holding company of the Dairy Crest Group of Companies Group.
The Directors report for the year ended 31 March 2017 comprises the Strategic report found at pages 2 to 27 the details of Directors at pages 28 to 29 and the Corporate Governance report at pages 30 to 61.
The abovementioned sections are expressly incorporated by reference into this the Directors report.
Going concern The Group and Companys business activities together with factors likely to affect future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic report from pages 2 to 21.
The financial position cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the financial review on pages 12 to 15 which also form part of the Strategic report.
In addition Notes 31 and 32 to the Accounts include the Group and Companys objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit risk and liquidity risk.
As highlighted in Note 31 the Company and Group meet daytoday working capital requirements through syndicated revolving credit facilities and cash to ensure that forecast net borrowings plus reasonable operating headroom are covered by committed facilities which mature at least 12 months after the year end.
At 31 March 2017 effective headroom was 112.0 million.
There were no breaches of bank covenants in the year ended 31 March 2017 and projections do not indicate any breaches in the foreseeable future.
Having reviewed and taken into account Going Concern and Liquidity Risk Guidance for Directors of UK Companies 2009 published by the Financial Reporting Council in October 2009 the Directors are satisfied that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue operating for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2014 the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a three year period.
The Directors have determined that a three year period to 31 March 2020 is an appropriate period over which to provide its viability statement.
This is the period reviewed by the Board in the strategic planning process where assumptions are made around future growth for the existing business new market opportunities investment needs and funding requirements of the Group.
A robust financial model of the Group is built by product and the metrics for the Groups KPIs and bank covenants are reviewed.
Taking into account the Groups current position and potential impact of the principal risks documented on pages 16 and 17 of the Annual Report and Accounts the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to 31 March 2020.
In making this statement the Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The Board considers all of the principal risks the likelihood of crystallisation the potential net profit impact and the mitigating controls.
In assessing the impact of a risk on the viability of the Group the Board has considered the potential impact that the crystallisation of a severe but plausible risk may have on the Group meeting its bank covenants.
The assumption has been made that the Group will be able to source an appropriate level of funding following the cessation of the 80 million bank facility in October 2018.
Future developments Future developments are described in the Strategic report at pages 2 to 21.
Group results The Groups consolidated income statement is set out on page 70 and shows a profit for the financial year of 38.3 million compared with a loss of 113.0 million in 201516.
Dividends The Directors are recommending a final dividend of 16.3p 201516 16.0p per ordinary share which if approved will be paid to members whose name appears on the register at the close of business on 7 July 2017.
Together the final dividend and interim dividend 6.2p per ordinary share paid on 28 January 2017 make total dividends for the year of 22.5p per ordinary share 20152016 22.1p.
Directors Details of the Directors of the Company are set out at pages 28 to 29.
Directors interests Details of the Directors interests in the shares of the Company including those of their immediate families appear in the Directors Remuneration report on page 56.
The
Company maintains liability insurance for its Directors and officers and those of its subsidiaries.
The Directors Company Secretary and other officers of the Company and those of its subsidiaries are indemnified by the Company to the extent permitted by company law.
That indemnity provision has been in place during the year and remains in force.
Disclosure of information to the Auditor Each Director confirms that as far as he or she is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys external auditor EY is unaware and that each Director has taken all steps he or she ought to have taken as a Director to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the external auditor is aware of that information. made during the year ended 31 March 2017.
Financial instruments Information relating to financial instruments is at pages 113 to 117.
Notes  on 4 April 2017 the Group repaid 10.7 million 9.2 million Sterling equivalent and 2.8 million of 2007 fixed coupon loan notes on their maturity. the Strategic report on pages 10 to 11. throughout the business.
Employees are kept well informed on the performance and strategy of the Group through a variety of communication tools including personal briefings regular meetings and the Groups intranet.
The Chief Executive and the Executive Committee have held roadshows and employee lunches at each site during the year.
All employees are invited to attend these forums to receive an update on the businesss performance and its priorities and to ask any questions.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 63
The Groups principles of equal opportunities mean that the training career development and promotion of disabled persons should as far as possible be the same as for other employees.
The Group has wellestablished consultation and negotiating arrangements with established trade unions.
Share schemes are a long established and successful part of our total reward package encouraging and supporting employee share ownership.
Details of the savingsrelated share option scheme Sharesave Scheme are set out in Note 27 to the financial statements on pages 106 to 107. financial statements at page 105.
At the date of this Directors report there were 141072297 ordinary shares of 25 pence each in issue all of which are fully paid up and quoted on the London Stock Exchange with an aggregate nominal value of 35268074.
Accounts to attend and speak at General Meetings of the Company to appoint proxies and to exercise voting rights.
To be effective electronic and paper proxy appointments and voting instructions must be received at the Companys registered office or such other place in the United Kingdom specified in the relevant notice of meeting not later than 48 hours before a General
None of the shares carry any special rights with regard to control of the Company.
There are no known arrangements under which financial rights are held by a person other than the holder of the shares and no known agreements on restrictions on share transfers or on voting rights.
Shares acquired through company share schemes and plans rank pari passu with the shares in issue and have no special rights. shares.
The authority remains valid until the AGM in 2017. transfers. set out in Note 27 to the financial statements.
The Company has a discretionary employees benefit trust The Dairy Crest Employees Share Ownership Plan Trust ESOPT funded by gifts to acquire shares for the potential benefit of employees.
Details of shares held by the ESOPT at 31 March 2017 are set out on page 106.
During the year shares have been released by the ESOPT in respect of share schemes for employees.
The trustee of the ESOPT has the power to exercise all voting rights in relation to any investment including ordinary shares held within the ESOPT. aggregate nominal amount of 23454480. five business days immediately preceding the date of purchase.
The Company did not exercise this authority during the year and made no market purchases.
Notified No.
Notified percentage of issued share capital Black Rock Inc.
7729917 5.47 No disclosable changes in interests in the share capital of the Company have been notified to the Company between 1 April 2017 to 17 May 2017.
Articles of association Changes to the Articles must be approved by the shareholders in accordance with applicable legislation.
The Articles are available on our website. of the Company following a takeover bid.
Details of the significant agreements of this kind are as follows Borrowing facilities  Noncompliance with the change of control clauses in the Groups funding arrangements or failure to reach agreement with the parties on revised terms would require any acquirer to put in place replacement facilities.
Supply agreements  Certain supply agreements contain provisions whereby on a change of control of the Group they may be terminable.
Accordingly a change of control of the Group could result in the need for the Group to source alternative supply for certain materials or services.
No compensation for loss of office The Company does not have agreements with any Director or employee that would provide compensation for loss of office or employment resulting from a takeover except that provisions of the Companys share schemes and plans may cause options and awards granted to employees under such schemes and plans to vest on a takeover.
64 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 pensions The Company employs only the Executive Directors.
Most employees in the Group are employed by the Companys main subsidiary Dairy Crest Limited.
Relevant companies within the Group became subject to the automatic enrolment regulations on 1 April 2013.
Depending on their grade effective from 1 April 2013 employees either enter the auto enrolled pension arrangements for the Group which are provided by Zurich or into the Groups defined contribution pension scheme also provided by
The Groups defined benefit pension fund is closed to future accrual and is now in runoff.
It remains under the control of a corporate trustee Dairy Crest Pension Trustees Limited the board of which comprises four directors nominated by Dairy Crest Limited and three directors elected by all members.
Its assets are held separately from those of the Group and can only be used in accordance with the rules of the fund.
Greenhouse gas emissions The Company is required to report annually on the quantity of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions in tonnes emitted as a result of activities for which it is responsible.
Details of our emissions during the year ended 31 March 2017 and the actions which the Group has taken to reduce them are set out on pages 22 to 23 and form part of the Directors report disclosures.
Directors responsibility statement The responsibility statement required under DTR 4.1 is set out on page 65.
Branch offices outside the UK The Company has no branch offices.
Annual general meeting The AGM will be held at Eversheds Sutherland International LLP One Wood Street London EC2V 7WS on Tuesday 18 July 2017 at 12pm.
The Notice of Meeting will be issued separately together with details of the business to be considered and explanatory notes relating to each of the resolutions being proposed.
Auditor The Group has appointed Deloitte LLP as the external auditor for the year commencing 1 April 2017.
A resolution to appoint Deloitte LLP as the Groups auditor will be put to the forthcoming AGM.
The Groups current auditor EY will retire by rotation.
The Directors report from pages 62 to 64 has been approved by the Board and is signed on its behalf by r obin Miller Company Secretary and General Counsel 17 May 2017 Dairy Crest Group plc Company No DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 65
Annual Accounts The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Groups and Companys financial statements in accordance with applicable laws and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Groups and Companys financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to present fairly the financial position financial performance and cash flows of the Group and Company select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information state whether the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU state whether the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with applicable UK accounting standards subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and make judgements and estimates that are responsible and prudent.
The Directors have responsibility for ensuring that the Group and Company keep accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy their financial position and which enable the Directors to ensure that the financial statements comply with relevant legislation.
They have a responsibility for taking reasonable steps to safeguard the assets of the Group and of the Company to prevent and detect fraud or other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for preparing a Strategic report Directors report the Directors Remuneration report and the Corporate Governance report in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and applicable regulations.
A copy of the financial statements of the Group is placed on our website at siteinvestor relations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Groups website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Dtr 4.1 s tatement Each of the Directors confirms that to the best of his or her knowledge the Groups 2017 Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair and balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary to shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy the Groups and Companys financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS 101 and UK accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Group and the Company included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
The Directors Responsibility Statement has been approved by the Board and is signed on its behalf by Mark Allen Chief Executive tom Atherton Group Finance Director 17 May 2017 stAteMeNt oF Directors respoNsiBilities 66 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Independent audItors report to the members of daIry Crest Group plc o ur opinion on financial statements In our opinion Dair y Cr e st G r oup plc  s G r oup fina ncial sta t e me nt s a nd P a r e nt compa n y fina ncial sta t e me nt s t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s gi v e t r ue a nd fair v ie w o f t he sta t e o f t he G r oup  s a nd o f t he pa r e nt compa n y s a f fair s as a t Ma r ch a nd o f t he G r oup  s pr o fit f or t he y e a r t he n e nde d t he G r oup fina ncial sta t e me nt s ha v e be e n pr ope r l y pr e pa r e d in accor da nc e wit h
E ur ope a n
FRSs as adop t e d b y t he E ur ope a n
Compa nie s A ct a nd t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s ha v e be e n pr e pa r e d in accor da nc e wit h t he r e quir e me nt s o f t he C ompa nie s A ct a nd as r e ga r ds t he G r oup fina ncial sta t e me nt s A r t icle o f t he IA S Re gula t ion .
What we have audited Dair y Cr e st G r oup plc fina ncial sta t e me nt s compr ise Group parent company C o n s o l i d at e d b a l a n c e s h e et a s at M a rc h B a l a n c e s h e et a s at M a rc h C o n s o l i d at e d i n c o m e s t at e m e nt fo r th e ye a r th e n e n d e d S t at e m e nt of c h a n g e s i n e q u i t y fo r th e ye a r th e n e n d e d C o n s o l i d at e d s t at e m e nt of c o m p re h e n s i ve i n c o m e fo r th e ye a r th e n e n d e d Ca s h fl ow s t at e m e nt fo r th e ye a r th e n e n d e d C o n s o l i d at e d s t at e m e nt of c h a n g e s i n e q u i t y fo r th e ye a r th e n e n d e d R e l at e d n ot e s t o t o th e fi n a n c i a l stat e m e nts C o n s o l i d at e d c a s h fl ow s t at e m e nt fo r th e ye a r th e n e n d e d R e l at e d n ot e s t o t o th e fi n a n c i a l stat e m e nts T he fina ncial r e por t ing f ra me w or k t ha t has be e n a pplie d in t he ir pr e pa ra t ion is a pplic a ble law a nd Int e r na t ional Fina ncial Re por t ing Sta nda r ds
E ur ope a n
Compa nie s A ct o verview of our audit approach r isks of material misstatement Ac c o u nti n g for prom o ti ona l e x p e n d iture i n cl ud i n g th e i m p a c t o n reve n u e re c o g n i ti o n C l a s s i fi c ati o n of i t e m s a s e x c e pti o n a l audit scope W e h a ve f u l l s c o p e c o m p o n e nts w h e re we h a ve p e r fo r m e d a n a u d i t of th e fi n a n c i a l i nfo r m ati o n T h e e nti ti e s w h e re we p e r fo r m e d f u l l s c o p e a u d i t p ro c e d u re s a c c o u nt e d fo r 9 9 % of p rofi t b efo re t a x ad j u s t e d fo r n o nre c u r r i n g e x c e pti o n a l i t e m s 1 0 0 % of reve n u e a n d 1 0 0 % of t ot a l a s s ets materiality O ve r a l l G ro u p m at e r i a l i t y of m i l l i o n w h i c h re p re s e nts 5 % of p rofi t b efo re t a x ad j u s t e d fo r no nre c u r r i ng e x c e p tio n a l i t e ms o ur assessment of risk of material misstatement W e ide nt ifie d t he r isk s o f ma t e r ial mis sta t e me nt de scr ibe d be lo w as t hose t ha t had t he gr e a t e st ef f e ct on our o v e rall audit st ra t e g y t he alloc a t ion o f r e sour c e s in t he audit a nd t he dir e ct ion o f t he ef f or t s o f t he audit t e a m .
In addr e s sing t he se r isk s we ha v e pe r f or me d t he pr oc e dur e s be lo w w hich we r e de signe d in t he cont e x t o f t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s as w hole a nd conse que nt l y we do no t e x pr e s s a n y opinion on t he se indi v idual a r e as.
R efe r t o th e Au d i t C o m m i t t e e R e p o r t p a g e Ac c o u nti n g p o l i c i e s p a g e a n d N ot e of th e C o n s o l i d at e d F i n a n c i a l S t at e m e nts p a g e R eve n u e of m i l l i o n m i l l i o n c o nti n u i n g i s re c o g n i s e d n et of re b at e s a n d d i s c o u nts w h i c h c o m p r i s e p ro m oti o n a l e x p e n s e s i n re l ati o n t o a g re e d p ro m oti o n a l a c ti v i t y a n d f u n d i n g w ith c us t om e r s.
W e fo c u s e d o n th i s a re a g i ve n th e s i g n i fi c a n c e of p ro m oti o n a l e x p e n d i tu re t o th e fi n a n c i a l s t at e m e nts a n d th e s u bj e c ti v i t y i n d et e r m i n i n g th e p ro m oti o n a l e x p e n d i tu re .
R is ks in c lu d e Pro m oti o n a l e x p e n s e s c o u l d b e re c o rd e d i n th e w ro n g fi n a n c i a l ye a r a n d a re i n c o r re c tl y c l a s s i fi e d i n th e i n c o m e s t at e m e nt .
T h e m eth o d o l o g y a p p l i e d i n c a l c u l ati n g th e l eve l of p ro m oti o n a l a c c r u a l s at M a rc h i s i na ppropr iat e .
T h i s r i s k wa s p re s e nt i n th e p r i o r ye a r .
S p e c i fi c p ro c e d u re s t o ad d re s s th e f r a u d r i s k we re I n a s s e s s i n g c h a n g e s i n k ey e s ti m at e s a n d th e G ro u p  s p o l i cy we a s s e s s e d b oth th e m eth o d o l o g i e s a n d r ati o n a l e a p p l i e d i n d et e r m i n i n g c h a n g e s i n a p p ro a c h f ro m p r i o r p e r i o d s fo r r i s k of m a n a g e m e nt o ve r r i d e .
W e c o r ro b o r at e d th ro u g h a n a n a l ys i s of h i s t o r i c a l s et tl e m e nts.
W e h a ve c o r ro b o r at e d th e ti m e f r a m e fo r ret a i n i n g u n c l a i m e d p ro m oti o n a l a c c r u a l s o n th e G ro u p  s b a l a n c e s h e et a n d th e a p p ro p r i at e n e s s of th e ye a r e n d a c c r u a l .
W e eva l u at e d th e d e s i g n of c o ntro l s i n re l ati o n t o th e a u th o r i s ati o n of p ro m oti o n a l a c ti v i t y a n d th e d et e r m i n ati o n of ye a r e n d p ro m oti o n a l a c cr ua l s.
W e t e s t e d o n s a m p l e b a s i s ye a r e n d p ro m oti o n a l a c c r u a l s a n d o bt a i n e d th i rd p a r t y d o c u m e nt ati o n t o s u p p o r t th e e x i s t e n c e a n d m e a s u re m e nt of th e a c c r u a l s b a l a n c e .
W e t e s t e d s u b s e q u e nt i nvo i c e s a n d c a s h p a i d af t e r th e b a l a n c e s h e et d at e t o d et e c t a ny u n re c o rd e d l i a b i l i ti e s i n p ro m oti o n a l a c c r u a l s a n d re  eva l u at e d th e a p p ro a c h t o d et e r m i n i n g a c c r u a l a m o u nts at ye a r e n d .
W e h a ve t e s t e d s a m p l e of i nvo i c e s th ro u g h th e p rofi t a n d l o s s a c c o u nt d u r i n g th e ye a r a n d ve r i fi e d t o c u s t o m e r d o c u m e nt ati o n .
W e ve r i fi e d th e a p p ro p r i at e n e s s of m a n a g e m e nt  s k ey a s s u m pti o n s i n c l u d i n g th e d et e r m i n ati o n of re d e m pti o n r at e s.
Key a s s u m pti o n s we re re a s s e s s e d b a s e d o n o b s e r ve d c h a n g e s i n c o n s u m e r b e h a v i o u r i n re l ati o n t o p ro m oti o n a l of fe r i n g s a n d th e G ro u p  s e x p e r i e n c e of p a y m e nts m ad e a g a i n s t a c c r u a l s.
O n s a m p l e b a s i s we h a ve p e r fo r m e d c u t  of f t e s ti n g t o c o nfi r m th at p ro m oti o n a l e x p e n d i tu re h a s b e e n re c o g n i s e d i n th e c o r re c t a c c ou nti ng p e r io d .
B a s e d o n o u r a u d i t p ro c e d u re s th e m eth o d o l o g y ad o pt e d i n d et e r mi n i n g prom o ti ona l e x p e n d i tu re n et t e d a g a i n s t th e reve n u e re c o g n i s e d i s a p p ro p r i at e a n d th e ye a r e n d a c c r u a l b a l a n c e i s c o r re c tl y s t at e Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 67 The numbers t he scope of our audit t ailoring the scope O ur as se s sme nt o f audit r isk our e v alua t ion o f ma t e r ialit y a nd our alloc a t ion o f pe r f or ma nc e ma t e r ialit y det e r mine our audit scope f or e ach e nt it y wit hin t he G r oup .
T a k e n t oget he r t his e na ble s us t o f or m a n opinion on t he consolida t e d fina ncial sta t e me nt s.
W e ta k e int o account siz e r isk pr o file t he or ga nis a t ion o f t he G r oup a nd ef f e ct i v e ne s s o f G r oup wide cont r ols cha nge s in t he busine s s e n v ir onme nt a nd o t he r fact or s such as r e c e nt Int e r nal A udit r e sult s w he n as se s sing t he le v e l o f wor k t o be pe r f or me d a t e ach e nt it y .
In as se s sing t he r isk o f ma t e r ial mis sta t e me nt t o t he G r oup fina ncial sta t e me nt s a nd t o e nsur e we had ade qua t e qua nt ita t i v e co v e rage o f signific a nt account s in t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s o f t he e nt it ie s wit hin t he G r oup we ha v e se le ct e d all t rading e nt it ie s a nd t he pa r e nt compa n y w hich r e pr e se nt t he pr incipal busine s s unit s wit hin t he G r oup .
T he r e maining e nt it ie s a r e e it he r non t rading holding or dor ma n t e n t it ie s .
W e pe r f or me d a n audit o f t he complet e fina ncial inf or ma t ion o f compone nt s f ull scope compone nt s w hich we r e se le ct e d base d on t he ir siz e or r isk cha ract e r ist ic s.
T he e nt it ie s f or w hich we pe r f or me d audit pr oc e dur e s account e d f or 1 0 0 % 9 9 % o f t he G r oup  s r e v e nue a nd 9 9 % 9 9 % o f t he G r oup  s pr o fit bef or e ta x adjust e d f or nonr e cur r ing e x c e p t ional it e ms a nd 1 0 0 % 9 7 % o f t he G r oup  s t o tal as set s.
F or t he r e maining e nt it ie s wit hin t he G r oup we pe r f or me d o t he r pr oc e dur e s including a nal y t ic al r e v ie w t e st ing o f t he cle r ic al accuracy o f t he consolida t ion t o r e spond t o a n y po t e nt ial r isk s o f ma t e r ial mis sta t e me nt o f t he G r oup fina ncial sta t e me nt s a nd e nquir ie s o f ma nage me nt t o addr e s s t he r e sidual r isk o f ma t e r ial m is s t a t e m e n t .
T he audit o f t he e nt it ie s wit hin t he G r oup is unde r ta k e n b y one audit t e a m w hich is le d b y t he se nior sta t u t or y audit or .
T he r e ha v e no t be e n a n y signific a nt cha nge s t o t he scope o f our audit f r om t he pr ior y e a r .
Classification of items as exceptional R efe r t o th e Au d i t C o m m i t t e e R e p o r t p a g e Ac c o u nti n g p o l i c i e s p a g e a n d N ot e of th e C o n s o l i d at e d F i n a n c i a l S t at e m e nts p a g e D a i r y C re s t G ro u p c o n s i d e r s th e s e p a r at e re p o r ti n g of e x c e pti o n a l i t e m s h e l p s t o g i ve u s e r s of th e a c c o u nts b et t e r u n d e r s t a n d i n g of th e u n d e r l y i n g o p e r ati o n a l p e r fo r m a n c e of th e G ro u p w h e re i t e m s a re m at e r i a l a n d o n e  of f i n n atu re .
W e h a ve fo c u s e d o n th e m i l l i o n m i l l i o n of t ot a l n et c o nti n u i n g a n d d i s c o nti n u i n g c o s ts th at a re c l a s s i fi e d a s e x c e pti o n a l i n th e c u r re nt ye a r .
R is ks in c lu d e I n a p p ro p r i at e c l a s s i fi c ati o n of c o s ts a s e x c e pti o n a l i te m s I n c o n s i s t e nt tre atm e nt of e x c e pti o n a l i t e m s f ro m ye a r t o ye a r I na ppropr iat e qu a ntifi c ati on of e x c e pti ona l it e m s T h i s r i s k wa s p re s e nt i n th e p r i o r ye a r .
Fo r s a m p l e of i t e m s we c o nfi r m e d th at th ey we re re c o rd e d i n l i n e w i th th e G ro u p  s p o l i cy fo r e x c e pti o n a l i t e m s a n d th at th e p o l i cy h a s b e e n a p p l i e d c o n s i s t e ntl y w i th p r i o r ye a r s.
I n p a r ti c u l a r we c o r ro b o r at e d th e a p p ro p r i at e n e s s of th e m eth o d o l o g y a n d r ati o n a l e s u p p o r ti n g th e c a l c u l ati o n of d u p l i c at e r u n n i n g c o s ts i n re l ati o n t o th e i n i ti ati o n c o s ts fo r th e d e m i n e r a l i s e d w h ey p owd e r a n d G OS p ro j e c ts th ro u g h v o u c h i n g i n c re m e nt a l e x p e n d i tu re t o s u p p o r ti n g d o c u m e nt atio n .
W e h a ve rev i ewe d th e n atu re of b oth th e i n c o m e a n d e x p e n d i tu re i t e m s i n c l u d e d w i th i n e x c e pti o n a l s a n d t e s t e d t o s u p p o r ti n g d o c u m e nt ati o n o n s a m p l e b a s i s.
W e s p e c i fi c a l l y c o n s i d e re d th e l eve l of tr a n s p a re n cy o f th e di sc losu re s.
W e a re s ati s fi e d th at th e s e i t e m s a n d th e i r c l a s s i fi c ati o n a s e x c e pti o n a l i s a p p ro p r i at e a n d i n a c c o rd a n c e w i th th e G ro u p  s a c c o u nti n g p o l i cy fo r e x c e pti o n a l i t e m s a n d c o n s i s t e nt w i th th e tre atm e nt i n p r i o r ye a r s.
In t he pr ior y e a r our audit or  s r e por t include d t he f ollo wing r isk s o f ma t e r ial mis sta t e me nt .
W e ha v e e x plaine d be lo w w h y t he y a r e no longe r r e cognise d in t he cur r e nt y e a r .
A ccount ing f or t he dispos al o f t he Dair ie s ope ra t ions W e f ocuse d on t his a r e a gi v e n t he ma t e r ial na t ur e o f t he c alcula t ion o f t he los s on dispos al a nd t he pe r f or ma nc e o f t he dair ie s ope ra t ions f or t he pe r iod up t o t he dispos al in D e c e mbe r w hich was r e por t e d as single line it e m wit hin discont inue d ope ra t ions in t he income sta t e me nt .
W e do no t conside r t ha t t he le v e l o f discont inue d ope ra t ions t his fina ncial y e a r r e pr e se nt s k e y f ocus a r e a o f t he audit .
D ef e r r e d ta x as set r e cognit ion r e la t ing t o t he Dair ie s lo s se s .
T his r isk was ne w in t he audit or  s r e por t as t he def e r r e d ta x as set r e la t ing t o t he Dair ie s los se s c a r r ie d f or wa r d a r ose f ollo wing t he complet ion o f t he s ale it s e lf .
K e y judge me nt s we r e made in t he pr ior y e a r pe r taining t o t he def e r r e d ta x r e cognit ion a nd t hose judge me nt s ha v e no t cha nge d signific a nt l y in t he r ef or e t his no longe r pr e se nt s signific a nt a r e a o f audit f ocus in t he cur r e nt year .
Re de mp t ion ra t e s do no t r efle ct ongoing cha nge s in bo t h consume r be ha v iour a nd t he na t ur e o f pr o mo t io na l a r ra ng e m e n t s pr e v iou s l y inc lu d e d w i t hin pr o mo t io na l ac c r u a ls Base d on pr ior y e a r s audit e x pe r ie nc e on r e as se s sme nt we do no t conside r t ha t t he r e is high lik e lihood o f ma t e r ial mis sta t e me nt occur r ing in r e spe ct o f r e de mp t ion ra t e s.
68 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 o ur application of materiality W e a ppl y t he conc e p t o f ma t e r ialit y in pla nning a nd pe r f or ming t he audit in e v alua t ing t he ef f e ct o f ide nt ifie d mis sta t e me nt s on t he audit a nd in f or ming our audit opinion .
T he magnit ude o f a n omis sion or mis sta t e me nt t ha t indi v iduall y or in t he aggr e ga t e could r e asona bl y be e x pe ct e d t o influe nc e t he e conomic de cisions o f t he use r s o f t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s.
Ma t e r ialit y pr o v ide s basis f or det e r mining t he na t ur e a nd e x t e nt o f our audit pr oc e dur e s.
W e det e r mine d ma t e r ialit y f or t he G r oup t o be million million w hich is 5 % 5 % o f pr o fit bef or e ta x f or cont inuing ope ra t ions adjust e d f or nonr e cur r ing e x c e p t ional it e ms.
W e be lie v e t ha t pr o fit bef or e ta x f or cont inuing ope ra t ions adjust e d f or e x c e p t ional it e ms pr o v ide s us wit h consist e nt y e a r on y e a r basis f or det e r mining ma t e r ialit y a nd is t he most r e le v a nt pe r f or ma nc e me asur e t o t he sta k e holde r s o f t he e nt it y a nd one w hich ma nage me nt use s as k e y pe r f or ma nc e indic a t or w he n r e por t ing t o t he ma r k et .
T he a pplic a t ion o f ma t e r ialit y a t t he indi v idual account or bala nc e le ve l .
It is set a t a n a mount t o r e duce t o a n a ppr opr ia t e ly low le ve l t he pr oba bilit y t ha t t he aggr e ga t e o f uncor r e ct e d a nd undet e ct e d mis sta t e me nt s e x c e e ds ma t e r ialit y .
O n t he basis o f our r isk as se s sme nt s t oget he r wit h our as se s sme nt o f t he G r oup  s o v e rall cont r ol e n v ir onme nt our judge me nt was t ha t pe r f or ma nc e ma t e r ialit y was 7 5 % 7 5 % o f our pla nning ma t e r ialit y na me l y million m illi o n  .
A udit wor k a t compone nt loc a t ions f or t he pur pose o f ob taining audit co v e rage o v e r signific a nt fina ncial sta t e me nt account s is unde r ta k e n base d on pe r c e ntage o f t o tal pe r f or ma nc e ma t e r ialit y .
T he pe r f or ma nc e ma t e r ialit y set f or e ach compone nt is base d on t he r e la t i v e sc ale a nd r isk o f t he compone nt t o t he G r oup as w hole a nd our as se s sme nt o f t he r isk o f mis sta t e me nt a t t ha t compone nt .
In t he cur r e nt y e a r t he ra nge o f pe r f or ma nc e ma t e r ialit y alloc a t e d t o compone nt s was million t o million t o f or all e nt it ie s  .
A n a mount be lo w w hich ide nt ifie d mis sta t e me nt s a r e conside r e d as be ing cle a r l y t r i v ial .
W e agr e e d wit h t he A udit Commit t e e t ha t we would r e por t t o t he m all uncor r e ct e d audit dif f e r e nc e s in e x c e s s o f w hich is set a t 5 % o f pla nning ma t e r ialit y as we ll as dif f e r e nc e s be lo w t ha t t hr e shold t ha t in our v ie w wa r ra nt e d r e por t ing on qualita t i v e gr ounds.
W e e v alua t e a n y uncor r e ct e d mis sta t e me nt s against bo t h t he qua nt ita t i v e me asur e s o f ma t e r ialit y discus se d a bo v e a nd in light o f o t he r r e le v a nt qualita t i v e conside ra t ions in f or ming our opinion .
A n audit in v ol v e s ob taining e v ide nc e a bou t t he a mount s a nd disclosur e s in t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s su f ficie nt t o gi v e r e asona ble as sura nc e t ha t t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s a r e f r e e f r om ma t e r ial mis sta t e me nt w het he r c ause d b y f raud or e r r or .
T his include s a n as se s sme n t o f w het he r t he account ing policie s a r e a ppr opr ia t e t o t he G r oup  s a nd t he pa r e nt compa n y s cir cumsta nc e s a nd ha v e be e n consist e nt l y a pplie d a nd ade qua t e l y disclose d t he r e asona ble ne s s o f signific a nt account ing e st ima t e s made b y t he dir e ct or s a nd t he o v e rall pr e se nta t ion o f t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s.
In addit ion we r e ad all t he fina ncial a nd non fina ncial inf or ma t ion in t he a nnual r e por t t o ide nt if y ma t e r ial inconsist e ncie s wit h t he audit e d fina ncial sta t e me nt s a nd t o ide nt if y a n y inf or ma t ion t ha t is a ppa r e nt l y ma t e r iall y incor r e ct base d on or ma t e r iall y inconsist e nt wit h t he k no wle dge acquir e d b y us in t he cour se o f pe r f or ming t he audit .
If
As e x plaine d mor e f ull y in t he D ir e ct or s Re sponsibilit ie s Sta t e me nt set ou t on page t he dir e ct or s a r e r e sponsible f or t he pr e pa ra t ion o f t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s a nd f or be ing s a t isfie d t ha t t he y gi v e t r ue a nd fair v ie w .
O ur r e sponsibilit y is t o audit a nd e x pr e s s a n opinion on t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s in accor da nc e wit h a pplic a ble law a nd Int e r na t ional Sta nda r ds on A udit ing
Ir e la nd .
T hose sta nda r ds r e quir e us t o compl y wit h t he A udit ing P ract ic e s Boa r d  s E t hic al Sta nda r ds f or A udit or s.
T his r e por t is made sole l y t o t he compa n y s me mbe r s as bod y in accor da nc e wit h Cha p t e r o f P a r t o f t he Compa nie s A ct O ur audit wor k has be e n unde r ta k e n so t ha t we might sta t e t o t he compa n y s me mbe r s t hose ma t t e r s we a r e r e quir e d t o sta t e t o t he m in a n audit or  s r e por t a nd f or no o t he r pur pose .
T o t he f ulle st e x t e nt pe r mit t e d b y law we do no t acc e p t or as sume r e sponsibilit y t o a n y one o t he r t ha n t he compa n y a nd t he compa n y s me mbe r s as bod y f or our audit w or k f or t his r e por t or f or t he opinions we ha v e f ormed.
In our opinion t he pa r t o f t he D ir e ct or s Re mune ra t ion Re por t t o be audit e d has be e n pr ope r l y pr e pa r e d in accor da nc e wit h t he Compa nie s A ct a nd base d on t he w or k unde r ta k e n in t he cour se o f t he audit t he inf or ma t ion gi v e n in t he St ra t e gic Re por t a nd t he D ir e ct or s Re por t f or t he fina ncial y e a r f or w hich t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s a r e pr e pa r e d is consist e nt wit h t he fina ncial sta t e me nt s t he St ra t e gic Re por t a nd t he D ir e ct or s Re por t ha v e be e n pr e pa r e d in accor da nc e wit h a pplic a ble le gal r e quir e me nt s.
Nonr e cur r ing e x c e p t ional it e ms incr e ase basis b y million m illi o n adjustments T a k e 5 % o f million million adjust e d pr o fit bef or e ta x million million materiality Re por t e d pr o fit bef or e ta x f r om cont inuing ope ra t ions million m illi o n starting basis
AUDITORS
REPORT
TO
ThE
MEMBERS
OF
DAIRy
CREST
GROUP plc CONTINUED Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 69 The numbers matters on which we are required to report by exception Isa s u K and Ireland reporting W e a re re q u i re d t o re p o r t t o yo u i f i n o u r o p i n i o n fi n a n c i a l a n d n o n fi n a n c i a l i nfo r m ati o n i n th e a n n u a l re p o r t i s m at e r i a l l y i n c o n s i s t e nt w i th th e i nfo r m ati o n i n th e a u d i t e d fi n a n c i a l s t at e m e nts o r a p p a re ntl y m at e r i a l l y i n c o r re c t b a s e d o n o r m at e r i a l l y i n c o n s i s t e nt w i th o u r k n ow l e d g e of th e G ro u p a c q u i re d i n th e c o u r s e of p e r fo r m i n g o u r a u d i t o r o th e r w is e m is l e a d in g .
I n p a r ti c u l a r we a re re q u i re d t o re p o r t w h eth e r we h a ve i d e nti fi e d a ny i n c o n s i s t e n c i e s b et we e n o u r k n ow l e d g e a c q u i re d i n th e c o u r s e of p e r fo r m i n g th e a u d i t a n d th e d i re c t o r s s t at e m e nt th at th ey c o n s i d e r th e a n n u a l re p o r t a n d a c c o u nts t a k e n a s w h o l e i s f a i r b a l a n c e d a n d u n d e r s t a n d a b l e a n d p ro v i d e s th e i nfo r m ati o n n e c e s s a r y fo r s h a re h o l d e r s t o a s s e s s th e e nti t y s p e r fo r m a n c e b u s i n e s s m o d e l a n d s tr at e g y a n d w h eth e r th e a n n u a l re p o r t a p p ro p r i at e l y ad d re s s e s th o s e m at t e r s th at we c o m m u n i c at e d t o th e a u d i t c o m m i t t e e th at we c o n s i d e r s h o u l d h a ve b e e n d i s c l o s e d .
W e h a ve n o e x c e pti o n s t o re p o r t .
Companies act 2006 reporting I n l i g ht of th e k n ow l e d g e a n d u n d e r s t a n d i n g of th e C o m p a ny a n d i ts e nv i ro n m e nt o bt a i n e d i n th e c o u r s e of th e a u d i t we h a ve i d e nti fi e d n o m at e r i a l m i s s t at e m e nts i n th e S tr at e g i c R e p o r t o r D i re c t o r s R e por t .
W e a re re q u i re d t o re p o r t t o yo u i f i n o u r o p i n i o n ad e q u at e a c c o u nti n g re c o rd s h a ve n ot b e e n k e pt b y th e p a re nt c o m p a ny o r retu r n s ad e q u at e fo r o u r a u d i t h a ve n ot b e e n re c e i ve d f ro m b r a n c h e s n ot v i s i t e d b y u s o r th e p a re nt c o m p a ny fi n a n c i a l s t at e m e nts a n d th e p a r t of th e D i re c t o r s R e m u n e r ati o n R e p o r t t o b e a u d i t e d a re n ot i n a g re e m e nt w i th th e a c c o u nti n g re c o rd s a n d retu r n s o r c e r t a i n d i s c l o s u re s of d i re c t o r s re m u n e r ati o n s p e c i fi e d b y l aw a re n ot m ad e o r we h a ve n ot re c e i ve d a l l th e i nfo r m ati o n a n d e x p l a n ati o n s we re q u i re fo r o u r a u d i t .
W e h a ve n o e x c e pti o n s t o re p o r t .
Listing r ules review requirements W e a re re q u i re d t o rev i ew th e d i re c t o r s s t at e m e nt i n re l ati o n t o g o i n g c o n c e r n s et o u t o n p a g e a n d l o n g e r  t e r m v i a b i l i t y s et o u t o n p a g e a n d th e p a r t of th e C o r p o r at e G o ve r n a n c e S t at e m e nt re l ati n g t o th e c o m p a ny s c o m p l i a n c e w i th th e p ro v i s i o n s of th e U K C o r p o r at e G o ve r n a n c e C o d e s p e c i fi e d fo r o u r rev i ew .
W e h a ve n o e x c e pti o n s t o re p o r t .
Isa s u K and Ireland reporting W e a re re q u i re d t o g i ve s t at e m e nt a s t o w h eth e r we h a ve a ny th i n g m at e r i a l t o ad d o r t o d r aw at t e nti o n t o i n re l ati o n t o th e d i re c t o r s c o nfi r m ati o n i n th e a n n u a l re p o r t th at th ey h a ve c a r r i e d o u t ro b u s t a s s e s s m e nt of th e p r i n c i p a l r i s ks f a c i n g th e e nti t y i n c l u d i n g th o s e th at wo u l d th re at e n i ts b u s i n e s s m o d e l f u tu re p e r fo r m a n c e s o l ve n cy o r l i q u i d i t y th e d i s c l o s u re s i n th e a n n u a l re p o r t th at d e s c r i b e th o s e r i s ks a n d e x p l a i n h ow th ey a re b e i n g ma na g e d or miti g at e d th e d i re c t o r s s t at e m e nt i n th e fi n a n c i a l s t at e m e nts a b o u t w h eth e r th ey c o n s i d e re d i t a p p ro p r i at e t o ad o pt th e g o i n g c o n c e r n b a s i s of a c c o u nti n g i n p re p a r i n g th e m a n d th e i r i d e nti fi c ati o n of a ny m at e r i a l u n c e r t a i nti e s t o th e e nti t y s a b i l i t y t o c o nti n u e t o d o s o o ve r p e r i o d of at l e a s t t we l ve m o nth s f ro m th e d at e of a p p ro va l of th e fi n a n c i a l s t at e m e nts a n d th e d i re c t o r s e x p l a n ati o n i n th e a n n u a l re p o r t a s t o h ow th ey h a ve a s s e s s e d th e p ro s p e c ts of th e e nti t y o ve r w h at p e r i o d th ey h a ve d o n e s o a n d w hy th ey c o n s i d e r th at p e r i o d t o b e a p p ro p r i at e a n d th e i r s t at e m e nt a s t o w h eth e r th ey h a ve re a s o n a b l e e x p e c t ati o n th at th e e nti t y w i l l b e a b l e t o c o nti n u e i n o p e r ati o n a n d m e et i ts l i a b i l i ti e s a s th ey f a l l d u e o ve r th e p e r i o d of th e i r a s s e s s m e nt i n c l u d i n g a ny re l at e d d i s c l o s u re s d r aw i n g at t e nti o n t o a ny n e c e s s a r y q u a l i fi c ati o n s o r a s s u m pti o n s.
W e h a ve n oth i n g m at e r i a l t o ad d o r t o d r aw at t e nti o n t o .
Se nior sta t u t or y audit or f or a nd on be half o f Er nst and y oung
Sta t u t or y A udit or L ond on Ma y Dairy Crest Annual Reporttel
Before exceptional items
Total
Before exceptional items
Total
Remeasurement gain on Promovita Ingredients 430     6.0 6.0 Other income  property 3 3.0  3.0 3.6  3.6 Profit on continuing operations 67.9 19.1 48.8 65.6 Finance costs 5 7.7  7.7 8.3  8.3 Other finance expense  pensions 21 0.8  0.8 0.6  0.6 Profit before tax from continuing operations 59.4 19.1 40.3 56.7 11.3 45.4 Tax expensecredit 6 10.7 3.5 7.2 9.9 3.0 6.9 Profit from continuing operations 48.7 15.6 33.1 46.8 8.3 38.5 Profitloss from discontinued operations 730 1.8 7.0 5.2 26.4 125.1 151.5 Profitloss for the year attributable to equity Earnings per share 2017 2016 Basic earnings per share from continuing operations pence Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations pence Basic earningsloss per share pence 8 27.4 81.9 Diluted earningsloss per share pence 8 27.1 81.3
2017 2016 Proposed final dividend m 9 22.8 22.3 Interim dividend paid m 9 8.7 8.4 Proposed final dividend pence 9 16.3 16.0 Interim dividend paid pence 9 6.2 6.1 ConsoliDaTED inComE sTaTEmEnT Year ended 31 March 2017 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 71 The numbers ConsoliDaTED sTaTEmEnT of ComPREhEnsivE inComE Year ended 31 March 2017
Profitloss for the year o ther comprehensive income to be reclassified to profit and loss in subsequent years Cash flow hedges  reclassification adjustment for lossesgains in income statement Cash flow hedges  gainslosses recognised in other comprehensive income Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income o ther comprehensive income not to be reclassified to profit and loss in subsequent years Remeasurement of defined benefit pension plans Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income other comprehensive loss for the year net of tax Total comprehensive loss for the year net of tax All amounts are attributable to owners of the parent company.
72 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 ConsoliDaTED anD PaREnT ComPany BalanCE shEETs At 31 March 2017
Parent Company
Property plant and equipment 11 Goodwill 12 Intangible assets 13 Investments 14 Deferred tax asset 6 Financial assets  Derivative financial instruments 17 Current assets Inventories 15 Trade and other receivables 16 Financial assets  Derivative financial instruments 17 Cash and shortterm deposits 18 noncurrent assets held for sale 19 7.4 Equity and liabilities noncurrent liabilities Financial liabilities  Longterm borrowings 20 Derivative financial instruments 20 Retirement benefit obligations 21 Deferred tax liability 6 Deferred income 23 Provisions 24 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 22 Financial liabilities  Shortterm borrowings 20 Derivative financial instruments 20 Current tax liability Deferred income 23 Provisions 24 Total liabilities shareholders equity Ordinary shares 25 Share premium 25 Interest in ESOP 26 Other reserves 26 Retained earnings Total shareholders equity Total equity and liabilities mark allen Chief Executive Tom atherton Group Finance Director The financial statements were approved by the directors on 17 May 2017.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 73 The numbers attributable to owners of the parent
Share premium
Other
Retained earnings
Equity
Profit for the year     38.3 38.3 Other comprehensive gainloss Cash flow hedges    3.2  3.2 Remeasurement of defined benefit pension plan     80.4 80.4 Tax on components of other comprehensive income    0.9 10.7 11.6 Other comprehensive loss    2.3 69.7 72.0 Total comprehensive loss    2.3 31.4 33.7 Issue of share capital 0.1 1.3    1.4 Sharebased payments     1.2 1.2 Tax on sharebased payments     0.1 0.1 Equity dividends     31.1 31.1 Loss for the year   0.3  112.7 113.0 Other comprehensive gainloss Cash flow hedges    1.0  1.0 Remeasurement of defined benefit pension plan     20.5 20.5 Tax on components of other comprehensive income    0.2 1.0 1.2 Other comprehensive loss    0.8 19.5 20.3 Total comprehensive loss   0.3 0.8 132.2 133.3 Issue of share capital 0.8 4.5    5.3 Shares acquired by ESOP   0.3   0.3 Exercise of options   0.2  0.2 Sharebased payments     2.3 2.3 Tax on sharebased payments     0.4 0.4 Equity dividends     30.0 30.0 Further details are provided in Note 26.
ConsoliDaTED sTaTEmEnT of ChangEs in EquiTy Year ended 31 March 2017 74 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 PaREnT ComPany sTaTEmEnT of ChangEs in EquiTy Year ended 31 March 2017
Share premium
Hedging reserve
Retained earnings
Equity
Profit for the year      196.9 196.9 Other comprehensive gainloss Cash flow hedges    3.2   3.2 Tax on components of other comprehensive income    0.9   0.9 Other comprehensive loss    2.3   2.3 Total comprehensive gainloss    2.3  196.9 194.6 Issue of share capital 0.1 1.3     1.4 Sharebased payments     0.4 0.8 1.2 Sale of shares held in Dairy Crest Limited   142.7  16.2 158.9 Equity dividends      31.1 31.1 Profit for the year      34.5 34.5 Other comprehensive gainloss Cash flow hedges    1.2   1.2 Tax on components of other comprehensive income    0.2   0.2 Other comprehensive loss    1.0   1.0 Total comprehensive gainloss    1.0  34.5 33.5 Issue of share capital 0.8 4.5     5.3 Sharebased payments     1.5 0.8 2.3 Tax on sharebased payments      0.4 0.4 Equity dividends      30.0 30.0 Other reserve represents the sharebased payment credit in respect of amounts capitalised as investments see Note 14.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 75 The numbers ConsoliDaTED anD PaREnT ComPany sTaTEmEnT of Cash flows Year ended 31 March 2017
Parent Company
Cash generated from operations 33 32.8 31.3 Interest paid 12.2 12.8 net cash inflow from operating activities 20.6 18.5 Cash flow from investing activities Capital expenditure 25.6 66.8 Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 42.4 5.4 Purchase of businesses and investments 30  6.0 Repaymentproceeds relating to sale of business net of fees 30 28.4 49.0 Amounts received frompaid to subsidiaries   69.9 11.2 net cash used ingenerated from investing activities 11.6 18.4 69.9 11.2 Cash flow from financing activities Repaymentissue of loan notes 34 80.2 76.1 80.2 76.1 Net drawdown under revolving credit facilities 34 23.0 Dividends paid 9 31.1 30.0 31.1 30.0 Proceeds from issue of shares net of issue costs 25 1.4 5.0 1.4 5.0 Finance lease repayments 34 1.5 1.5 net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 88.4 49.6 109.9 51.1 net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 79.4 49.7 40.0 39.9 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 34 100.3 50.6 40.1 0.2 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 34 20.9 100.3 0.1 40.1 net debt at end of year 34 249.8 229.0 140.1 180.3 76 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Accounting policies Year ended 31 March 2017 Basis of preparation The consolidated and Company financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis modified in respect of the revaluation to fair value of financial instruments assets held by defined benefit pension plans and on consolidation the original interest in an acquiree purchased through a stepped acquisition.
They are presented in sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest 0.1 million  million except where otherwise indicated.
The consolidated financial statements of Dairy Crest Group plc have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU.
The separate Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
The Company has taken advantage of the exemption provided under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to publish its individual income statement and related notes.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group and Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
The financial statements have therefore continued to be prepared on a going concern basis.
See Going Concern section on page 62 of the Directors Report.
Areas of estimation The key sources of estimation uncertainty that have a significant risk of causing material adjustments to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are i The calculation of promotional discount accruals ii the measurement of defined benefit pension scheme assets and obligations and iii the measurement of impairment of goodwill. i The Group accrues for agreed promotional funding.
Accruals for promotional funding are calculated based on an estimated redemption rate of the promotion on expected volumes.
The redemption rate and volumes used are dependent on the promotional mechanic and considers known historical data on the performance of that mechanic.
Management considers this to be an area of estimation which is dependent on the customer mix and promotion mechanic.
See Note 22. requirement of IAS 19 Retirement Benefit Obligations.
The calculations include a number of judgements and estimations in respect of the expected rate of return on assets the discount rate inflation assumptions the rate of increase in salaries and life expectancy amongst others.
Changes in these assumptions can have a significant effect on the value of the retirement benefit obligation.
See Note 21. the cashgenerating units to which goodwill is allocated.
The assessment of value in use is compared to the carrying value of goodwill.
This requires estimation of future cash flows and the selection of a suitable discount rate.
See Note 12.
Areas of judgment The following items are considered by Management to be key areas of judgment i Classification of exceptional items  The Group classifies items of a material oneoff nature which result from a restructuring of the business or some other event or circumstance as exceptional.
These are disclosed separately in the consolidated income statement.
Management considers this to be an area of judgment due to the assumption made that the items are material in size and oneoff in nature.
Further disclosure is provided in Note 4 and Note 7 . property within continuing operations.
Management considers this treatment appropriate on the basis that the closed depots were not related to the disposal of the Dairies operation and that all historic costs in respect of the closure of these depots have been charged to the income statement therefore ensuring consistent treatment between gains and losses.
Noncurrent assets held for sale  The Group has classified some closed properties as noncurrent assets held for sale.
Management considers this to be an area of judgement due to the assumptions made around the timing of the disposals.
See Note iv Contingent liability in respect of Chadwell Heath  The Group has disclosed a contingent liability in relation to a potential dilapidations liability at Chadwell Heath.
Management considers this to be an area of judgement due to the uncertainty around the intention of the landlord with respect to the future use of the land following the cessation of the lease.
See Note 28. capital project at Davidstow.
Management considers this to be an area of judgment because a reliable estimation of the liability if any cannot be made at this stage.
See Note 28.
Recognition of deferred tax asset  The Group has recognised a deferred tax asset in relation to carried forward trading losses on the basis that these losses which have arisen from various unprofitable operations within the Group and rationalisation initiatives to promote the profitability of the Group as a whole will be available to offset future taxable profits of the Group.
See Note 6. comprises one segment under IFRS 8 Operating Segments.
Certain product Group information is provided voluntarily to assist the users of the accounts.
See Note 1.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 77 The numbers c hanges in accounting policies The following accounting standards and interpretations became effective for the current reporting period International Accounting Standards IASIFRSs IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS7 IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Amendments to IAS 12 IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities  Clarification of the scope of the disclosure requirements in IFRS 12 The application of these standards has had no material impact on the net assets results and disclosures of the Group in the year ended 31 March 2017.
The IASB and IFRIC have issued the following standards and interpretations with an effective date after the date of these financial statements IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective 1 January 2018 IFRIC Interpretation 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases effective 1 January 2019 The Directors do not anticipate that the adoption of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and IFRIC Interpretation 22 Foreign Currency and Advance Consideration will have a material impact on the Groups financial statements however further disclosure around the potential impact of IFRS 15 has been provided.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers will replace IAS 18 Revenue and the Group is in the early stages of evaluating the impact of the standard.
Under IFRS 15 revenue will be recognised based on a five step model which requires for each contract with a customer the transaction price to be matched against the performance obligation arising under the contract or in the case of more than one performance obligation apportioned over those obligations.
The transaction price will be the amount of consideration the Group expects to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the goods or service to the customer.
Depending on the particular contractual arrangements in place application of the new standard could change the amount of revenue recognised on a contract andor its timing.
Whilst management continues the process of evaluating the impact against all of the Groups contracts with customers initial reviews by management indicate the impact of IFRS 15 would not materially change the way in which the Group accounts for revenue.
IFRS 16 Leases will apply to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and will be applicable to the Group in its financial statements for the year ending 31 March 2020.
IFRS 16 will remove the distinction between Operating Leases and Finance Leases and will require lessees to report operating leases on the balance sheet similar to the treatment of finance leases under IAS 17.
Lessees will recognise an asset and a liability for each lease and will have to recognise an element of each lease payment as an interest charge.
The effect of this on the Groups financial statements will be that the gross assets and gross liabilities will each increase by an equal and opposite amount.
There will also be a timing effect on the income statement as interest on leases will have to be charged in a similar way to that in which interest is charged on a loan which will result in more interest being charged in early periods of each lease and less interest being charged in the later periods.
Basis of consolidation The Group financial statements consolidate the accounts of Dairy Crest Group plc the Company its subsidiaries and associates together referred to as the Group.
The financial statements are drawn up to 31 March each year using consistent accounting policies.
Subsidiaries are entities that are directly or indirectly controlled by the Group.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which the Group obtains control and continue to be consolidated until the date control ceases.
All intercompany balances and transactions including unrealised profits and losses arising from intragroup transactions have been eliminated in full.
Subsidiaries acquired during the year are consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
The separable net assets both tangible and intangible of the newly acquired subsidiary undertakings are incorporated into the financial statements on the basis of the fair value as at the effective date of control if appropriate.
Acquisition costs incurred are expensed in the income statement.
If a business acquisition is achieved in stages the acquisition date carrying amount of the Groups previously held interest in the acquiree is remeasured to fair value at the acquisition date through the consolidated profit and loss account.
The fair value measurement is determined using the hierarchy principles of IFRS13 Fair Value Measurement.
Results of subsidiary undertakings disposed of during the financial year are included in the financial statements up to the effective date of disposal.
Where a business component representing a separate major line of business is disposed of or classified as held for sale it is classified as a discontinued operation.
The posttax profit or loss of the discontinued operations is shown as a single amount on the face of the income statement separate from the other results of the Group.
The comparative consolidated income statement other comprehensive income and associated notes have been restated as if the operation had been discontinued from the start of the comparative year.
Foreign currency translation The functional and presentational currency of Dairy Crest Group plc and its subsidiaries is Sterling .
Transactions in foreign currency are initially recorded in the functional currency rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences on monetary items are generally taken to the income statement.
However foreign currency differences arising from the translation of qualifying cash flow hedges to the extent the hedges are effective are recognised in other comprehensive income.
78 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment losses.
Cost comprises the purchase price and any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
Depreciation is calculated to write off the cost less residual value of property plant and equipment excluding freehold land on a straightline basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets as follows Freehold buildings 25 years Leasehold land and buildings 25 years or if shorter the period of the lease Vehicles plant and equipment 4 to 20 years The carrying value of property plant and equipment is reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If the carrying value exceeds the estimated recoverable value the asset is written down to its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of plant and equipment is the greater of the fair value less costs to sell or value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash flows the recoverable amount is determined for the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
Impairment losses are charged to the consolidated income statement.
An item of property plant and equipment is derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Any gain or loss arising on derecognition of the asset is included in the consolidated income statement in the year that it is derecognised.
Borrowing costs Borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of an asset that necessarily takes a substantial period of time to get ready for its intended use are capitalised as part of the cost of the respective assets.
All other borrowing costs are recognised as an expense in the period they occur.
Goodwill arising on an acquisition is carried at cost at acquisition date less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill on acquisition is initially measured as the cost of the acquisition less the fair value of net identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed in exchange for the business combination.
The cost of the acquisition is measured as the consideration transferred measured at acquisition date fair value the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and in the case of business combinations achieved in stages the acquisition date fair value of any previous equity interest in the acquiree.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
Any goodwill acquired is allocated to the cashgenerating unit or groups of cashgenerating units expected to benefit from the combinations synergies as at the acquisition date.
Impairment is determined by assessing the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit to which the goodwill relates.
Where the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is less than the carrying amount an impairment loss is recognised.
Where goodwill forms part of a cash generating unit and part of the operation within that unit is disposed of the goodwill associated with the operation disposed of is included in the carrying amount of the operation when determining the gain or loss on disposal of the operation.
Goodwill disposed of in this circumstance is measured on the basis of the relative values of the operation disposed of and the portion of the cashgenerating unit retained.
Intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and any recognised impairment losses.
All intangible assets recognised by the Group have finite useful economic lives and are being amortised on a straight line basis.
Intangible assets acquired as part of an acquisition of a business are recognised at fair value separately from goodwill if the fair value can be measured reliably on initial recognition and the future expected economic benefits flow to the Group.
Acquired intangible assets comprise the Frylight brand which was considered to have a useful life of 15 years at the date of acquisition.
Intangible assets generated internally comprise software and product development where the future recoverability can reasonably be assured under IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Development is amortised over a period of up to ten years dependent on the type of development.
Internally generated intangible assets that are not yet available for use are tested for impairment annually either individually or at the cashgenerating unit level or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
The Company recognises its investments in subsidiaries at cost being the fair value of consideration paid less provisions for impairment where appropriate.
Research and development Expenditure on research is written off as incurred.
Development expenditure is also written off as incurred unless the future recoverability of this expenditure can reasonably be assured as required by IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost includes the purchase price of raw materials on a first in first out basis direct labour and a proportion of manufacturing overheads based on normal operating capacity incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less estimated costs of completion and selling costs.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 79 The numbers Financial Assets and l iabilities Financial assets and liabilities are recognised at fair value on initial recognition.
The Group and Company classify financial assets on initial recognition within the scope of IAS 39 as financial assets at fair value through income statement loans and receivables heldtomaturity investments or availableforsale financial assets as appropriate.
The Group and Company classify nonderivative financial liabilities into the following categories financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss or other financial liabilities.
The Group holds derivative financial instruments to hedge its foreign currency exposures.
A financial asset is derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from that asset have expired.
A financial liability is dereognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged cancelled or expires.
Trade and other receivables are recognised and carried at original invoice amount less an allowance for any uncollectable amounts.
An estimate for doubtful debts is made when collection of the full amount is no longer probable.
Trade receivable debts are written off when there is no expectation of recovery.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purposes of the consolidated cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as defined above net of bank overdrafts.
Interest bearing loans and borrowings are initially recognised at the fair value net of issue costs associated with the borrowing.
After initial recognition interestbearing loans and borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Amortised cost is calculated by taking into account any issue costs and any discount or premium on settlement.
Gains and losses are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement when the liabilities are derecognised.
The Group and Company define net debt as interest bearing loans and borrowings and finance leases less cash and cash equivalents.
The calculation of net debt excludes the fair value of derivative financial instruments with the exception of cross currency swaps to fix foreign currency debt in Sterling where they are designated as cash flow hedges.
In this case the fixed Sterling debt not the underlying foreign currency debt retranslated is included in net debt.
It includes any cash or borrowings included within disposal groups classified as held for sale and excludes unamortised upfront facility fees.
The Group and Company use derivative financial instruments such as forward currency contracts crosscurrency swaps to hedge its risks associated with foreign currency fluctuations.
Such derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date.
For derivative financial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value are taken directly to the income statement for the year.
When a derivative financial instrument is designated as a cash flow hedging instrument at inception of the hedge relationship the effective portion of the changes in fair value of the derivative is recognised to other comprehensive income and accumulated in the hedging reserve.
The ineffective portion is recognised in the income statement.
The cumulative amount recognised to other comprehensive income is reclassified into the income statement out of other comprehensive income in the same period or periods during which the hedged forecast cash flows affects the income statement or the hedged item affects the income statement for example when the future sale actually occurs interest payments are made or when debt matures.
If the forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting the hedge instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or designated as revoked the hedge accounting is discontinued prospectively.
If the forecast transaction is no longer to occur then the cumulative amounted recognised in other comprehensive income is reclassified to the income statement.
Fair value measurement Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date regardless of whether that price is directly observable or estimated using another valuation technique.
In estimating the fair value of an asset or liability the Group takes into account the characteristics of the asset or liability if marker participants would take those characteristics into account when pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date.
All assets and liabilities for which fair value is measured or disclosed in the financial statements are categorised within the fair value hierarchy described as follows based on the lowest level input that is observable and significant to the fair value measurement as a whole Level 1  Quoted unadjusted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2  Valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is directly or indirectly observable Level 3  Valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is unobservable.
For assets and liabilities that are recognised in the financial statements on a recurring basis the Group determines whether transfers have occurred between levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole at the end of each reporting period.
80 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 provisions A provision is a liability of uncertain timing or amount that is recognised when the Group or Company has a present obligation legal or constructive where as a result of a past event it is more likely than not that payment will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be estimated.
If the effect is material expected future cash flows are discounted using the current pretax rate that reflects the risks specific to the liability.
Provisions are estimates and the actual costs and timings of future cash flows are dependent on future events.
Provisions are reviewed regularly by management with any difference between the amounts previously recognised and current estimate or actual liability being recognised to the income statement.
Assets acquired under finance leases which transfer to the Group substantially all the risks and benefits incidental to ownership of the leased item are capitalised at the inception of the lease at fair value of the leased asset or if lower the present value of the minimum lease payments.
The net present value of future lease rentals is included as a liability on the balance sheet.
The interest element of lease rentals is charged to the income statement in the year.
Leases where the lessor retains substantially all the risks and benefits of ownership of the asset are classified as operating leases.
Assets held under operating leases are not recognised in the Groups balance sheet with the operating lease rentals being charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Noncurrent assets held for sale comprise closed properties owned by the Group that meet the definition of held for sale assets under IFRS 5 Noncurrent assets held for sale and discontinued operations.
For a property to be classified as held for sale it must be available for immediate resale in its present condition and the sale must be highly probable.
The following criteria must be met for the sale to be highly probable Management must be committed to a plan to sell the asset An active programme to locate a buyer and complete the plan must be initiated The asset must be actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable The sale should be expected to qualify for recognition as a completed sale within one year from the date of classification and Actions required to complete the plan should indicate that it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or the plan withdrawn Noncurrent assets held for sale are measured at the lower of carrying value and fair value less costs to sell.
Retirement benefit obligations The Group operates two types of pension arrangements a defined benefit scheme and a defined contribution scheme.
The net asset or liability recognised in the balance sheet in respect of the defined benefit pension scheme is the fair value of scheme assets less the present value of the defined benefit obligations at the balance sheet date as adjusted for unrecognised past service cost.
Any asset resulting from the calculation is limited to past service cost plus the present value of available refunds and reductions in future contributions to the scheme.
Where the Group is considered to have a contractual obligation to fund the scheme above the accounting value of the liabilities an onerous obligation is recognised as an unrecoverable notional surplus.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in full to the statement of comprehensive income as they arise.
The Company has closed its defined benefit scheme and therefore no current service costs are required to be charged to income statement.
Past service costs are recognised in the income statement at the earlier of the date of the plan amendment or curtailment and the date that the Group recognises related restructuring costs.
Scheme administration costs that are not directly related to investment activities are charged to the income statement.
Administration costs that are directly related to investment are recognised as part of the remeasurement exercise through the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The net interest charge is calculated by applying the discount rate to the net defined benefit liability or asset.
These pension arrangements do not constitute a future obligation to the Group.
Members of these schemes will contribute a percentage of their salary into the scheme and the Company will pay an additional amount into the scheme.
The size of an individuals pension on retirement is based on the performance of the asset portfolio and is not linked to salary.
Company contributions to the scheme are charged to the income statement in the same period as services are rendered by the relevant employee.
The Group and Company have issued equity instruments for which they receive services from employees in consideration for these equity instruments.
All of the awards granted under existing plans are classified as equitysettled awards.
The Group and Company recognise a compensation expense that is based on the fair value of the awards measured at grant date using an appropriate pricing model.
Fair value is not subsequently remeasured unless relevant conditions attaching to the award are modified.
Fair value reflects any market performance conditions and all nonvesting conditions.
Adjustments are made to the compensation expense to reflect actual and expected forfeitures due to failure to satisfy service conditions or nonmarket performance conditions.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 81 The numbers The compensation expense is generally recognised to the income statement on a straightline basis over the vesting period and a corresponding credit is recognised in equity.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any cost not yet recognised in the income statement for the award is expensed immediately.
Rights granted to employees of subsidiary undertakings over equity instruments of the Company are treated as an investment in the Companys balance sheet.
The shares in the Company held by the Dairy Crest Employees Share Ownership Plan Trust to satisfy Long Term Incentive Share Plan awards are presented as a deduction from equity in arriving at shareholders equity.
Consideration received from the sale of such shares is also recognised in equity with no gain or loss recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Revenue
Revenue on the sale of food related products is recognised on delivery.
Revenue comprises the invoiced value for the sale of goods net of Value Added Tax rebates and discounts and after eliminating sales within the Group.
Discounts comprise mainly promotional accruals overriding discounts and customer terms.
Promotional accruals are made in respect of customer claims where a discount is claimed following completion of the promotion based on the redemption rate of that promotion.
The accruals are calculated based on the expected instore redemption rate for the particular promotional mechanic e. volume.
The redemption rate used considers known historical data on the performance of that mechanic and is adjusted for actual performance.
An overriding discount is a discount given across all sales of a particular product providing the sales exceed agreed volumes.
The overriding discounts are calculated as a proportion of the level of customer sales in the period.
A customer term is where the Group has agreed to pay a customer a sum of money based on that customer delivering an agreed sales and promotional plan.
These terms are generally paid for in arrears following delivery of the plan and are accrued for over the period to which they relate.
Dividend income is recognised when the Companys right to receive payment is established.
Other income comprises the profit on disposal of depots as a result of rationalisation.
Certain items are recorded separately in the income statement as exceptional.
Only items of a material oneoff nature which result from a restructuring of the business or some other event or circumstance are disclosed in this manner in order to give a better understanding of the underlying operational performance of the
The profits arising on disposal of closed sites other than closed Dairies depots retained by the Group following disposal of the Dairies operation are reported within exceptional items.
Government grants are initially recognised at their fair value where there is reasonable assurance that the grant will be received and all attaching conditions will be complied with.
When the grant relates to an expense item it is recognised as income over the periods necessary to match the grant on a systematic basis to the costs that it is intended to compensate.
Where the grant relates to an asset the fair value is credited to a deferred income account and is released to the income statement over the expected useful life of the relevant asset in equal annual instalments.
Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax.
It is recognised to the income statement except to the extent it relates to items recognised directly to equity or other comprehensive income.
Current tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities based on tax rates and laws that are enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax is provided on all temporary differences at the balance sheet date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements except as indicated below.
Deferred tax is not recognised in respect of temporary differences arising from the initial recognition of goodwill or the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss and taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries associates and interests in joint ventures where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences carryforward of unused tax assets and unused tax losses to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which they can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset only if a legal enforcement right exists to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities the deferred income taxes relate to the same taxation authority and that authority permits the Group to make a single net payment.
82 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNaNcial statemeNts 1 segmental analysis IFRS 8 requires operating segments to be determined based on the Groups internal reporting to the Chief Operating Decision Maker
The CODM has been determined to be the Companys Board members as they are primarily responsible for the allocation of resources to segments and the assessment of performance of the segments.
The business is managed centrally by functional teams Demand Supply Procurement and Finance that have responsibility for the whole of the Groups product portfolio.
Although some discrete financial information is available to provide insight to the management team of the key performance drivers the product group profit is not part of the CODMs review.
Management has judged that the continuing Group comprises one operating segment under IFRS 8.
As such disclosures required under IFRS 8 for the financial statements are shown on the face of the consolidated income statement and balance sheet.
To assist the readers of the financial statements management considers it appropriate to provide voluntary disclosure on a basis consistent with historical reporting of the cheese and functional ingredients product group and the butters spreads and oils product group results included within the consolidated income statement.
In disclosing the product group profit for the year certain assumptions have been made when allocating resources which are centralised at a group level.
The Other product group comprises revenue earned from distributing products for third parties and certain central costs net of recharges to the other product groups.
Generally central costs less external Other revenue is recharged back into the product groups such that their result reflects the total cost base of the Group.
Other operating profit therefore is nil.
The results under the historical segmentation basis for the Group included in the financial information are as follows
Cheese and Functional Ingredients 254.8 263.7 Butters Spreads and Oils 150.7 152.6 Other 11.1 6.0 t otal product group external revenue  continuing operations Product group profit Cheese and Functional Ingredients Butters Spreads and Oils t otal product group profit  continuing operations Finance costs 5 adjusted profit before tax  continuing operations Acquired intangible amortisation 2 Exceptional items 4 Other finance expense  pensions 21 Group profit before tax  continuing operations t otal assets Cheese and Functional Ingredients Butters Spreads and Oils
Other
Total product group Unallocated assets t otal assets Profit on operations before exceptional items and amortisation of acquired intangibles.
Adjusted profit before tax from continuing operations is presented as managements key Group profit measure because it excludes exceptional items and therefore gives a better indication of the underlying operational performance of the Group.
The calculations also exclude amortisation of acquired intangibles and pension interest in relation to the Groups defined benefit pension scheme being dependent on market assumptions at 31 March each year.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 83 The numbers
Product group depreciation and amortisation excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets Cheese and Functional Ingredients Butters Spreads and Oils
Product group additions to noncurrent assets Cheese and Functional Ingredients Butters Spreads and Oils
Dairies additions not included above amounted to nil 2016 7.3 million Product group exceptional items Cheese and Functional Ingredients 19.0 10.2 Butters Spreads and Oils  0.7 Unsegmented 0.1 1.8 Total exceptional operating costs 4 19.1 11.3 Interest income and expense are not included in the measure of product group profit.
Group treasury has always been centrally managed and external interest income and expense are not allocated to product groups.
Further analysis of the Group interest expense is provided in Note 5.
Tax costs are not included in the measure of product group profit.
Product group assets comprise property plant and equipment goodwill intangible assets inventories receivables and cash and cash equivalents.
They exclude derivative financial assets and deferred tax assets.
Other product group assets comprise certain property plant and equipment that is not reported in product groups.
Product group depreciation and amortisation excludes amortisation of acquired intangible assets of 0.4 million 2016 0.4 million as these costs are not charged in the product group result.
Product group additions to noncurrent assets comprise additions to goodwill intangible assets and property plant and equipment through capital expenditure and acquisition of businesses.
Geographical information  continuing operations External revenue attributed on basis of customer location
Rest of world Total revenue Noncurrent assets based on location
Rest of world
Comprises property plant and equipment goodwill intangible assets investments deferred tax asset and assets held for sale.
The Group has three customers which individually represent more than 10% of revenue from continuing operations in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 four with each customer accounting for 54.2 million 56.2 million and 92.7 million 2016 46.9 million 53.6 million 67 .6 million and 102.1 million of revenue from continuing operations being 13.0% 13.5% and 22.3% 2016 11.1% 12.7% 16.0% and 24.2%.
1 segmental analysis continued 84 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 2 o perating costs  continuing operations 2017 2016
Before exceptional items
Total
Distribution costs 31.6  31.6 26.7  26.7 Administrative expenses 32.6  32.6 38.0 1.8 39.8 Profit from continuing operations is stated after chargingcrediting Release of grants 1.6 1.7 Depreciation 14.9 16.5 Amortisation of intangibles  acquired 0.4 0.4 Amortisation of intangibles  internally generated 0.5 1.1 Operating lease rentals 3.9 4.5 Research and development expenditure 2.6 2.3 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 287.5 295.6 Including movement in inventory provision 0.9 1.0 The equivalent disclosure for discontinued operation is contained within Note 7.
Remuneration paid to auditors Fees payable to the Companys auditors  audit of Companys annual accounts 0.1 0.1 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for other services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 0.4 0.3 Taxation services 0.1 0.1 Other services relating to corporate finance transactions 0.1 0.1 10000 2016 10000 of this relates to the Company.
Nonaudit services carried out in the year include advice in relation to the disposal of the Groups Dairies operations and tax advisory services.
Fees paid to Ernst and Young LLP and its associates for nonaudit services to the Company itself are not disclosed in the individual accounts of the Company because Group financial statements are prepared which are required to disclose such fees on a consolidated basis.
Ernst and Young LLP are auditors of the Dairy Crest Group Pension Fund.
Fees paid by the Fund for audit services are not included in the above table.
3 o ther income  property Other income of 3.0 million 2016 3.6 million relates to the profits from the disposal of closed Dairies depots retained by Dairy Crest.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 85 The numbers 4 exceptional items Exceptional items comprise those items that are material and oneoff in nature that the Group believes should be separately disclosed to assist in the understanding of the underlying financial performance of the Group.
The exceptional items charge to the operating costs of the continuing operations are analysed below.
The exceptional items charged in relation to discontinued operations are analysed in Note 7.
Demineralised whey powder and GOS projects 19.0 16.2 Property provision  1.8 Spreads restructuring costs  0.7 Disposal costs in relation to closed manufacturing sites 2.3 Settlement gain in relation to Farmright Limited and Quadra Foods Limited 2.2 Gain on remeasurement to fair value of original investment in Promovita Ingredients Limited  6.0 Tax relief on exceptional items 2.8 3.0 Release of deferred tax liability in respect of industrial buildings 0.7 Demineralised whey powder and Gos projects The Group has completed an investment in its cheese creamery at Davidstow Cornwall enabling the Group to manufacture demineralised whey powder a base ingredient of infant formula and galactooligosaccharide GOS widely used in infant formula.
During the year 19.0 million of costs were charged to the income statement in relation to this project.
12.3 million related to commissioning of the facility of which 7.3 million was for the writedown of product produced during the commissioning process which did not meet the required standard to be considered for infant formula.
In addition 5.8 million related to project review costs.
A further 0.9 million has been charged in respect of a financial liability relating to the project that did not meet the criteria for hedge accounting due to it being an ineffective hedge at 31 March 2017.
In the prior year 16.2 million of exceptional costs were incurred of which 5.3 million related to the commissioning and 6.5 million on project review costs.
A further 4.4 million was charged for set up costs.
The tax credit relating to this exceptional charge in the year was 3.1 million 2016 2.7 million.
Management considers these costs to be exceptional due to the materiality and the oneoff nature of the capital project to which they relate and do not expect any significant costs in relation to this project going forward.
Disposal costs in relation to closed manufacturing sites The Group has incurred costs of 2.3 million relating to the disposal of closed manufacturing sites in Totnes in Devon Fenstanton in Cambridgshire and Crudgington in Shropshire.
Management has determined these properties to be held for sale at the 31 March 2017 and any future gains in respect of these properties will be treated as exceptional consistent with the historical closure costs.
The tax credit in relation to these costs was 0.1 million.
On 9 May 2016 the Group paid 1.0 million in full and final settlement of claims arising out of the debt originally owed to Farmright Limited.
Claims between the Group Farmright Limited and Quadra Foods Limited and any assignees of the claims are now resolved.
Following settlement 2.1 million plus a provision for professional fees of 0.1 million which was no longer required have been released.
Management considers this credit to be exceptional due to it being oneoff in nature and in relation to the debt of Quadra Foods Limited for which 4.3 million was provided for under an exceptional impairment provision in the year ended 31 March 2012.
The tax charge in relation to this release was 0.4 million.
Prior Year Property provision The Group commissioned a dilapidation assessment on some of its leasehold properties.
The 1.8 million exceptional charge represents an increase in provision for property dilapidation liabilities on properties where the Group considers there to be a high likelihood of exiting when the lease term expires.
The tax credit on this exceptional charge was 0.4 million.
During the year ended 31 March 2015 the Group completed the consolidation of its spreads production operations into one site in Kirkby
As a result of this consolidation the site at Crudgington Shropshire ceased production in December 2014.
The exceptional credit of 0.7 million in the year represents the release of a prior year provision relating to the completion of this project that was not required.
The tax charge relating to this exceptional credit was 0.3 million.
Gain on remeasurement to fair value of original investment in Promovita ingredients l imited On 18 December 2015 the Group completed the stepped acquisition of Promovita Ingredients Limited Promovita.
In accordance with IFRS 3 Revised the original investment was revalued to fair value at point of acquisition and the resulting gain of 6.0 million has been recognised within exceptional items.
See Note 30.
86 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 6 t ax expense continuing operations The major components of income tax expense for continuing operations for the years ended 31 March 2017 and 2016 are consolidated income statement Current income tax Deferred income tax Net utilisation of deferred tax asset 8.5 7.5 Effect of change in tax rate 0.5 0.2 Adjustment in respect of previous years  deferred tax 0.8 0.4
Before exceptional items 10.7 9.9 Exceptional items 3.5 3.0 There is no current tax charge in the year due to tax relief in respect of pensions contributions capital allowances and in relation to the disposal of the Dairies operation in December 2015.
Reconciliation between the tax charge and the profit before tax multiplied by the statutory rate of corporation tax in the UK Profit before tax 40.3 45.4 Tax at UK statutory corporation tax rate of 20% 2016 20% 8.1 9.1 Adjustments in respect of previous years 0.8 0.4 Adjustment for change in UK corporation tax rate 0.5 0.2 Nondeductible expenses 1.2 1.1 Profits offset by available tax relief 0.8 2.7 The effective preexceptional rate of tax on the Groups profit before tax from continuing operations is 18.0% 2016 17.5%.
The total Group effective tax rate is below the headline rate of UK corporation tax at 17.9% 2016 15.2%.
One of the reasons for this is the availability of capital losses for which no deferred tax asset has been recognised against profits of 3.0 million on the disposal of closed depots.
We expect the effective tax rate to remain below the headline rate of UK corporation tax next year due to the expected disposal of closed properties.
Two further reductions in the UK Corporation tax rate have been enacted taking the rate to 19% from April 2017 and to 17% from April 2020.
Accordingly deferred tax has been provided on all temporary differences at the rate in force when they are anticipated to reverse.
Discontinued operations The total income tax credit in respect of discontinued operations for the year ended 31 March 2017 is 9.8 million 2016 35.7 million.
Tax relief on exceptional costs incurred by discontinued operations in the year ended 31 March 2017 was 5.7 million 2016 28.8 million. million tax credit has been realised in respect of the disposal of St Hubert SAS.
Tax attributable to discontinued operations is disclosed in Note 7.
5 f inance costs and other finance income finance costs Bank loans and overdrafts at amortised cost 7.6 8.2 Finance charges on finance leases 0.1 0.1 Total net finance costs  continuing operations 7.7 8.3 Interest payable on bank loans and overdrafts is stated after capitalising 3.1 million 2016 3.8 million of interest on expenditure on capital projects at a rate of 4.0% 2016 5.0%.
The tax impact of the capitalised interest was 0.6 million 2016 0.7 million.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 87 The numbers t ax credit relating to components of consolidated other comprehensive income Deferred income tax related to items charged to other comprehensive income Pension deferred tax movement taken directly to reserves 10.7 1.0 Valuation of financial instruments 0.9 0.2 Tax credit 11.6 1.2 t ax on items recognised directly to equity Deferred tax of 0.1 million relating to sharebased payments was charged directly to equity in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 0.4 million credited to equity.
Deferred income tax Deferred income tax at 31 March 2017 and 2016 relates to the following Deferred tax liability Accelerated depreciation for tax purposes  4.5 Goodwill and intangible assets 7.8 7.9 Deferred tax asset Accelerated depreciation for tax purposes 1.1 Government grants 0.9 1.2 Sharebased payments 1.0 0.9 Pensions 18.6 12.5 Financial instruments valuation 1.2 0.3 Trading losses 14.0 15.3 Other 0.6 1.5 Net deferred tax asset 29.6 19.3 The recognition of the deferred tax asset relating to trading losses is based on the expectation that the business will continue to be profitable going forward.
The Company has a deferred tax asset of 1.9 million at 31 March 2017 2016 0.8 million.
This relates to temporary differences in respect of financial instruments valuations and sharebased payments.
The movement on the net deferred tax asset is shown below Deferred tax assetliability Goodwill and intangible assets
Accelerated tax depreciation
Total
Balances at 31 March 2016 7.9 12.5 4.5 19.2 19.3 Chargecredit to income statement continuing operations 0.1 4.6 5.6 8.3 7.2 Credit to income statement discontinued operations    6.0 6.0 Credit to other comprehensive income  10.7  0.9 11.6 Charge taken directly to reserves    0.1 0.1 Balances at 31 march 2017 7.8 18.6 1.1 17.7 29.6 Balances at 31 March 2015 8.5 16.0 29.5 10.9 11.1 Chargecredit to income statement continuing operations 0.6 4.5 3.5 0.5 6.9 Credit to income statement discontinued operations    7.2 7.2 Credit to other comprehensive income  1.0  0.2 1.2 Credit taken directly to reserves    0.4 0.4 Disposal of business   28.5  28.5 Balances at 31 March 2016 7.9 12.5 4.5 19.2 19.3 6 t ax expense continued 88 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD The Group has capital losses which arose in the UK of 121.2 million 2016 1 18.
1 million that are available indefinitely for offset against future taxable gains.
Deferred tax has not been recognised in respect of these losses as there is no foreseeable prospect of their being utilised.
The Group has realised capital gains amounting to 22.6 million 2016 47 .9 million for which rollover relief claims have been or are intended to be made.
7 Discontinued operations On 26 December 2015 the Group completed the disposal of its Dairies operation to Muller UK and Ireland Group LLP.
The Dairies operation has been classified as a discontinued operation since the year of disposal.
The results of the Dairies operation which have been included in the consolidated income statement within discontinued operations can be analysed as follows Revenue  529.1 Operating costs 2.1 562.5 Other income  property  0.1 operating loss before exceptional operating items and tax attributable to discontinued operations 2.1 33.3 Exceptional operating items  16.6 operating loss before tax attributable to discontinued operations 2.1 49.9 Attributable tax 0.8 9.1 Tax credit in relation to the disposal of St Hubert 3.8 Profitloss after tax from discontinued operations 2.5 40.8 Loss on disposal 2.5 137.3 Attributable tax on disposal 5.2 26.6 Profitloss for the period from discontinued operations 5.2 151.5 earningsloss per share from discontinued operations Basic pence 3.7 109.9 Diluted pence 3.7 109.0 loss from discontinued operations is stated after charging Depreciation  6.9 Amortisation of intangibles  internally generated  0.9 Operating lease rentals  13.7 Research and development expenditure  0.4 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense  426.3 The operating costs of 2.1 million in the year comprise 1.6 million relating to certain costs in respect of the Dairies operation that had not been accrued for at the point of sale and as such were the liability of the Group in line with the sale and purchase agreement with Muller UK and Ireland LLP.
A further 0.5 million has been charged in respect of the Groups investment in HEICO Limited which has been fully impaired in the period.
The investment related to the Dairies operation and as such the impairment has been recognised within discontinued operations.
6 t ax expense continued Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 89 The numbers a.
Exceptional operating items after attributable tax 4.3 14.4 Profitloss on disposal after attributable tax Note 30 2.7 110.7 Exceptional items after tax 7.0 125.1 exceptional operating costs Rationalisation of operating sites  7.7 Costs associated with the separation and proposed sale of the Dairies operation  8.9 Exceptional operating costs  discontinued operations  16.6 Tax relief on exceptional items 0.5 2.2 Tax credit in relation to the disposal of St Hubert 3.8 t ax credit in relation to the disposal of st hubert A tax provision of 3.8 million was created when St Hubert SAS was disposed of in August 2012.
A tax credit has been recognised in the period in respect of this because the period during which the French authorities can raise tax assessments has now expired.
This has been recognised within discontinued operations consistent with the results of St Hubert SAS following disposal.
In the prior year the Group incurred 8.9 million of separation costs such as oneoff systems costs and professional fees.
A tax credit of 0.5 million has been recognised in the period 2016 1.9 million.
Rationalisation of operating sites In September 2014 the Group announced it had started consultation with employees and their representatives regarding the closure of its glass bottling dairy in Hanworth West London.
In the prior year an exceptional charge of 1.7 million was incurred in the year primarily comprising accelerated depreciation of assets following an assessment of their useful economic lives as well as other associated closure costs.
The Group ceased production at its specialist cream potting factory in Chard Somerset in September 2015.
In the prior year a charge of 6.0 million was recognised in relation to site decommissioning and demolition costs.
The tax credit on these exceptional costs in the prior year was 0.3 million. b.
Net cash flows attributable to discontinued operations Net cash flows attributable to the Dairies operation in the period and comparative period are as follows Cash flow from operating activities 2.1 51.6 Cash used in investing activities  10.4 Net cash flows attributable to discontinued operations 2.1 62.0 8 earnings per share The basic earnings per share EPS measures for the year have been calculated by dividing the profit attributable to equity shareholders from the relevant operations continuing discontinued and total Group by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the period excluding those held by the Dairy Crest Employees Share Ownership Plan Trust which are held as treasury shares and treated as cancelled.
The weighted average number of shares used in the calculation of basic EPS is detailed below along with the diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares used for the calculation of diluted EPS.
The diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares reflects the dilutive impact of share options exercisable under the Groups share option schemes.
Note that in the circumstances where there is a basic loss per share from continuing operations share options are antidilutive and therefore are not included in the calculation of any other EPS measures.
7 Discontinued operations continued 90 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 8 earnings per share continued To show earnings per share on a consistent basis which in the Directors opinion reflects the underlying performance of the Group more appropriately adjusted earnings per share has been calculated.
Year ended 31 march 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 earnings
Per share amount pence
Weighted average number of shares million Per share amount pence Basic ePs from continuing operations 33.1 139.8 23.7 38.5 137.9 27.9 Effect of dilutive securities Share options  1.3 0.2  1.1 0.2 Diluted ePs from continuing operations 33.1 141.1 23.5 38.5 139.0 27.7 adjusted ePs from continuing operations Profit from continuing operations 33.1 139.8 23.7 38.5 137.9 27.9 Exceptional items net of tax 15.6  11.2 8.3  6.0 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets net of tax 0.3  0.2 0.3  0.2 Pension interest expense net of tax 0.7  0.5 0.5  0.4 adjusted basic ePs from continuing operations 49.7 139.8 35.6 47.6 137.9 34.5 Effect of dilutive securities Share options  1.3 0.4  1.1 0.3 adjusted diluted ePs from continuing operations 49.7 141.1 35.2 47.6 139.0 34.2 Basic earningsloss per share from discontinued operations Effect of dilutive securities Share options  1.3   1.1 0.9 Diluted earningsloss per share from discontinued Basic earningsloss per share for the year 38.3 139.8 27.4 113.0 137.9 81.9 Effect of dilutive securities Share options  1.3 0.3  1.1 0.6 Diluted earningsloss per share for the year 38.3 141.1 27.1 113.0 139.0 81.3 There have been no transactions involving ordinary shares or potential ordinary shares between the reporting date and the date of signing of these financial statements.
Adjusted earnings per share from continuing operations calculations are presented to give an indication of the underlying operational performance of the Group.
The calculations exclude exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and pension interest in relation to the Groups defined benefit pension scheme being dependent on market assumptions at 31 March each year.
9 Dividends paid and proposed Declared and paid during the year Equity dividends on ordinary shares Final dividend for 2016 16.0 pence 2015 15.7 pence 22.4 21.6 Interim dividend for 2017 6.2 pence 2016 6.1 pence 8.7 8.4 Proposed for approval at aGm not recognised as a liability at 31 march Equity dividends on ordinary shares Final dividend for 2017 16.3 pence 2016 16.0 pence 22.8 22.3 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 91 The numbers 10 Remuneration of employees and key management personnel Number of employees continuing operations  Group number number Average number of employees Production 668 620 Sales distribution and administration 455 560 Total employees 1123 1180 There were no employees in relation to the discontinued operation 2016 2708.
Remuneration of employees including key management personnel continuing operations Wages and salaries 41.2 44.3 Social security costs 4.9 4.7 Equity settled sharebased payments expense Note 27 1.2 1.4 Pension costs Note 21 2.0 2.1 The above costs include amounts paid to the Companys Executive and Nonexecutive Directors.
Discontinued operations Wages and salaries  64.7 Social security costs  6.7 Equity settled sharebased payments expense Note 27  0.8 Pension costs Note 21  2.9 Key management compensation Key management is represented by the Companys Executive and Nonexecutive Directors.
Directors
Salaries and benefits 1371 1058 Bonuses 194 373 Fees and benefits to Nonexecutive Directors 308 289 Emoluments 1873 1720 Employer payments to defined contribution pension scheme 2 16 The Executive Directors did not exercise any options during the year.
Aggregate gains made by the Directors on the exercise of share options in 2016 were 9830.
The amount of the gain relating to highest paid director was nil 2016 9830.
Salary and benefits 703 675 Bonus 102 235 Emoluments 805 910 Further information relating to Directors remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2017 is provided in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 41 to 61.
92 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 11 Property plant and equipment consolidated 2017 l and and buildings
At 1 April 2016 82.0 197.9 96.2 376.1 Additions 4.9 9.3 12.2 26.4 Disposals 1.3 44.8  46.1 Transfers and reclassifications 4.0 91.0 95.0 Transfer to noncurrent assets held for sale 14.6 0.5 at 31 march 2017 75.0 252.9 13.4 341.3 accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2016 30.3 111.9  142.2 Charge for the year  continuing 2.6 12.3  14.9 Disposals  6.7  6.7 Transfer to noncurrent assets held for sale 7.3 0.4  7.7 at 31 march 2017 25.6 117.1  142.7 Net book amount at 31 march 2017 49.4 135.8 13.4 198.6 Consolidated 2016
At 1 April 2015 171.7 310.0 74.9 556.6 Additions 7.0 12.8 44.4 64.2 Disposals 5.0   5.0 Disposal of Dairies operations Note 30 92.4 147.3  239.7 Transfers and reclassifications 0.7 22.4 23.1 At 31 March 2016 82.0 197.9 96.2 376.1 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2015 68.6 159.5  228.1 Charge for the year  continuing 2.0 14.5  16.5 Charge for the year  discontinued operations 1.8 5.1  6.9 Asset impairments  discontinued operations  1.6  1.6 Disposals 3.4   3.4 Disposal of Dairies operations Note 30 38.7 68.8  107.5 At 31 March 2016 30.3 111.9  142.2 Net book amount at 31 March 2016 51.7 86.0 96.2 233.9 On 31 March 2017 7.3 million of land and buildings and 0.1 million of plant and equipment was transferred to noncurrent assets held for sale see Note 19.
During the year the Group disposed of 37.9 million of plant and equipment under two sale and leaseback agreements with Lombard Business Leasing Limited.
The sale and leaseback was for certain plant and equipment relating to the Demineralised Whey and GOS facility at Davidstow see Note 28.
In the year ending 31 March 2016 1.6 million of exceptional accelerated depreciation was charged in relation to Hanworth prior to the disposal of the Dairies operation see Note 7.
Cost 28.0 28.9 Accumulated depreciation 21.7 19.8 Net book amount 6.3 9.1 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 93 The numbers 12 Goodwill cost At 31 March 2015 145.6 Acquisition of Promovita Ingredients Limited Note 30 12.0 Disposal of discontinued operations Note 30 70.7 at 31 march 2016 and 31 march 2017 86.9 accumulated impairment At 31 March 2015 71.3 Disposal of discontinued operations Note 30 70.7 at 31 march 2016 and 31 march 2017 0.6 Net book amount at 31 march 2016 and 31 march 2017 86.3 During the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group acquired the remaining share capital of Promovita Ingredients Limited leading to the recognition of 12.0 million of goodwill see Note 30 and disposed of its Dairies operation leading to the disposal of 70.7 million of goodwill which was fully written down during the year ended 31 March 2012.
Acquired goodwill has been allocated for impairment testing purposes to three groups of cashgenerating units CGUs Butters and Spreads MH Foods and Cheese and Functional Ingredients.
Goodwill recognised on the acquisition of Promovita Ingredients Limited is included in the Cheese and Functional Ingredients CGU as the business is directly linked to the Cheese and Functional Ingredients product group with a number of shared overheads.
All groups of CGUs with goodwill are tested for impairment annually by comparing the carrying amount of that CGU with its recoverable amount.
Recoverable amount is determined based on a valueinuse calculation using cash flow projections based on financial budgets and strategic plans approved by senior management covering a threeyear period and appropriate growth rates beyond that.
The discount rate applied to the projections was 6.5% for Butters and Spreads MH Foods and Cheese and Functional Ingredients 2016 6.0%.
The growth rate used to extrapolate cash flows beyond the threeyear period for Butters and Spreads MH Foods and Cheese and Functional Ingredients is nil 2016 nil.
The carrying amount of goodwill allocated to groups of CGUs at 31 March 2017 is MH Foods 6.7 million 2016 6.7 million Butters and Spreads 65.5 million 2016 65.5 million Cheese and Functional Ingredients 14.1 million 2016 14.1 million Key assumptions on which management has based its cash flow projections Gross margin  budgeted gross margins are based initially on actual margins achieved in the preceding year further adjusted for projected input and output price changes volume changes initiatives implemented and associated efficiency improvements.
The budgeted margins form the basis for strategic plans which incorporate longerterm market trends.
Discount rates  Discount rates are pretax and calculated by reference to average industry gearing levels the cost of debt and the cost of equity based on the capital asset pricing model and CGUspecific risk factors.
Raw materials prices  budgets are prepared using the most up to date price and forecast price data available.
This is based on forward prices in the market place adjusted for any contracted prices at the time of forecast.
The key resources are milk vegetable oils fuel oil diesel gas and electricity and packaging costs.
Growth rate estimates  for periods beyond the length of the strategic plans growth estimates are based upon published industry research adjusted downwards to reflect the risk of extrapolating growth beyond a threeyear time frame.
The Directors consider the assumptions used to be consistent with the historical performance of each CGU where appropriate and to be realistically achievable in the light of economic and industry measures and forecasts.
2017 and 2016 sensitivity to changes in assumptions With regard to the assessment of valueinuse of the Butters and Spreads MH Foods and Cheese and Functional Ingredients CGUs management believes that no reasonably possible change in the above key assumptions would cause the carrying value of those units to exceed their recoverable amount.
94 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 13 intangible assets Assets in the course of construction
Acquired intangibles
At 31 March 2015 1.4 35.6 8.7 45.7 Additions 3.5   3.5 Disposals 0.4 31.2  31.6 Transfers and reclassifications 1.0 1.0 At 31 March 2016 3.5 5.4 8.7 17.6 Additions 4.2   4.2 Disposals  3.5  3.5 Transfers and reclassifications 3.5 6.1 2.6 at 31 march 2017 4.2 8.0 6.1 18.3 accumulated amortisation At 31 March 2015  16.2 3.9 20.1 Amortisation for the year  continuing  1.1 0.4 1.5 Amortisation for the year  discontinued operations  0.9  0.9 Disposals  16.0  16.0 At 31 March 2016  2.2 4.3 6.5 Amortisation for the year  continuing  0.5 0.4 0.9 Amortisation for the year  discontinued operations Disposals  3.5  3.5 Transfers and reclassifications  2.3 2.3 at 31 march 2017  1.5 2.4 3.9 Net book amount at 31 march 2017 4.2 6.5 3.7 14.4 Net book amount at 31 March 2016 3.5 3.2 4.4 11.1 In the year ending 31 March 2017 additions to assets in the course of construction of 4.2 million comprised third party system support costs relating to a new enterprise planning system of 3.7 million 2016 nil and product development costs of 0.5 million 2016 nil.
In the prior year the assets in the course of construction of 3.5 million comprised third party systems and setup support costs relating to the demineralised whey powder and GOS projects at Davidstow.
Internally generated intangible assets comprise software development and implementation costs across manufacturing sites and Head Office and product development where the future recoverability can be reasonably assured under IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Acquired intangibles comprise predominantly brands acquired with the acquisition of businesses.
The largest component within acquired intangibles is the Frylight brand acquired with the acquisition of Morehands Limited MH Foods Limited in June 2011.
A useful life of 15 years has been assumed for this brand with 9 years remaining.
The carrying value of the Frylight brand at 31 March 2017 is 3.7 million 2016 4.1 million.
14 investments c onsolidated A charge of 0.5 million was incurred during the year ended 31 March 2017 following an impairment of the investment in HEICO Limited.
This investment related to the Dairies operation and the charge has therefore been recognised within discontinued operations.
In the prior year the Group acquired the outstanding share capital of Promovita Ingredients Limited Promovita for a cash consideration of 6.0 million.
Promovita was established in 2014 as a joint venture between the Group and Fayrefield Foods Limited to develop and produce galactooligosaccharide a prebiotic for use in infant formula. see Note 30.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 95 The numbers 14 investments continued company Share grants awarded in subsidiaries Shares in subsidiary undertakings
At 1 April 2015 14.7 468.1 482.8 Sharebased payment charge in subsidiary companies 1.5  1.5 At 31 March 2016 16.2 468.1 484.3 Sharebased payment charge in subsidiary companies 0.4  0.4 Disposal of shares 16.2 239.2 255.4 at 31 march 2017 0.4 228.9 229.3 Shares in subsidiary undertakings comprise an investment in Dairy Crest UK Limited of 228.9 million.
During the year the shares held in Dairy Crest Limited of 255.4 million including 16.2 million of share grants awarded in subsidiaries were sold to Dairy Crest UK Limited for a consideration of 450.0 million.
Share grants awarded in subsidiaries represent the cumulative cost of the Companys grant of equity instruments under sharebased payment awards to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
At 31 March 2017 the subsidiary undertakings were Parent Business Percentage of ordinary share capital held all subsidiary undertakings Dairy Crest UK Limited Dairy Crest Group plc Holding Company 100% Dairy Crest France Holdings 1 Limited Dairy Crest Limited Holding Company 100% Dairy Crest Jersey Limited Dairy Crest Limited Holding Company 100% Dairy Crest Services Limited Dairy Crest France Holdings 1 Limited Holding Company 100% t rading Dairy Crest Limited Dairy Crest UK Limited Manufacture of dairy products 100% MH Foods Limited Dairy Crest Limited Manufacture of cooking oils 100% Promovita Ingredients Limited Dairy Crest Limited Development and sales of galactooligosaccharide 100% Nont rading Dairy Crest Dairy Products Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% DC Quest Trustees Limited Dairy Crest Group plc NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest Facilities Limited Dairy Crest UK Limited NonTrading 100% Coombe Farm Dairies Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest Foston Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest Food Ingredients Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest Investments Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest Pension Trustees Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest Share Trustees Limited Dairy Crest Limited NonTrading 100% Dairy Crest France Holdings 2 Limited Dairy Crest France Holdings 1 Limited NonTrading 95% Dairy Crest Services Limited NonTrading 5% Unigate Dairies Limited Dairy Crest Jersey Limited NonTrading 100% Cressdene Limited Dairy Crest Jersey Limited NonTrading 100% Morehands IP Limited MH Foods Limited NonTrading 100% Being Dissolved Morehands Limited Magnuss and Usher Limited Dormant 100% Magnuss and Usher Limited Dairy Crest Limited Holding Company 100% The principal place of operation and country of incorporation of all subsidiary undertakings is England and Wales except Dairy Crest Jersey Limited whose country of incorporation is Jersey.
The registered office of all subsidiary undertakings incorporated in England and Wales is Claygate House Littleworth Road Esher Surrey KT10 9PN.
The registered office of Dairy Crest Jersey Limited is 44 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE4 9WG.
96 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 15 inventories c onsolidated Raw materials and consumables 13.0 12.5 Finished goods 141.2 139.6 Cheese inventories at 31 March 2017 totalled 123.8 million 2016 129.6 million.
This matures over an average of 11 months and up to a maximum of 50 months.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 7.3 million of product produced during commissioning of demineralised whey and GOS was written off 2016 0.4 million.
At 31 March 2017 a provision for impairment has been made of 3.8 million 2016 0.6 million against product with a carrying value of 7.6 million 2016 1.0 million where the expected net realisable value of the product was below carrying value.
In April 2014 the Group granted the Trustee of the Dairy Crest Group Pension Fund a floating charge over maturing cheese inventories with a maximum realisable value of 60 million.
16 t rade and other receivables c onsolidated Parent c ompany Trade receivables 27.4 30.4 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   391.3 10.1 Other receivables 1.5 9.2  0.4 Prepayments and accrued income 4.5 3.6 All amounts above with the exception of prepayments and accrued income are financial assets.
Trade receivables are denominated in the following currencies c onsolidated Sterling 25.7 29.4 Euro 1.7 1.0 US Dollar Swiss Franc There are no material concentrations of credit risk.
Trade receivables are non interest bearing and are generally on 3090 days terms and are shown net of a provision for impairment.
As at 31 March 2017 no trade receivables have been impaired and provided for 2016 6.2 million.
The prior year figure included an impairment of 4.3 million in relation to Quadra Foods Limited that was charged to the income statement in the year ended 31 March 2012.
This has been utilised in the period as part of the full and final settlement of liabilities between the Group Quadra Foods Limited and Farmright Limited see Note 4.
At 31 March the analysis of trade receivables that were past due but not impaired is as follows Past due not impaired Neither past due nor
30  60 days 60  90 days 90 days 31 march 2017 27.4 22.6 4.3 0.5 The credit quality of trade receivables is assessed by reference to external credit ratings where available otherwise historical information relating to counterparty default rates is used.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 97 The numbers 17 f inancial assets Derivative financial instruments consolidated Note current Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges 31  16.0
Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges 31 12.3 2.3 company Note current Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges 31  16.0
Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges 31 12.3 2.3 All derivative financial instruments are fair valued at each balance sheet date and all comprise Level 2 valuations under IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement namely that they are based on inputs observable directly from prices or indirectly derived from prices.
18 c ash and shortterm deposits c onsolidated Parent c ompany Cash and shortterm deposits 20.9 100.3 0.1 40.1 Cash and shortterm deposits earn interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates.
Counterparty risk and the Groups policy for managing deposits are described in Note 31.
19 Noncurrent assets held for sale c onsolidated Parent c ompany Noncurrent assets held for sale 7.4 Noncurrent assets held for sale of 7.4 million represent properties owned by the Group comprising closed depots and closed production facilities that management has committed to sell and where the completion of the sale within twelve months of the classification date is highly probable.
The held for sale value represents the lower of carrying value and fair value less costs to sell.
Any future profit on disposal of the closed depots will be recognised as Other Income  property within the Income Statement.
Any future profit on disposal of the closed production facilities will be recognised under exceptional items within the Income Statement.
98 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 20 Financial liabilities Consolidated Note
Obligations under finance leases 32 1.5 1.5 Loan notes at amortised cost 32 11.9 95.6 Debt issuance costs 0.6 0.6 Financial liabilities  Borrowings 12.8 96.5 Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges 0.1 Forward currency contracts at fair value cash flow hedge 32 0.2 Financial liabilities  Derivative financial instruments 0.3 Current financial liabilities 13.1 96.5
Obligations under finance leases 32 1.0 2.4 Loan notes at amortised cost 32 146.0 144.2 Bank loans at amortised cost 32 128.0 105.0 Debt issuance costs 0.8 1.3 Financial liabilities  Borrowings 274.2 250.3 Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges  1.3 Financial liabilities  Derivative financial instruments  1.3 Noncurrent financial liabilities 274.2 251.6 All derivative financial instruments are fair valued at each balance sheet date and all comprise Level 2 valuations under IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement namely that they are based on inputs observable directly from prices or indirectly derived from prices.
Interest bearing loans and borrowings The effective interest rates on loans and borrowings at the balance sheet date were as follows
Effective
Interest rate at March 2017
Interest rate at March 2016
Loan notes US swapped into  April 2016   85.6 5.31% Sterling April 2016   10.0 5.27% Euro swapped into  April 2017 9.1 5.53% Sterling April 2017 2.8 5.84% Finance leases 1.5 3.61% 1.5 3.61% Debt issuance costs 0.6 0.6
Revolving credit facilities Sterling floating October 2018 80.0 LIBOR  150bps 53.0 LIBOR  160bps Sterling floating October 2020 48.0 LIBOR  170bps 52.0 LIBOR  190bps Loan notes Euro swapped into  April 2017  5.53% 8.5 5.53% Sterling April 2017  5.84% 2.8 5.84% US swapped into  November 2018 20.0 3.87% 17.4 3.87% US swapped into  November 2021 45.0 4.52% 39.2 4.52% US swapped into  March 2023 36.0 3.33% 31.3 3.33% Sterling March 2026 45.0 3.34% 45.0 3.34% Finance Leases 1.0 3.61% 2.4 3.61% Debt issuance costs 0.8 1.3 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 99 The numbers 20 Financial liabilities continued On 4 April 2016 the Group repaid 123 million 70.2 million and 10 million of 2006 fixed coupon loan notes on maturity.
To fund the repayment on 23 March 2016 the Group raised 45 million and 45 million 31.1 million of fixed coupon loan notes.
The Sterling loan notes have a maturity of 10 years and an interest rate of 3.34%.
The US Dollar loan notes have a maturity of seven years.
The principal and the interest cash flows have been swapped into Sterling at an exchange rate of 1.4471 and an interest rate of 3.23%.
Upfront debt issuance costs amounted to 0.4 million and these are being charged to the consolidated income statement over the term of the loan notes.
On 6 October 2015 the Group refinanced its revolving credit facility.
The 170 million plus 90 million revolving credit facility which was due to expire in October 2016 was cancelled and replaced by a 240 million facility of which 80 million will expire on 6 October 2018 and 160 million will expire on 6 October 2020.
Upfront debt issuance costs amounted to 1.6 million and these are being charged to the consolidated income statement over the expected life of the facility.
There were no debt issuance costs charged to the income statement relating to the cancelled facility in the prior year.
The Group is subject to a number of covenants in relation to its borrowing facilities which if contravened would result in its loans becoming immediately repayable.
These covenants specify a maximum net debt to EBITDA ratio of 3.5 times and minimum interest cover ratio of 3.0 times.
No covenants were contravened in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 None.
Details of the Groups interest rate management strategy and interest rate swaps are included in Notes 31 and 32.
Company
Current
Loan notes at amortised cost 11.9 95.6 Financial liabilities  Borrowings 11.9 95.6 Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges 0.1 Financial liabilities  Derivative financial instruments 0.1 Current financial liabilities 12.0 95.6
Loan notes at amortised cost 146.0 144.2 Financial liabilities  Borrowings 146.0 144.2 Cross currency swaps cash flow hedges  1.3 Financial liabilities  Derivative financial instruments  1.3 Noncurrent financial liabilities 146.0 145.5 All derivative financial instruments are fair valued at each balance sheet date and all comprise Level 2 valuations under IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement namely that they are based on inputs observable directly from prices or indirectly derived from prices.
Interest bearing loans and borrowings The effective interest rates on loans and borrowings at the balance sheet date were as follows
Effective
Interest rate at March
Interest rate at March
Loan notes US swapped into  April 2016   85.6 5.31% Sterling April 2016   10.0 5.27% Euro swapped into  April 2017 9.1 5.53% Sterling April 2017 2.8 5.84%
Loan notes Euro swapped into  April 2017   8.5 5.53% Sterling April 2017   2.8 5.84% US swapped into  November 2018 20.0 3.87% 17.4 3.87% US swapped into  November 2021 45.0 4.52% 39.2 4.52% US swapped into  March 2023 36.0 3.33% 31.3 3.33% Sterling March 2026 45.0 3.34% 45.0 3.34% 100 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 21 Retirement benefit obligations The Group has a defined benefit pension scheme Dairy Crest Group Pension Fund which is closed to future service accrual and a defined contribution scheme Dairy Crest Group defined contribution scheme.
Defined Benefit Pension Scheme The Dairy Crest Group Pension Fund the Fund is a final salary defined benefit pension scheme which was closed to future service accrual from 1 April 2010 and had been closed to new joiners from 30 June 2006.
This pension scheme is a final salary scheme.
The Fund is administered by a corporate trustee which is legally separate from the Company.
The Trustees directors comprise representatives of both the employer and employees plus a professional trustee.
The Trustee is required by law to act in the interest of all relevant beneficiaries and is responsible for the investment policy with regard to the assets plus the day to day administration of the benefits.
The Company and Trustee have agreed a longterm strategy for reducing investment risk as and where appropriate.
This includes an assetliability matching policy which aims to reduce the volatility of the funding level of the pension plan by investing in assets which perform in line with the liabilities of the plan so as to protect against inflation being higher than expected.
In December 2008 and June 2009 certain obligations relating to retired members were hedged by the purchase of annuity contracts.
During the financial year a Flexible Retirement Option FRO exercise was carried out.
An offer enabling deferred pensioners aged 55 and over to take cash equivalent transfer values or trivial commutation lump sums where applicable with financial advice paid for by the company.
Transfer values totalling 16.7 million and trivial commutation lump sums totalling 0.1 million were accepted.
This resulted in a settlement gain before costs of 2.0 million representing IAS19 liabilities extinguished of 18.8 million less amounts paid of 16.8 million.
UK legislation requires that pension schemes are funded prudently.
The most recent full actuarial valuation of the Fund was carried out as at 31 March 2013 by the Funds independent actuary using the projected unit credit method.
Full actuarial valuations are carried out triennially.
This valuation resulted in a deficit of 145.0 million compared to the IAS19 deficit of 56.3 million reported at that date.
The next full actuarial valuation is currently being carried out on the 31 March 2016 position.
We expect the results of the valuation in the first half of 201718.
Under the latest schedule of contributions which was signed in March 2014 the level of contributions is 13 million per annum from April 2014 to March 2016 then 16 million per annum until March 2017 and then 20 million per annum until March 2020.
Until June 2018 these contributions included 2.8 million per annum of rental payments for land and buildings that were subject to a sale and leaseback arrangement between the Group and the Fund as part of the final schedule of contributions.
The Group bought back the land and buildings for 8.3 million in November 2015 with rental payments ceasing from this date.
This reduced contributions payable to 11.8 million per annum to March 2016 13.2 million per annum from April 2016 to March 2017 17.2 million per annum from April 2017 until June 2018 and then 20 million per annum until March 2020.
A new schedule of contributions will be agreed with the Trustee following the next actuarial review as at 31 March 2016.
The Fund duration is an indicator of the weightedaverage time until benefit payments are made.
For the Fund as a whole the duration is around 20 years reflecting the approximate split of the defined benefit obligation including insured pensioners between deferred members duration of 27 years current noninsured pensioners duration of 15 years and insured pensioners duration of 11 years.
The principal risks associated with the Groups defined benefit pension arrangements are as follows Asset Volatility The liabilities are calculated using the discount rate set with reference to corporate bond yields if assets underperform this yield this will create a deficit.
The Fund holds a significant proportion in a range of returnseeking assets which though expected to outperform corporate bonds in the longterm create volatility and risk in the shortterm.
The allocation to returnseeking assets is monitored to ensure it remains appropriate given the Funds longterm objectives.
Changes in Bond Yields A decrease in corporate bond yields will increase the value placed on the Funds liabilities for accounting purposes although this will be partially offset by an increase in the value of the Funds bond holdings.
Inflation Risk A significant portion of the Funds benefit obligations are linked to inflation and higher expected future inflation will lead to higher liabilities although in most cases caps on the level of inflationary increases are in place to protect against extreme inflation.
The majority of the assets are either unaffected by or only loosely correlated with inflation meaning that an increase in expected future inflation will also increase the deficit.
Longevity Risk The majority of the Funds obligations are to provide benefits for the life of the member so increases in life expectancy will result in an increase in liabilities.
A contingent liability exists in relation to the equalisation of Guaranteed Minimum Pension GMP.
The UK Government intends to implement legislation which could result in higher benefits for some members.
This would increase the defined benefit obligation of the Fund.
At this stage it is not possible to quantify the impact of this change.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 101 The numbers 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued The following tables summarise the components recognised in the consolidated balance sheet consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Defined benefit obligation Fair value of scheme assets  Equities  43.7 Bonds and cash 747.0 592.9 Equity return swaps valuation 18.6 1.9 Property and other 115.5 114.6 Insured retirement obligations 310.6 291.3 1191.7 1044.4 Defined benefit obligation  Uninsured retirement obligations 994.0 786.8 Insured retirement obligations 307.3 288.0 Total defined benefit obligation 1301.3 1074.8 Recognition of liability for unrecoverable notional surplus  12.1 1301.3 1086.9 Net liability recognised in the balance sheet 109.6 42.5 Related deferred tax asset 18.6 12.5 Net pension liability 91.0 30.0 Comprises a positive synthetic equity exposure of 157.5 million 2016 107.7 million and a negative LIBOR exposure of 138.9 million 2016 105.8 million.
Includes obligations to deferred members of 676.9 million 2016 541.9 million and noninsured members of 317.1 million 2016 244.9 million.
The Group is entitled to any surplus on winding up of the Fund albeit refunds are subject to tax deductions of 35% at source.
Based on the present value of committed cash contributions at 31 March 2017 and the IAS 19 valuation at that date of 109.6 million there would be nothing deducted from any notional surplus returned to the Group 2016 12.1 million.
In the prior year this was recognised as an additional liability in accordance with IFRIC 14.
It should be noted that cash contributions are determined by reference to the triennial actuarial valuation not the IAS 19 valuation.
The actuarial deficit is greater than that recognised under IAS 19 since liabilities are discounted by reference to gilt yields rather than high quality corporate bond yields.
Amounts recognised in consolidated income statement Administration expenses 1.0 0.8 Settlement gain 2.0 Other finance costs  pensions 0.8 0.6 Loss before tax 0.2 1.4 Deferred tax 0.3 0.3 Loss for the year 0.1 1.1 Amounts recognised in other comprehensive income Return on plan assets excluding amounts included in net interest 152.5 44.0 Experience gains arising on scheme liabilities 30.6 14.1 Actuarial lossesgains due to changes in the financial assumptions 275.6 4.6 Net actuarial loss 92.5 25.3 Movement in liability for unrecoverable notional surplus 12.1 4.8 Recognised in other comprehensive income 80.4 20.5 Related tax 10.7 1.0 Net actuarial loss recognised in other comprehensive income 69.7 19.5 Actual returns on plan assets were 188.4 million 2016 8.0 million.
102 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued Movement in the present value of the defined benefit obligations are as follows Opening defined benefit obligation 1074.8 1093.7 Interest cost 36.7 36.6 Actuarial lossesgains arising from changes in financial assumptions 275.6 4.6 Actuarial gains arising from experience 30.6 14.1 Benefits paid 53.2 36.8 Settlement gains 2.0 Closing defined benefit obligation 1301.3 1074.8 Movement in the fair value of fund assets are as follows Opening fair value of fund assets 1044.4 1069.2 Interest income on fund assets 35.9 36.0 Remeasurement gainslosses on fund assets 152.5 44.0 Contributions by employer 13.1 20.8 Administration costs incurred 1.0 0.8 Benefits paid out 53.2 36.8 Closing fair value of fund assets 1191.7 1044.4 The Funds assets are invested in the following asset classes all assets have a quoted market value in an active market with the exception of property annuity policy and cash.
Assets
Equities
United Kingdom 42.8 North America 62.4 Europe ex UK 22.8 Japan 17.9 Asia ex Japan 11.6 Emerging Markets Global Small Cap CashLIBOR Synthetic Equity 138.9 105.8 144.6 Emerging Market Debt 55.0 Multi Asset Credit 69.1 Insurance Linked Securities 37.6 Absolute Return Bonds 33.5
Corporate Bonds 203.9 Liability Driven Investments 305.9 Annuity Policy 310.6 Property 77.9 Cash 79.6 Total 1191.7 1044.4 1069.2 Equities are a combination of physical equities of nil 2016 43.7 million a positive synthetic equity exposure of 157.5 million 2016 107.7 million and a negative LIBOR exposure of 138.9 million 2016 105.8 million.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 103 The numbers 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued The Group does not use any of the pension fund assets.
This is debt issued by emerging market countries denominated in the emerging markets domestic currency.
The debt is almost entirely issued by governments and not by corporations.
Investors benefit from higher yields on the bonds due to the additional risks of investing in emerging market countries compared to developed countries and it is also expected that emerging market currencies will appreciate over time relative to developed countries.
Multi Asset Credit strategies invest globally in a wide range of creditbased asset classes which include bank loans high yield bonds securitised debt emerging market debt and distressed debt of noninvestment grade.
The investment strategies will also allocate amounts in investment grade credit sovereign bonds and cash for defensive reasons.
The strategies are opportunistic and allocate dynamically to the best opportunities within the credit market from an asset allocation and individual security selection perspective.
Insurance linked securities are eventlinked investments which allow investors outside the insurance industry to access insurance premiums for assuming various forms and degrees of insurance risk.
The underlying risk premium is a type of investment risk where the event is linked to natural or manmade catastrophes.
The premium paid to the investor represents compensation for the expected loss due to the uncertainty around the size and timing of the insured event.
Absolute Return Bond strategies are designed to deliver a positive return in all market environments and will take advantage of numerous alpha opportunities within the fixed income universe.
The objective of the strategy is to capture returns from active management in a number of areas within fixed income including interest rates currencies asset allocation and security selection.
The strategy will have long and short positions and employ a degree of leverage.
The strategies tend to have low sensitivity to the direction of interest rates and credit.
Insight have been appointed to manage the Liability Driven Investment LDI portfolio for the Fund.
The objective is to hedge a proportion of the Funds liabilities against changes in interest rates and inflation expectations by investing in assets that are similarly sensitive to changes in interest rates and inflation expectations.
Insight will seek to add interest and inflation exposure to the LDI portfolio over time in line with parameters that have been set by the Trustee.
Insight are permitted to use a range of swaps and gilt based derivative instruments as well as physical bonds to structure the liability hedge for the Fund.
In addition Insight are responsible for monitoring market yields against a number of preset yield triggers and will increase the level of hedging as and when the triggers are met.
The principal assumptions used in determining retirement benefit obligations for the Fund are shown below % % % Key assumptions Price inflation RPI 3.3 3.2 3.1 Price inflation CPI 2.2 2.1 2.0 Pension increases Pre 1993  RPI to 7%annum 3.3 3.2 3.1 Pension increases 1993 to 2006  RPI to 5%annum 3.2 3.1 3.0 Pension increases Post 2006  RPI to 4%annum 3.0 2.9 2.8 Life expectancy at 65 for a male currently aged 50 years 24.1 24.0 23.9 Average expected remaining life of a 65 year old retired male years 22.5 22.4 22.4 Life expectancy at 65 for a female currently aged 50 years 27.0 26.9 26.8 Average expected remaining life of a 65 year old retired female years 24.8 24.7 24.6 Discount rate 2.4 3.5 3.4 The financial assumptions reflect the nature and term of the Funds liabilities.
The mortality assumptions are based on analysis of the Fund members and allow for expected future improvements in mortality rates.
It has been assumed that members exchange 25% of their pension for a cash lump sum at retirement and 30% of deferred members take the Pension Increase Exchange option at retirement.
Sensitivity to changes in assumptions The key assumptions used for IAS 19 are discount rate inflation and mortality.
If different assumptions were used this could have a material effect on the results disclosed.
The sensitivity of the results to these assumptions is as follows Expected Expense for 201718
Cost
Net
Interest
Total PandL
March 2017
Current Figures 1.0 2.4 3.4 109.6 Effect of a 0.1% decrease in the discount rate  0.4 0.4 22.9 Recalculated value 1.0 2.8 3.8 132.5 Effect of a 0.1% increase in the inflation assumption  0.5 0.5 20.3 Recalculated value 1.0 2.9 3.9 129.9 Effect of a 1 year increase in life expectancy  1.0 1.0 41.6 Recalculated value 1.0 3.4 4.4 151.2 The above sensitivities assume that with the exception of the annuity contracts the Funds assets remain unchanged due to changes in assumptions but in practice changes in market interest and inflation rates will also affect the value of the Funds assets.
The Company and Trustee have agreed a longterm strategy for reducing investment risk as and when appropriate.
This includes an assetliability matching policy 104 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued which aims to reduce the volatility of the funding level of the Fund by investing in assets which perform in line with the liabilities of the Fund.
In
December 2008 and June 2009 certain obligations relating to retired members were fully hedged by the purchase of annuity contracts.
The
Funds other investments include matching assets which protect against changes in bond yields and against inflation risk.
The respective interest rate and inflation hedge ratios for these assets as at 31 March 2017 were both 36% of those obligations not covered by annuity contracts.
The Company recognises no liabilities on its balance sheet or charges or credits in its income statement or statement of recognised income and expense in relation to the Fund.
The legal sponsor of the Fund is Dairy Crest Limited.
Defined Contribution Pension Scheme The Group has charged 2.0 million in respect of the Dairy Crest Group defined contribution scheme in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 2.1 million.
The Company has made no charge in respect of the Dairy Crest Group defined contribution scheme in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 nil.
22 Trade and other payables Consolidated Parent Company Trade payables 45.8 50.2 Amounts due to subsidiary undertakings Other tax and social security 1.2 1.3 0.1 Other creditors 6.4 32.4 Accruals 25.7 36.4 1.1 3.2 Financial liabilities at amortised cost.
Included within accruals is 7.6 million in relation to promotional funding which is subject to a degree of estimation uncertainty 2016 13.0 million.
The accruals relating to promotional funding are calculated based on an estimated redemption rate of the promotion.
The customer will claim the funding retrospectively based on the performance of the promotion.
There has been a reduction in accruals relating to promotional funding in the period reflecting a growing trend towards offinvoice promotional funding from retrospective promotional funding.
23 Deferred income
Grants 1.5 1.6
Grants 3.0 4.5 In 201011 two new biomass boilers were installed at the Davidstow cheese manufacturing site.
Capital expenditure amounted to 3.9 million and we received cash grants of 0.8 million during the year ended 31 March 2011 and 0.2 million during the year ended 31 March 2012 from the South West of England Regional Development Agency.
During 201213 the Group received a grant of 5.3 million under the Regional Growth Fund from the Department of Business Innovation and Skills in relation to the consolidation of the spreads manufacturing into a single site at Kirkby Liverpool.
This grant is conditional upon certain conditions over a five year term principally the project being completed and the creation or safeguarding of an agreed number of jobs.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 105 The numbers 24 Provisions
Dairies disposal provision
Total
As at 1 April 2016 5.0 3.0 2.0 10.0 Utilised during the year 2.7 2.8  5.5 Charged during the year   0.2 0.2 At 31 March 2017 2.3 0.2 2.2 4.7 Current 2.3 0.2 0.2 2.7 NonCurrent   2.0 2.0 At 1 April 2015 3.1   3.1 Utilised during the year 2.4   2.4 Charged during the year 4.3 3.0 2.0 9.3 At 31 March 2016 5.0 3.0 2.0 10.0 Current 5.0 3.0 2.0 10.0
Restructuring and rationalisation of operating sites In the prior year the Group provided through exceptional operating items decommissioning and demolition costs in relation to the closure of the Chard site of 4.3 million.
The Group has paid 2.7 million of these costs in the year ending 31 March 2017 2016 2.4 million and expects the remaining provision to be utilised in the year ending 31 March 2018.
Dairies disposal provision At 31 March 2016 the Group held a provision of 3.0 million for future expected costs in relation to the disposal of the Dairies operation to Muller UK and Ireland Group LLP on 26 December 2015.
The Group has paid 2.8 million of these costs in the year ending 31 March 2017 and expects the remainder of this provision to be utilised in the year ending 31 March 2018.
Dilapidation provision At 31 March 2017 the Group held a provision relating to leasehold property dilapidation liabilities on properties where the Group considers there to be a high likelihood of exiting when the lease term expires.
The payment of this provision would occur following vacation of the respective properties.
A provision of 0.2 million relates to vacated properties and therefore may become payable in the year ending 31 March 2018.
The remaining 2.0 million relates to properties where the lease term expires in the year ending 31 March 2020 and as such the provision has been reclassified as noncurrent in the Groups financial statements.
The prior year has not been restated.
25 Share capital
Thousands
Thousands
Ordinary shares of 25 pence each 240000 240000 Issued and fully paid Thousands m At 31 March 2015 137725 34.4 Issued for cash on exercise of share options 1766 0.5 Issued to ESOP at par for nil consideration 1200 0.3 At 31 March 2016 140691 35.2 Issued for cash on exercise of share options 380 0.1 At 31 March 2017 141071 35.3 During the year ended 31 March 2017 380281 shares were issued at a premium of 1.3 million for an aggregate consideration of 1.4 million 2016 2965762 shares at a premium of 4.5 million for an aggregate consideration of 5.0 million.
Exercises of management share options are fulfilled by the transfer of existing shares from The Dairy Crest Employees Share Ownership Plan Trust ESOP  see Note 27.
106 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 26 Notes to statement of changes in equity
The shares held by the ESOP are available to satisfy awards under the Companys management share option schemes see Note 27.
At 31 March 2017 the ESOP held 1132532 shares 2016 1203367 shares in the Company at a cost of 0.3 million 2016 0.3 million.
The
ESOP was established in August 1996 to acquire shares in the Company in order to hedge certain future obligations of the Group including shares awarded under the Companys management share option schemes.
During the year the Trustee of the ESOP transferred 71035 2016 87401 shares following exercises of options and subscribed for 200 shares at 25 pence per share.
The market value of the shares held by the ESOP which are listed on the London Stock Exchange was 6.3 million at 31 March 2017 2016 7.4 million.
Merger reserve
Translation reserve
At 31 March 2016 55.9 3.8 1.5 50.6 Total recognised in other comprehensive income  2.3  2.3 At 31 March 2017 55.9 6.1 1.5 48.3 At 31 March 2015 55.9 3.0 1.5 51.4 Total recognised in other comprehensive income  0.8  0.8 At 31 March 2016 55.9 3.8 1.5 50.6 The merger reserve includes the premium on shares issued to satisfy the purchase of Dairy Crest Limited in 1996.
The cumulative amount of goodwill charged against the merger reserve is 86.8 million 2016 86.8 million.
The reserve is not distributable.
The hedging reserve records the gains and losses on hedging instruments to the extent that they are effective cash flow hedges.
Any gains and losses previously recorded in the hedging reserve are reclassified in profit and loss when the underlying hedged item affects profit and loss.
The translation reserve records exchange differences arising from the translation of the accounts of foreign currency denominated subsidiaries offset by the movements on loans and derivatives designated to hedge the net investment in foreign subsidiaries.
Parent Company As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 no separate profit and loss account is presented for the Company.
The profit for the year dealt with in the accounts of the Company is 196.9 million 2016 34.5 million this included a profit on the sale of shares held in Dairy Crest Limited of 194.6 million and dividends received from subsidiary companies of nil 2016 34.5 million.
Dividends paid amounted to 31.1 million 2016 30.0 million which along with a debit for sharebased payments of 0.8 million 2016 0.8 million and a transfer between reserves of 158.9 million resulted in a 325.5 million increase in retained earnings 2016 5.7 million.
Not all the retained earnings are distributable at this point as this is dependent on the proceeds for the sale being settled in cash as is the Companys intention in the future.
In 1996 the Company acquired the entire issued share capital of Dairy Crest Limited.
Consideration was in the form of cash and the issue of 109.8 million ordinary shares of 25 pence each.
The fair value of the shares issued was estimated as 170.2 million.
The capital reserve of 142.7 million shown in the statement of changes in equity represents the difference between the fair value of shares issued and their nominal value of 27.5 million.
During the year these shares were sold to Dairy Crest UK Limited.
27 Share based payment plans
The Group has five share option schemes in operation.
The Dairy Crest Long Term Alignment Plan LTAP The LTAP is a longterm incentive scheme under which awards are made to Directors and senior managers consisting of the right to acquire shares for a nominal price.
The vesting period for grants made under this scheme is 50% of the award after 4 years and 50% after 5 years.
Pregrant performance criteria determine the amount of any initial grant after which there are no significant performance conditions prior to vesting.
As such these options are fair valued at 100% of the price at the date of the grant.
The Transformational Incentive Award TIA The TIA was granted under the rules of the LTISP in December 2014.
The TIA is a nil price option to acquire ordinary shares subject to certain performance objectives being met in addition to continuing employment.
The performance objectives relate to three categories detailed below 1 managing the competition approval process relating to the proposed Dairies operation disposal 2 appropriate reshaping of the Group taking into account the competition approval process and 3 establishing a successful future business by reference to the development of the Group including delivering value to shareholders.
The vesting period is three years from the date of grant.
There are no cash settlement alternatives.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 107 The numbers 27 Share based payment plans continued Deferred Bonus Plan DBP Any bonus in excess of 50% of basic annual salary is deferred in share options with a vesting period of 3 years.
The only vesting condition is continuing employment.
The cost of these share options is based on the number of shares issued and the share price at the date of grant spread over the vesting period.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 no deferred shares were awarded in relation to the year ended 31 March 2016 2016 none.
The Dairy Crest Long Term Incentive Share Plan LTISP This is a longterm incentive scheme under which awards are made to Directors and senior managers consisting of the right to acquire shares for a nominal price subject to the achievement of financial targets based on i total shareholder returns TSR over a three year period versus comparator companies and ii growth in adjusted basic earnings per share.
The TSR element represents 60% of the awards granted.
The vesting period for grants made under this scheme is 3 years with an exercise period of 7 years.
There were no awards granted in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 nil.
There are no cash settlement alternatives.
The LTISP was replaced by the LTAP in the year ended 31 March 2014.
Dairy Crest Sharesave Scheme All employees are eligible to join the Dairy Crest Sharesave Scheme which allows employees to use regular monthly savings to purchase shares.
Options are granted at a discount of up to 20% of the market value of the shares.
No financial performance criteria are attached to these options and they vest three years from the date of grant with an exercise period of six months.
During the current year 629639 options were granted at 463 pence 2016 none.
There are no cash settlement alternatives.
The number of share options and weighted average exercise price for each of the principal schemes is set out as follows LTAP TIA DBP LTISP Sharesave Scheme number number number number number weighted average exercise price pence Options outstanding at 1 April 2016 877831 252558 71123 131569 991800 367.8 Options granted during the year 216927    629639 463.0 Reinvested dividends 40077 9816 2410 6218 Options exercised during the year 63641   7394 380281 358.1 Options forfeited during the year     300022 381.5 Options outstanding at 31 March 2017 1071194 262374 73533 130393 941136 431.1 Exercisable at 31 March 2017   2875 130393 Options outstanding at 1 April 2015 716937 240623 68934 196737 3119443 319.3 Options granted during the year 264779 Reinvested dividends 38490 11935 2189 8902 Options exercised during the year    71738 1771686 285.9 Options forfeited during the year 142375   2332 355957 351.9 Options outstanding at 31 March 2016 877831 252558 71123 131569 991800 367.8 Exercisable at 31 March 2016 63640   131569 579195 LTAP TIA DBP and LTISP options are nil cost options.
The weighted average exercise price during the year under LTAP and LTISP was 562.8 pence and 565.0 pence respectively.
LTAP options are exercisable at varying dates up to June 2026 March 2016 May 2025.
TIA options are exercisable up to December 2024 March 2016 December 2024.
DBP options are exercisable at varying dates up to December 2024 March 2016 December 2024.
LTISP options are exercisable at varying dates up to July 2022 March 2016 July 2022.
Sharesave scheme options are exercisable up to February 2020 at prices ranging from 376 pence to 463 pence March 2016 exercisable up to February 2018 at prices ranging from 281 pence to 376 pence.
The remaining weighted average contractual life of options outstanding at March 2017 is 7.8 years for the LTAP 7.7 years for the TIA 7.7 years for the DBP 5.1 years for the LTISP and 2.2 years for the Sharesave Scheme 2016 LTAP 8.4 years TIA 8.7 years DBP 8.6 years LTISP 6.1 years and Sharesave Scheme 1.8 years.
The fair value factor of the Sharesave Scheme options issued in May 2016 was 19.0% giving a fair value of 1.06 per option granted.
This has been computed using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The key assumptions used in the valuation model were expected share price volatility 24% risk free rate of interest 0.61% and dividend yield 3.57%.
The volatility assumption is based on the historical volatility of the Dairy Crest Group plc share price over a period commensurate with the expected option life ending on the grant date of option.
108 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 27 Share based payment plans continued The fair value of TIA options issued on 23 December 2014 was 4.91 per option granted.
This has been computed using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The key assumptions used in the valuation model were expected share price volatility 24% and a risk free rate of interest 0.85%.
The volatility assumption is based on the historical volatility of the Dairy Crest Group plc share price over a period commensurate with the expected option life ending on the grant date of option.
The Group expense arising from share option plans for continuing operations for the year ended 31 March 2017 was 1.2 million 2016 1.4 million.
The Group expense related to discontinued operations was nil 2016 0.8 million.
See Note 10.
Company
The number of share options and weighted average exercise price for each of the schemes for employees of the Company is set out as follows LTAP TIA DBP LTISP Sharesave Scheme number number number number number weighted average exercise price pence Options outstanding at 1 April 2016 424375 252558 52251 50859 12775 352.2 Options granted during the year 118668    3886 463.0 Reinvested dividends 23452 9816 1743 1976 Adjustment for change of director during the year 60375    4336 Options exercised during the year     3202 Options forfeited during the year Options outstanding at 31 March 2017 626870 262374 53994 52835 17795 404.5 Exercisable at 31 March 2017   2875 52835 Options outstanding at 1 April 2015 392313 240623 68934 73355 21572 333.7 Options granted during the year 128741 Reinvested dividends 20221 11935 2189 3638 Adjustment for change of director during the year 24020  18872 26134 5595 Options exercised during the year     3202 Options forfeited during the year 92880 Options outstanding at 31 March 2016 424375 252558 52251 50859 12775 352.2 Exercisable at 31 March 2016    50859 LTAP options are exercisable at varying dates up to June 2026 March 2016 May 2025.
TIA options are exercisable up to December 2024 March 2016 December 2024.
DBP options are exercisable at varying dates up to December 2024 March 2016 December 2024.
LTISP options are exercisable at varying dates up to July 2022 March 2016 July 2022.
Sharesave Scheme options are exercisable up to February 2020 at prices ranging from 376 pence to 463 pence March 2016 exercisable up to February 2018 at prices ranging from 281 pence to 376 pence.
The remaining weighted average contractual life of options outstanding at March 2017 is 7.8 years for the LTAP 7.7 years for the TIA 7.7 years for the DBP 5.3 years for the LTISP and 1.6 years for the Sharesave Scheme 2016 LTAP 8.4 years TIA 8.7 years DBP 8.6 years LTISP 7.3 years and Sharesave Scheme 1.5 years.
The Company expense arising from share option plans for the year ended 31 March 2017 was 0.8 million 2016 0.8 million.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 109 The numbers 28 Commitments and contingencies Operating Leases The Group has entered into commercial leases on certain land and buildings vehicles and equipment.
There are no material renewal options escalation clauses or purchase options included in the lease contracts.
There are no contingent rentals or operating leases or material subleases.
There are no significant restrictions placed upon the lessee by entering into these leases.
Excluding land and buildings these leases have an average life of between three and seven years.
Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases as at 31 March are as follows Within one year 7.5 2.6 After one year but not more than five years 25.3 3.7 More than five years 8.0 During the year the Group entered into two sale and leaseback agreements with Lombard Business Leasing Limited.
The sale and leaseback was for certain plant and equipment relating to the Demineralised Whey and GOS facility at Davidstow.
The future minimum rentals at 31 March 2017 in respect of these operating lease agreements was 34.6 million.
Finance leases On 23 June 2015 the Group recognised a finance lease for certain assets at Nuneaton.
The lease term is for 3.75 years.
Future minimum payments under finance leases together with the present value of the net minimum lease payments are as follows 2017 2016
Present value of payments
Present value of payments Within one year 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 After one year but not more than five years 1.0 1.0 2.6 2.4 More than five years Total minimum lease payments 2.6 2.5 4.1 3.9 Less amounts representing finance charges 0.1  0.2 Present value of minimum lease payments 2.5 2.5 3.9 3.9
The Company has provided guarantees and indemnities to Lombard Business Leasing Limited in relation to the obligations of Dairy Crest Limited under two lease agreements that were taken out during the year.
The future lease rentals payable under these agreements at 31 March 2017 were 34.6 million and the maximum amount payable by the Company under these guarantees is capped at 76.0 million plus interest.
There were no guarantees and indemnities in the prior year.
Capital commitments
Future capital expenditure contracted on property plant and equipment 13.0 13.1 Contingent liabilities Dilapidations liability of Chadwell Heath Under the terms of the sale and purchase agreement of the Dairies operation the Group has a potential dilapidations liability to 26 December 2015 in relation to the Chadwell Heath site.
The lease does not end until July 2032 with break clauses in July 2022 and July 2027.
Muller UK and Ireland Group LLP have announced they intend to close the site in 2018 however any obligations are dependent on the intentions of the landlord in respect of the site.
The Directors are not quantifying the potential liability in respect of this obligation because to do so may be prejudicial to the interests of the Group as the matter may be subject to negotiation or judicial proceedings.
Litigation in relation to the capital project at Davidstow There are a number of contractual disputes in respect of the demineralised whey and GOS capital project at Davidstow which remain outstanding as of 31 March 2017.
In a number of instances claims have been made by the Group and in others claims made against the
To the extent that claims are being made by the Group including the most significant ongoing dispute the status of the resolution of these matters does not support recognition of an asset.
The Group has rebutted all claims against it but nonetheless has accrued for professional fees on these claims.
In the case of both the claims made by the Group and those made against it the Group is not disclosing detail of the claims due to the legal sensitivity of the matter.
In each instance it is anticipated that the case will be resolved in the next financial year.
It is the opinion of the Directors that there is no significant financial liability that would require being provided for as at 31 March 2017.
110 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 29 Related party transactions The Group had no significant related parties.
Compensation of key management personnel of the Group and Company Shortterm employee benefits 2.0 1.9 Sharebased payments 0.8 0.8 Total compensation paid to key management personnel 2.8 2.7 Further details relating to compensation of key management personnel are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report.
This includes a description of pension arrangements and any cash supplements paid.
Key management personnel comprise Executive and Nonexecutive Directors of Dairy Crest Group plc.
The senior management team is small and all key decisions are made by either the three Executive Directors or by the Group Board which meets regularly.
Company
Dairy Crest Limited a subsidiary company incurred costs of 2.0 million 2016 1.9 million from the Company for the provision of management and administrative services carried out on its behalf.
Dairy Crest Limited received 1.9 million 2016 1.8 million for the remuneration of the Companys employees which had been paid by Dairy Crest Limited.
Interest charges of 2.5 million 2016 4.0 million were incurred by the Company from Dairy Crest Limited on loans reflecting an interest rate of LIBOR100 basis points.
Interest income of 5.7 million 2016 11.5 million was received by the Company from Dairy Crest Limited on loans reflecting an interest rate of 4.5% 2016 5.3% and a further 5.4 million was received by the Company from Dairy Crest UK Limited on floating rate loans paying LIBOR plus margin 2016 0.4 million.
The Company paid no interest 2016 nil to Dairy Crest Limited on cross currency swaps paying LIBOR and receiving EURIBOR.
30 Business combinations and disposals i Disposal of Discontinued Operations On 26 December 2015 the Group completed the disposal of its Dairies operation to Muller UK and Ireland Group LLP Mller.
The Dairies operation has therefore been classified as discontinued operations.
The disposal resulted in a post tax loss of 108.0 million which is analysed below.
The final consideration of 23.5 million comprised 54.5 million received in cash during the prior year net of 25.9 million which was provided for in the prior year but repaid to Mller in 2017.
The final consideration adjustment of 2.5 million was agreed in the current year.
The disposal resulted in a net cash outflow in the current year of 28.4 million 2016 49.0 million inflow after 5.5 million of professional fees.
Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Property plant and equipment  132.2 Intangible assets  15.6 Inventories  33.0 Trade and other receivables  9.0 Trade and other payables  29.4 Net assets and liabilities disposed  160.4 Consideration 2.5 28.6 Disposal costs  5.5 Loss on disposal before tax 2.5 137.3 Attributable tax 5.2 26.6 Profitloss on disposal of discontinued operations 2.7 110.7 ii Acquisitions There were no business acquisitions during the year.
In the prior year the Group acquired the outstanding share capital of Promovita Ingredients Limited Promovita for a cash consideration of 6.0 million bringing its shareholding to 100%.
Promovita was established in 2014 as a joint venture between the Group and Fayrefield Foods Limited to develop and produce GOS a prebiotic for use in infant formula.
In accordance with IFRS 3 Revised Business Combinations the value of the previously held 50% shareholding has been restated to fair value at the acquisition date.
The difference between the fair value of the equity owned prior to acquisition of 6.0 million and the book value of the original investment of nil was recognised in the consolidated income statement with the gain of 6.0 million reported in exceptional items under continuing operations.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 111 The numbers 30 Business combinations and disposals continued The fair value of the original shareholding has been calculated based on the principles of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement under Hierachy Level 2 with the fair value being equal to the amount paid for Fayrefield Foods Limiteds 50% share.
Book and provisional fair value Net assets acquired Trade and other receivables 0.8 Trade and other payables 0.8 Gain on remeasurement to fair value 6.0 Goodwill 12.0 Total consideration satisfied by cash 6.0 The goodwill of 12.0 million arising on acquisition represents future opportunities in relation to the use of GOS in infant formula and other products.
None of the goodwill is expected to be deductible for corporate income tax purposes.
Financial risk management objectives and policies The objective of the treasury function which is accountable to the Board is to manage the Groups and Companys financial risk secure costeffective funding for the Groups operations and to minimise the effects of fluctuations in interest rates and exchange rates on the value of the Groups and Companys financial assets and liabilities on reported profitability and on cash flows.
The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans and overdrafts loan notes finance leases and cash and shortterm deposits.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to raise finance for the Groups operations.
The Group has various other financial assets and liabilities such as trade receivables and trade payables which arise directly from its operations.
The Group also enters into derivative transactions principally cross currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The purpose is to manage the interest rate and currency risks arising from the Groups operations and its sources of finance.
It is and has been throughout 2016 and 2017 the Groups policy that no trading in financial instruments shall be undertaken.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are liquidity risk interest rate risk foreign currency risk price risk and credit risk.
Information on how these risks arise is set out below as are the objectives policies and processes agreed by the Board for their management and the methods used to measure each risk.
Derivative instruments are used to change the economic characteristics of financial instruments in accordance with the Groups treasury policies.
The Groups accounting policies in relation to derivatives are set out in the Accounting Policies note.
Liquidity risk The Groups objectives are to ensure that forecast peak net borrowings plus a prudent operating headroom are covered by committed facilities which mature after at least 12 months to ensure that prudent headroom versus bank and loan note covenant ratios are forecast for the next three years to maintain flexibility of funding by employing diverse sources of funds eg use of nonbank markets such as private placements and to avoid a concentration of facility maturities in any particular year.
The maturity analysis of Group borrowings is set out in Note 20.
At 31 March 2017 the Groups total credit facilities amounted to 397.9 million 2016 479.8 million excluding finance leases of 2.5 million 2016 3.9 million and the impact of crosscurrency swaps on US Dollar and Euro loan notes of 12.2 million 2016 19.4 million.
The facilities at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 consisted of March 2017 240 million revolving credit facility of which 80 million will expire on 6 October 2018 and 160 million on 6 October 2020. loan notes totalling 157.9 million repayable between April 2017 and March 2026.
March 2016 240 million revolving credit facility of which 80 million will expire on 6 October 2018 and 160 million on 6 October 2020. loan notes totalling 239.8 million repayable between April 2016 and March 2026.
Undrawn revolving credit facilities at 31 March 2017 amounted to 112.0 million 2016 135.0 million.
Effective headroom including cash and shortterm deposits amounted to 132.9 million 2016 235.3 million.
The Group aims to mitigate liquidity risk by closely managing cash generation by its operating businesses and by monitoring performance to budgets and forecasts.
Capital investment is carefully controlled with detailed authorisation limits in place up to Executive level and cash payback criteria considered as part of the investment appraisal process.
Shortterm and longterm cash and debt forecasts are constantly reviewed and there are regular treasury updates to the Executive highlighting facility headroom and net debt performance.
Daytoday cash management utilises undrawn revolving credit facilities overdraft facilities and occasionally shortterm money market deposits if there is excess cash.
112 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Interest rate risk The Groups exposure to the risk for changes in market interest rates relate primarily to the Groups longterm debt obligations with a floating interest rate.
The Groups policy is to manage its interest cost using a mix of fixed and variable rate debt.
The Groups longterm strategy is to keep between one third and three quarters of its borrowings at fixed rates of interest in the medium term.
To manage this mix in a costefficient manner the Group has issued fixed coupon loan notes and also enters into interest rate swaps from time to time on a portion of its floating bank borrowings in which the Group agrees to exchange at specified intervals the difference between fixed and variable rate interest amounts calculated by reference to an agreedupon notional principal amount.
These swaps are designated to hedge underlying debt interest cash flow obligations.
In the shortterm the proportion of fixed and floating rate borrowings can go outside the longterm range.
At 31 March 2017 55% of the Groups borrowings were at a fixed rate of interest 2016 70%.
On 23 March 2016 the Group raised 76.1 million sterling equivalent by way of fixed coupon loan notes and on 4 April 2016 the Group repaid 80.2 million sterling equivalent of fixed coupon loan notes.
This resulted in a high percentage of fixed interest rate debt as at 31 March 2016.
In the medium term we expect the fixed proportion of borrowings to continue to be in the target range.
The Groups borrowing facilities require minimum interest cover of 3.0 times.
The Groups exposure to interest rate risk is shown by way of a sensitivity analysis in Note 32.
Foreign currency risk The Group has no significant operations outside the UK.
However it buys and sells a small amount of goods in currencies other than Sterling.
As a result the value of the Groups nonSterling revenues purchases assets liabilities and cash flows can be affected by movements in exchange rates  predominantly EuroSterling.
The Groups exposure to EuroSterling is increasing due to the investment in demineralised whey production which is sold in Euros.
The Groups policy is to match foreign currency transaction exposures where possible and where appropriate the Group will use financial instruments in the form of forward foreign currency contracts to hedge future transaction and cash flows denominated in currencies other than Sterling.
The majority of the Groups transactions are carried out in the relevant entitys functional currency and therefore transaction exposures are currently limited.
It can be seen in Note 16 that the only significant nonSterling trade receivables are in Euros.
In 201617 the Group began trading demineralised whey products in Euros resulting in an increase in trade receivables denominated in Euros from 1.0 million at 31 March 2016 to 2.3 million at 31 March 2017.
We expect this to increase further in 201718.
Currency exposures on other transactions such as certain capital expenditure denominated in a foreign currency are hedged following approval of the project using forward foreign exchange contracts.
In 2007 2011 and 2016 the Group issued loan notes denominated either in US  or .
Crosscurrency swaps were implemented as required to hedge the interest and principal repayment cash flows.
These have the effect of fixing the liability and coupon in Sterling.
The principal amount and interest and principal payment dates on these swaps match those on the loan notes exactly and all swaps are with counterparties with strong credit ratings.
There is no profit and loss exposure in relation to US or  note debts as any retranslation impact on the profit and loss account is offset by reclassification of amounts from other comprehensive income into profit and loss.
Price risk The Group is exposed to price risk related to certain commodities and their byproducts used by the Groups businesses.
The principal nonmilk commodities that affect input prices for the Group are vegetable oils gas electricity diesel heavy fuel oil and crude oil byproducts used in packaging.
The Group monitors prices on an ongoing basis in order to assess the impact that movements have on profitability and to assess whether the amount of forward cover is appropriate.
This includes vegetable oil contracts and energy which is generally contracted one season in advance for both summer and winter energy but with some requirement contracted at more regular intervals.
The Group regularly reviews relevant commodity markets and levels of future cover.
Fixed price contracts are only entered into with the approval of the Commodity Risk Committee comprising senior operational and finance management and external advisers.
Credit risk It is the Groups policy that all customers who wish to trade on credit terms are subject to credit verification procedures.
The Group only offers these terms to recognised creditworthy third parties.
In addition receivables balances are monitored on an ongoing basis with the result that the Groups history of bad debt losses is not significant.
Debtor days outstanding are closely monitored throughout the year and action is taken promptly when payment terms are breached.
With respect to credit risk arising from the other financial assets of the Group which comprise cash and cash equivalents trade and other debtors excludes prepayments and certain derivative instruments the Groups exposure to credit risk arises from default of the counterparty.
The maximum exposure for the Group is equal to the carrying amount of these financial assets of 62.1 million 2016 158.2 million.
All revolving credit facility borrowings are through banks with longterm credit ratings of A or above.
Funds temporarily surplus to business requirements are invested through deposit accounts with mainstream UK commercial banks with a credit rating of A or better.
The Group currently has no requirement to place deposits for long periods accordingly counterparty risk is considered to be acceptable.
Derivative financial instruments are contracted with a range of banks with longterm credit ratings of A or above to avoid excessive concentration of financial instruments with one counterparty.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 113 The numbers Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Capital management The primary objective of the Groups capital management is to ensure that it maintains an appropriate level of gearing in order to support its business and maximise shareholder value.
In addition the Group monitors its forecast net debt to EBITDA ratios in order that they are comfortably within its banking covenant requirements.
The maximum net debt to EBITDA ratio for the purposes of bank covenants is 3.5 times though the Directors target a ratio of below 2 times.
At 31 March 2017 the ratio of net debt to EBITDA was 2.94 times March 2016 2.69 times.
The Group monitors its capital structure and makes adjustments to it in the light of changes in economic conditions or changes in Group structure.
Possible mechanisms for changing capital structure include adjusting the level of dividends issuance of new shares or returning capital to shareholders.
No significant changes in capital structure have been implemented in the year ended 31 March 2017 or the prior year.
The Group monitors capital using a gearing ratio which is net debt divided by shareholders funds.
The analysis of net debt is included in Note The gearing ratio at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 can be analysed as follows Net debt Shareholders funds Gearing ratio 347% 171%
Details of dividends paid and proposed during the year are given in Note 9.
The dividend policy is to maintain a progressive dividend whilst seeking to maintain a level of dividend cover between 1.5 and 2.5 times.
The final proposed dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017 is 16.3 pence up 0.3 pence from last year 2016 16.0 pence.
Total dividends paid and proposed in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017 amount to 22.5 pence 2016 22.1 pence.
32 Financial instruments An explanation of the Groups financial instrument risk management objectives policies and strategies is set out in the discussion of Treasury policies in Note 31.
Consolidated
Interest rate maturity profile of financial assets and liabilities The following table sets out the carrying amount by maturity of the Groups financial assets and liabilities that are exposed to interest rate risk.
No other financial assets and liabilities other than those shown below are exposed directly to interest rate risk.
At 31 March 2017 1 year 1 2 years 2 3 years 3 4 years 4 5 years 5 years
Fixed rate Forward currency contracts 0.2      0.2 Finance leases 1.5 1.0     2.5 Cross currency swaps 0.1 3.6   6.2 2.5 12.2 Floating rate Bank loans  80.0  48.0  128.0 Cash at bank and in hand 20.9      20.9 At 31 March 2016 Fixed rate Finance leases   3.9    3.9 Cross currency swaps 16.0 0.7 1.0   0.7 17.0 Floating rate Bank loans   53.0  52.0  105.0 Cash at bank and in hand 100.2      100.2 Classified as fixed rate after taking into account the effect of interest rate swaps.
114 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 32 Financial instruments continued Interest on financial instruments classified as floating rate is repriced at intervals of less than one year.
Interest on financial instruments classified as fixed rate is fixed until the maturity of the instrument.
Interest rate risk The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a reasonably possible change in interest rates with all other variables held constant of the Groups profit before tax through the impact on floating rate borrowings.
There is no material impact on the Groups equity resulting from movements in interest rates other than in relation to the USGBP and EURGBP crosscurrency swaps used as a cash flow hedge on US and EUR loan notes.
The impact on equity is nil over the life of the instruments as these swaps comprise an effective hedge.
At 31 March 2017 55% of Group borrowings were at fixed rates of interest 2016 70% see Note 30.
The sensitivity analysis below excludes all nonderivative fixed rate financial instruments carried at amortised cost but includes nonderivative floating rate financial instruments except those where interest rate swaps have been used as cash flow hedges.
This is due to the fact that gains and losses on the hedging instrument offset losses and gains on the nonderivative floating rate financial instrument which are subject to the hedge and are matched in both profit and loss and cash terms.
No nonderivative fixed rate financial instruments have profit and loss exposure due to floating rates as a result of interest rate swaps.
The 2017 analysis below reflects lower reasonably possible changes in interest rates to 2016  upside LIBOR expectations assumed last year were not realised and the assumption is that base rates will increase less than anticipated at March 2016.
Increase
Effect on profit before tax Effect on equity Sterling 100 1.5 Sterling 50 0.7 Sterling 100 1.1 Sterling 50 0.5 Equity price risk The Group holds no listed equity investments and is not subject to equity price risk other than through the pension scheme see Note 21.
Credit risk There are no significant concentrations of credit risk within the Group unless otherwise disclosed.
The maximum credit risk exposure relating to financial assets is represented by carrying value as at the balance sheet date see Note 31.
Liquidity risk The Groups policy on managing its liquidity risk is set out in Note 31.
The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities at 31 March 2017 and 2016 based on contractual undiscounted payments of interest and principal.
At 31 March 2017 1 year 1 2 years 2 3 years 3 4 years 4 5 years 5 years
Crosscurrency swaps on loan notes Bank loans  80.0  48.0   128.0 Finance leases 1.5 1.0     2.5 At 31 March 2016 Restated Restated Restated Crosscurrency swaps on loan notes Bank loans   53.0  52.0  105.0 Finance leases 1.5 1.5 1.1    4.1 Comparative period restated to reflect the loan notes payable in November 2021 as payable in  5 years Shortterm payables all mature within one year.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 115 The numbers 32 Financial instruments continued Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities The carrying amounts and the fair values of all of the Groups financial instruments that are carried in the financial statements are the same with the exception of the loan notes.
The carrying amount of the loan notes was 157.9 million 2016 239.8 million and the fair value was 156.4 million 2016 231.0 million.
The fair value of borrowings has been calculated based on the principles of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement under Hierachy Level 2 by discounting the expected future cash flows at prevailing interest rates.
Cross currency swaps The notional principal amount of the outstanding USGBP cross currency swap contracts at 31 March 2017 was 126.3 million 101.0 million 2016 249.4 million 173.5 million.
These cross currency swaps have both legs at fixed interest rates are designated as cash flow hedges and meet the criteria for hedge accounting.
At 31 March 2017 the fixed interest rates varied from 3.227% to 4.516% 2016 3.227% to 5.305%.
Any gainslosses arising from fair value adjustments deferred in equity will reverse in the income statement finance costs during the next six years being the life of the swaps.
The notional principal amount of the outstanding EURGBP cross currency swap contracts at 31 March 2017 was 10.7 million 9.2 million 2016 10.7 million 8.5 million.
These cross currency swaps have both legs at fixed interest rates are designated as cash flow hedges and meet the criteria for hedge accounting.
At 31 March 2017 the fixed interest rates varied from 5.47% to 5.60% 2016 5.47% to 5.60%.
The loss deferred in equity will reverse in the income statement finance costs during the next year being the life of the swaps.
Forward currency contracts The Group enters into certain forward currency contracts in order to hedge the Sterling cost of currencydenominated future purchases and receipts.
The forward currency purchases in place at 31 March 2017 do not meet the criteria for hedge accounting and the loss in respect of these has been recognised within the income statement.
Borrowing facilities The Group has undrawn committed longterm borrowing facilities available at 31 March 2017 of 112.0 million 2016 135.0 million in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met at that date.
Undrawn facilities expire on 6 October 2018 nil and 6 October 2020 112.0 million.
Company
Interest rate maturity profile of financial assets and liabilities The following table sets out the carrying amount by maturity of the Companys financial assets and liabilities that are exposed to interest rate risk.
No other financial assets and liabilities other than those shown below are exposed directly to interest rate risk.
At 31 March 2017 1 year 1 2 years 2 3 years 3 4 years 4 5 years 5 years
Fixed rate Loan notes 11.9 20.0 Intercompany receivables 152.9      152.9 Intercompany payables 48.8      48.8 Cross currency swaps 0.1 3.6 Floating rate Intercompany receivables 456.4      456.4 Intercompany payables 169.2      169.2 At 31 March 2016 restated Fixed rate Intercompany receivables 238.7      238.7 Intercompany payables 48.6      48.6 Cross currency swaps 16.0 0.7 1.0   0.7 17.0 Floating rate Intercompany receivables 35.4      35.4 Intercompany payables 215.4      215.4 These have been classified as fixed rate after taking into account the effect of interest rate swaps.
The comparative figures have been restated to report intercompany receivables and intercompany payables separately within fixed and floating rate.
Interest rate risk The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a reasonably possible change in interest rates with all other variables held constant of the Companys profit before tax through the impact on floating rate borrowings.
There is no impact on the Companys equity resulting from movements in interest rates other than in relation to the USGBP and EURGBP crosscurrency swaps used as a cash flow hedge on US and EUR loan notes.
The impact on equity is nil over the life of the instruments as these swaps comprise an effective hedge.
116 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 32 Financial instruments continued The sensitivity analysis excludes all nonderivative fixed rate financial instruments carried at amortised cost but includes nonderivative floating rate financial instruments except those where interest rate swaps have been used as cash flow hedges.
This is due to the fact that gains and losses on the hedging instrument offset losses and gains on the nonderivative floating rate financial instrument which are subject to the hedge are matched in both profit and loss and cash terms.
No nonderivative fixed rate financial instruments have profit and loss exposure due to floating rates as a result of interest rate swaps.
The 2017 analysis below reflects lower reasonably possible changes in interest rates to 2016  upside LIBOR expectations assumed last year were not realised and the assumption is that base rates will increase less than anticipated at March 2016.
Increase
Effect on profit before tax Effect on equity Sterling 100 Sterling 50 Sterling 100 Sterling 50 Equity price risk The Company holds no listed equity investments and is not subject to equity price risk.
Credit risk The maximum exposure to credit risk is the carrying amount of financial assets.
Liquidity risk The Companys policy on managing its liquidity risk is set out in Note 31.
The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Companys financial liabilities at 31 March 2017 and 2016 based on contractual undiscounted payments of interest and principal.
At 31 March 2017 1 year 1 2 years 2 3 years 3 4 years 4 5 years 5 years
Crosscurrency swaps on loan notes At 31 March 2016 Restated Restated Restated Crosscurrency swaps on loan notes Comparative period restated to reflect the loan notes payable in November 2021 as payable in  5 years Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities The carrying amounts and the fair values of all of the Companys financial instruments that are carried in the financial statements are the same with the exception of the loan notes.
The carrying amount of the loan notes was 157.9 million 2016 239.8 million and the fair value was 156.4 million 2016 231.0 million.
The fair value of borrowings has been calculated based on the principles of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement under Hierachy Level 2 by discounting the expected future cash flows at prevailing interest rates.
Cross currency swaps
The notional principal amount of the outstanding USGBP cross currency swap contracts at 31 March 2017 was 126.3 million 101.0 million 2016 249.4 million 173.5 million.
These cross currency swaps have both legs at fixed interest rates are designated as cash flow hedges and meet the criteria for hedge accounting.
At 31 March 2017 the fixed interest rates varied from 3.227% to 4.516% 2016 3.227% to 5.305%.
Any gainslosses arising from fair value adjustments deferred in equity will reverse in the income statement finance costs during the next one to six years being the life of the swaps.
The notional principal amount of the outstanding EURGBP cross currency swap contracts at 31 March 2017 was 10.7 million 9.2 million 2016 10.7 million 8.5 million.
These cross currency swaps have both legs at fixed interest rates are designated as cash flow hedges and meet the criteria for hedge accounting.
At 31 March 2017 the fixed interest rates varied from 5.47% to 5.60% 2016 5.47% to 5.60%.
The loss deferred in equity will reverse in the income statement finance costs during the next year being the life of the swaps.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 117 The numbers 32 Financial instruments continued Borrowing facilities The Company has undrawn committed longterm borrowing facilities available at 31 March 2017 of 112.0 million 2016 135.0 million in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met at that date.
Undrawn facilities expire on 6 October 2018 nil and 6 October 2020 112.0 million.
33 Cashflow from operating activities Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Profit before taxation  continuing operations 40.3 45.4 Loss before taxation  discontinued operations 4.6 187.2 Finance costs and other finance income  continuing operations 8.5 8.9 Loss on disposal of Dairies operation 2.5 137.3 Profit on operations 46.7 4.4 Depreciation 14.9 23.4 Amortisation of internally generated intangible assets 0.5 2.0 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 0.4 0.4 Impairment of investment 0.5 Difference between cash outflow on exceptional items and amounts recognised in the income statement excluding disposal of Dairies operation Release of grants 1.6 1.7 Sharebased payments 1.2 2.2 Profit on disposal of depots 3.0 3.7 Difference between pension contributions paid and amounts recognised in the income statement 14.1 20.0 RandD tax credits 0.1 Increasedecrease in inventories 10.5 13.8 Decrease in receivables 9.3 44.2 Decrease in payables 4.9 44.0 Cash generated from operations 32.8 31.3 No cash was generated from operations for the Company in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 nil.
118 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Notes to the fiNANCiAl stAtemeNts CoNtiNueD 34 Analysis of net debt
At 1 April
Noncash movement
At 31 March Cash and cash equivalents 100.3 79.4   20.9 Borrowings current 95.6 95.6 11.3 0.6 11.9 Borrowings noncurrent 249.2 23.0 11.3 13.1 274.0 Finance leases 3.9 1.5 0.1  2.5 Debt issuance costs 1.9 0.4 0.9  1.4 Debt issuance costs excluded 1.9 0.4 0.9  1.4 Impact of crosscurrency swaps 19.4 15.4  13.7 17.7 At 1 April
Noncash movement
At 31 March Cash and cash equivalents 50.6 49.7   100.3 Borrowings current   92.9 2.7 95.6 Borrowings noncurrent 263.2 76.3 92.9 2.6 249.2 Finance leases  1.5 5.4  3.9 Debt issuance costs 0.2 1.6 0.1  1.9 Debt issuance costs excluded 0.2 1.6 0.1  1.9 Impact of crosscurrency swaps 13.9 0.2  5.3 19.4 The Group has 126.3 million and 10.7 million of loan notes against which crosscurrency swaps have been put in place to fix interest and principal repayments in Sterling March 2016 249.4 million and 10.7 million.
Under IFRS currency borrowings are retranslated into Sterling at year end exchange rates.
The cross currency swaps are recorded at fair value and incorporate movements in both market exchange rates and interest rates.
The Group defines net debt so as to include the effective Sterling liability where crosscurrency swaps have been used to convert foreign currency borrowings into Sterling.
The 17.7 million adjustment included in the above March 2016 19.4 million converts the Sterling equivalent of Dollar and Euro loan notes from year end exchange rates 110.1 million March 2016 182.0 million to the fixed Sterling liability of 92.3 million March 2016 162.6 million.
During the year the Group repaid 123.0 million 70.2 million and 10.0 million of 2006 fixed coupon loan notes on maturity.
The 80.2 million cash flow in respect of the repayment is reflected in the table under borrowings current of 95.6 million and the impact of crosscurrency swaps of 15.4 million.
Finance lease noncash movement relates to the recognition of the agreement of a secondary lease term for assets at Nuneaton.
On 4 April 2017 there was a natural maturity of 10.7 million 9.2 million and 2.8 million of 2007 fixed coupon loan notes.
Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 119 The numbers 34 Analysis of net debt continued
At 1 April
Noncash movement
At 31 March Cash and cash equivalents 40.1 40.0   0.1 Borrowings current 95.6 95.6 11.3 0.6 11.9 Borrowings noncurrent 144.2  11.3 13.1 146.0 Borrowings noncurrent  impact of crosscurrency swaps 19.4 15.4  13.7 17.7 At 1 April
Noncash movement
At 31 March Cash and cash equivalents 0.2 39.9   40.1 Borrowings current   92.9 2.7 95.6 Borrowings noncurrent 158.2 76.3 92.9 2.6 144.2 Borrowings noncurrent  impact of crosscurrency swaps 13.9 0.2  5.3 19.4 35 Post balance sheet events Maturity of Fixed Coupon Loan Notes On 4 April 2017 the Group repaid 10.7 million 9.2 million and 2.8 million of 2007 fixed coupon loan notes on maturity.
36 Corporate information The consolidated accounts of Dairy Crest Group plc for the year ended 31 March 2017 were authorised for issue in accordance with a resolution of the Directors on 17 May 2017 and the consolidated and Company balance sheets were signed on the Boards behalf by Mr M Allen and Mr T Atherton.
Dairy Crest Group plc is a limited company incorporated in England and Wales and domiciled in the United Kingdom whose shares are publicly traded on the London Stock Exchange.
120 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 Consolidated income statement summary  continuing operations
Restated
Restated
Product group revenue Cheese and Functional Ingredients 231.3 264.6 274.4 263.7 254.8 Butters Spreads and Oils 194.5 177.4 170.0 152.6 150.7 Product group profit Cheese and Functional Ingredients 33.1 39.3 33.1 36.4 42.8 Butters Spreads and Oils 25.5 16.8 33.8 29.6 25.5 Associate  0.3 Total product group profit  continuing operations 58.6 56.4 66.9 66.0 68.3 Finance costs 18.7 9.9 8.1 8.3 7.7 Adjusted profit before tax  continuing operations 39.9 46.5 58.8 57.7 60.6 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 Exceptional items 26.0 8.4 19.8 11.3 19.1 Other finance expense  pensions 3.5 0.3 1.8 0.6 0.8 Group profit before tax  continuing operations 10.0 37.4 36.8 45.4 40.3 Balance sheet summary Property plant and equipment goodwill intangibles and investments 375.9 391.9 428.9 331.8 299.3 Inventories receivables payables deferred income deferred tax asset and provisions 74.1 109.6 116.2 80.1 132.3 Total operating assets 450.0 501.5 545.1 411.9 431.6 Financial instruments excluding amounts included in net debt 1.5 2.8 1.3 2.4 0.3 Retirement obligations 67.2 57.7 41.4 42.5 109.6 Shareholders equity 307.4 289.4 289.8 134.2 71.9 Cash flow summary Generated fromused in operations 19.1 13.8 35.3 31.3 32.8 Fixed asset investments net of grants 46.0 58.8 80.1 66.8 25.6 Interest paid 18.0 14.0 10.5 12.8 12.2 Taxation repaidpaid 4.7 2.1 Dividends paid 27.4 28.5 29.2 30.0 31.1 Purchase of businesses and investments 0.6  0.1 6.0 Other items principally business and asset disposals 354.3 30.5 28.1 54.0 15.3 Movement in net debt 276.7 82.5 56.5 30.3 20.8 Profit on operations before exceptional items and amortisation of acquired intangibles.
Before exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and pension interest.
The Consolidated Income Statement Summary  Continuing Operations has been restated in all years to reclassify the results of the sold Dairies operation to discontinued operations.
GROuP FINANCIAL hISTORY Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 121 The numbers ShareholderS information Company r egistrar and Shareholder enquiries If you have administrative enquiries concerning your shareholdings in the Company such as the loss of share certificates change of address dividend payment arrangements or amalgamation of accounts please contact the Companys registrar by writing to Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4TU or by telephone ontel.
Calls are charged at the standard geographical rate and will vary by provider.
Calls from outside the UK are charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open 9.00am to 5.30pm Monday to Friday.
Capita Asset Services also provides online facilities for shareholders to check their holdings and update their details.
Registering is easy and there is no fee involved simply access site Payment of dividends Shareholders may arrange to have their dividends paid directly into a bank or building society account using the Bankers Automated Clearing System BACS.
Bank mandate forms are available from Capita Asset Services whose details appear above or you can register your mandate details online at site l ow cost share dealing service If you do not have share dealing arrangements in place Dairy Crest has a low cost share dealing service arranged by Capita Share Dealing Services.
Shareholders wishing to use the service should either visit the Capita Share Dealing website at site or calltel.
Calls are charged at the standard geographical rate and will vary by provider.
Calls from outside the UK are charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open 8.00am to 4.30pm Monday to Friday.
Gifting shares to charity Shareholders who have a small holding of shares on the register whereby their value makes them uneconomic to sell may donate these shares to charity under the Sharegift Scheme  administered by the Orr Mackintosh Foundation  a registered charity.
Information
General information General information about Dairy Crest can be found on our corporate website site Investors who have questions relating to the Groups business activities should contact Investor Relations Dairy Crest Group plc Claygate House Littleworth Road Esher Surrey KT10 9PN.
Telephonetel00 email email f inancial calendar dividends final Exdividend Thursday 6 July 2017 Record date Friday 7 July 2017 Payment date Friday 11 August 2017 Group results anticipated Half Year Interims November 2017 Preliminary Announcement of 201718 results May 2018 201718 Report and Accounts circulation June 2018 analysis of ordinary shareholders at 17 may 2017 holders number % Shares %
Individuals and other holders 16580 88.34 27535434 19.52 Insurance companies pension funds banks nominees and limited companies 2189 11.66 113536863 80.48 18769 100.00 141072297 100.00 Size of holdings Up to 5000 shares 17381 92.61 23427965 16.61 5001  20000 shares 1155 6.15 8638028 6.12 20001  100000 shares 117 0.62 5470230 3.88 Over 100000 shares 116 0.62 103536074 73.39 18769 100.00 141072297 100.00 122 Dairy Crest Annual Report 2017 This report is printed on Chorus Lux Silk paper.
This paper has been independently certified as meeting the standards of the Forest Stewardship Council
ISO14001 and EMAS environmental standards.
The inks used are all vegetable based.
Printed at Pureprint.
Designed and produced by Tor Pettersen and Partners.
Photographic direction by Hudson Wright Easton.
Board photography by Ed Hill.
Dairy Crest is a leading British dairy company.
We have a wellestablished strategy a clear vision robust values and great people.
The companys success is driven by a strong portfolio of market leading brands including Cathedral City cheese Clover dairy spread Country Life butter and Frylight the original one calorie cooking spray.
The year ended 31 March 2017 marked a new chapter in our history as we started production of two functional ingredients demineralised whey powder and galactooligosaccharide GOS at our Davidstow facility.
This brings exciting new opportunities in the high growth global infant formula market.
We strive constantly to innovate bringing new products to market and introducing new ways of working across the business.
Our success has been built on our links to the countryside our dairy heritage and our people and we continue to ensure we are setting the standard for responsible business practice.
Dairy Crest is very well positioned for profitable and sustainable growth in our added value and branded markets.
ABouT uS The uKs No1 cheese brand The uKs No1 oil brand The uKs No1 dairy spread The uKs fastest growing major spreadable brand
Dairy Crest Group plc Annual Report 2017 Dairy Crest Group plc Claygate House Littleworth Road
Surrey KT10 9PN Company No Visit our website at site httpsiteinvestors Dairy Crest Group plc Annual Report 2017
