Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial highlights Investment property m 1344.9m up by 21.2% EPRA NAV p up by 7 .2% 2016 1109.4 2017 1344.9 2016 46.1 2017 49.4 Net rental income m up by 16.3% Profit before tax m up by 230.6% 2016 58.4 2017 67.9 2016 28.8 2017 95.2 EPRA EPS p up by 20.0% Total dividends paid p up by 9.8% 2016 2.0 2017 2.4 2016 2.05 2017 2.25 Strategic report 2 Our business at a glance 4 Chairmans statement 6 CEO review 10 Our business model and strategy 12 Our business model in action 18 Strategy at a glance 20 Summary of our strategy in action 22 Key performance indicators 24 Resources and relationships 28 Risk management 30 Principal risks and uncertainties 34 Business review
Cha i r ma n  s i n t r o d uct i on to governance 42 Leadership 44 Board of Directors 46 Effectiveness 48 Nominations Committee Report 50 Audit Committee Report
52 Remuneration Report
66 Directors Report D i r e ct or s  R e s p on si bi l it y
70 Independent Auditors Report
Financial statements Consolidated income statement Consolidated balance sheet Consolidated statement of changes in equity Consolidated cash flow statement 79 Notes to the accounts 98 Company financial statements Additional information 104 Glossary 107 Corporate information Contents Investing to help develop the NHS of the future Assura is the UKs leading healthcare Real Estate Investment Trust helping GPs and the NHS bring care closer to home by creating the modern fitforpurpose buildings that doctors say they urgently need in the right places for patients.
By designing GP surgery premises for the job theyll be doing in future we can help the NHS deliver on its plans to ease pressure on hospitals  by giving family doctors the infrastructure they need to offer extended appointment hours digital consultations and more services tests and treatment in the community.
Whether were developing new buildings or investing to make existing spaces work better were helping to create a primary care estate today thats in shape for the NHS of tomorrow.
Available online at site site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Our business at a glance Aspen Centre Gloucester 3481 sq.
The Aspen centre contains Barnwood Medical Practice Heathville Medical Practice and London Medical Practice which together have a list size of over 21000 patients.
The centre offers a broad range of services to the local community including consultant rooms hightech treatment rooms a day site operating theatre training rooms and conference facilities.
Fleetwood Health and Wellbeing Centre
5857 sq.
The practice serves 11000 patients and the building hosts a number of ancilliary services.
Moor Park Health and Leisure Centre
5217 sq.
This multipurpose centre is home to two GP practices a library and the local leisure centre.
Frome Medical Centre Frome 4087 sq.
Frome Medical Centre completed in 2012 serves over 29000 patients and is adjacent to the community hospital.
One Life Building Middlesbrough 3327 sq.
The One Life Building is located in the heart of Middlesbrough offering conveniently located services to the local community including a GP practice opticians and pharmacy.
Todmorden Medical Centre Todmorden 4467 sq.
This visually striking building was completed in 2008 and offers multiple services including a GP practice pharmacy district nurses physio podiatry and clinical and office space for two local Foundation Trusts.
Investing to support the primary healthcare infrastructure.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio analysis by capital value
Total value
Portfolio analysis by region
Total value
Midlands 77 274.2 21 Scotland 21 44.8 3 Wales 26 66.0 5 Portfolio analysis by tenant covenant
Total rent roll % NHS body 13.7 18 Pharmacy 5.6 8 Other 4.8 6 Properties valued over 10 million Building official name Town Build date Sq.
List size NHS rent % Ashfields Primary Care Centre Sandbach 2004 2681 23381 88% Aspen Centre Gloucester 2014 3481 21067 91% Beam Street Medical Centre Nantwich 2008 3322 24235 88% Bonnyrigg Medical Centre Bonnyrigg 2005 4074 21906 97% Church View Medical Centre South Kirkby 2013 2812 13779 91% Crompton Health Centre Bolton 2007 2964 11425 88% Dene Drive Primary Care Centre Winsford 2007 2988 23328 87% Dickson House Basingstoke 2007 2318 37056 67% Eaglebridge Health and Wellbeing Centre Crewe 2007 6261 42723 90% Fleetwood Health and Wellbeing Centre Fleetwood 2012 5857 11733 91% Freshney Green Primary Care Centre Grimsby 2009 6796 29402 87% Frome Medical Centre Frome 2012 4087 29112 83% Market Drayton Primary Care Centre Market Drayton 2005 3667 17482 91% Moor Park Health and Leisure Centre Blackpool 2011 5217 28482 95% North Ormesby Health Village North Ormesby 2005 7652 22384 66% One Life Building Middlesbrough 2005 3327 9586 94% Severn Fields Health Village Shrewsbury 2012 6086 16883 94% South Bar House Banbury 2009 3691 33937 89% Sudbury Community Health Centre Sudbury 2014 2937 9367 100% Todmorden Medical Centre Todmorden 2008 4467 13452 92% Turnpike House Medical Centre Worcester 2006 4257 27170 91% Waters Green Medical Centre Macclesfield 2006 6007 61397 93% EPRA summary table 2017 2016 EPRA EPS p 2.4p 2.0p EPRA NAV p 49.4p 46.1p EPRA NNNAV p 44.7p 42.4p EPRA NIY % 5.05% 5.23% EPRA toppedup NIY % 5.05% 5.23% EPRA Vacancy Rate 2.1% 3.0% EPRA Cost Ratio including direct vacancy costs % 13.7% 16.5% EPRA Cost Ratio excluding direct vacancy costs % 12.4% 16.0% See a detailed rationale for each performance measure on pages 38 and 39.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Chairmans statement Assuras purpose is to provide GPs and patients with the buildings they need today for the NHS of tomorrow.
Simon Laffin NonExecutive Chairman Dear Shareholder Assura has continued to grow over the last 12 months.
Our property portfolio expanded significantly through both acquisitions and new developments.
In the past year we have added 170 million of property and this together with the 141 million of property additions in the previous year has increased our net rental income by 16% to 67.9 million.
We are now the UKs largest developer and ownermanager of primary healthcare property with a property portfolio valued at over 1.3 billion.
The increased scale of our operations and our strong financial position have assisted us in obtaining better terms on our debt.
We have signed new unsecured debt facilities of 350 million lowering the overall cost of borrowings by 78 basis points to 4.06%.
Last year we set a lower mediumterm loan to value LTV target range of between 40% and 50%.
At the year end our LTV was 37% well positioned relative to this range.
We are continuing to source attractive investment opportunities and we currently have a pipeline of further property acquisitions and developments of 153 million in solicitors hands.
This will in time increase the LTV.
We shall continue to monitor what the right LTV range is for the Company.
A key part of our strategy is our unique proposition of offering all of the elements of the property service for GPs.
This provides GPs with a longterm partner approach throughout the lifecycle of a medical centre from first idea of a new surgery through the NHS business case development and build of the new surgery moving in disposal of the old property and maintenance of the premises over the next 25 plus years.
Our ability to develop invest and manage gives us a crucial advantage when securing new development opportunities and other asset management initiatives with GPs.
Moreover it provides a highly scalable model that means that as we grow the benefits of scale accrue to shareholders and drive our progressive dividend policy and shareholder returns.
The benefit of this model has been illustrated again this year as rent roll rose by 17% to 74.4 million and EPRA earnings rose by 58% to 40.3 million.
EPRA EPS up by 20% Dividends paid per share up by 9.8% Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dividends We aim to deliver superior risk adjusted returns to our shareholders.
A key component of this return is a growing covered dividend.
In January 2017 the Board increased our quarterly dividend payment by 9% to 0.60 pence per share or 2.4 pence per share on an annualised basis.
This represents an increase of over 33% from the level of 0.45 pence per share paid three years ago.
Shareholder engagement We are committed to the highest standards of financial transparency and believe a significant investment in investor relations activity is a key responsibility for any public company.
We have held 95 meetings with investors during the year and I am delighted to welcome a number of new shareholders onto our register.
Our people and the Board The past year was marked by the tragic death of our previous CEO Graham
Graham stepped down in March 2016 and passed away in July having been suffering from cancer.
Graham was a great leader and CEO for Assura over his four years in charge delivering a period of remarkable success which saw the Group grow from a market capitalisation of 152 million to become a FTSE 250 company valued at over 900 million.
He had a clear vision inspired investor confidence and built a strong team all of which transformed Assura into a leading player in the sector.
I became Executive Chairman in March last year to cover for Grahams absence.
In October 2016 the Board appointed Jonathan Murphy as Interim CEO and confirmed him as permanent CEO in February 2017.
Jonathan had been Finance Director since January 2013.
He brings extensive knowledge and experience to the role as well as the commitment and ability to continue to deliver on our strategy.
We are currently recruiting for a new Finance Director.
I am delighted to welcome Andrew Darke onto the Board as Property
Andrew has been with Assura since its flotation in 2003 and brings to the Board an unparalleled knowledge and understanding of the specialist primary care property market.
We have 43 people employed in Assura and on behalf of the Board I would like to thank them all for their hard work dedication and contribution to the success of the business through such a busy year.
Our investment case By following our strategies we can deliver longterm shareholder value through Low volatility of property returns Low default risk Linkage to cost inflation Scalable internally managed model Covered progressive dividends Excellent risk adjusted returns.
Culture values and ethics The NHS is Assuras prime customer accounting for 86% of our total rent roll.
We strongly support the NHS and believe in its vital role in the countrys health.
We aim to provide the NHS GPs and patients with the buildings needed for the NHS of today and tomorrow.
These buildings provide the essential social infrastructure required to improve the health of the communities in which we operate.
We direct private sector capital to provide develop and enhance primary care premises.
Some 6% of the UKs NHS patients now use our premises.
This important social dimension to our work is reflected in our alignment with the values of the NHS and our commitment to the highest standards of ethics and integrity.
We have robust ethical policies and control procedures which help us ensure that good business ethics are embedded across the Group.
The Government and NHS control both new asset investment and rental increases based on a transparent market mechanism.
This reflects the mutually beneficial partnership that we have with the public sector.
For a number of years we have been working on designing and developing an energy neutral building which brings together the latest thinking in sustainable design practice and construction techniques.
Our first project under this initiative is now nearing completion and we hope to apply these innovative approaches to future schemes in our development pipeline.
This is in addition to our commitment to meeting the highest possible BREEAM accreditation for our schemes as evidenced by us achieving a Very Good accreditation for both properties completed in the year.
Looking ahead With the support of our shareholders Assura has the strongest balance sheet in the sector and we are well placed to continue investing in what remains a very fragmented market.
In addition we remain focused on carefully managing our existing portfolio with our inhouse management team continuing to deliver the highest standard of customer service and operational excellence for the nations GPs while also maximising the value of our portfolio through asset management initiatives.
Although the NHS and primary care policy consensus across all mainstream parties is now more positive than ever before we remain frustrated by the slow progress in transforming policy into meaningful investment in primary care premises.
It looks as if the general election will result in a continuity in basic primary care strategy by whichever party wins it.
Everyone seems to agree that better healthcare hinges on more care being provided in the primary care sector.
Having more doctors and better leveraging of their skills through ancillary healthcare professionals will require more and better premises.
We are ready to support this essential investment in the infrastructure of the NHS by offering the right skills relationships and capital to make the plans a reality on the ground.
Simon Laffin NonExecutive Chairman 22 May 2017 Read about our business model and strategy on page 10 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information CEO review Investment in primary care premises is an essential enabler for the necessary NHS transformations.
Jonathan Murphy
Overview
A year of political disruption has contributed towards uncertainty in the financial and commercial property markets.
Despite this backdrop Assura has continued to deliver superior risk adjusted returns built on a secure and longterm income stream funded by the NHS.
In the past year our property return was 9.7% driven by an income return of 5.3% and an increase in property values adding a further 4.4%.
At the end of the financial year in March Sir Robert Naylor released his landmark review of the NHS estate highlighting the crucial role for primary care premises in enabling the policy imperatives of dramatically increasing evening and weekend GP appointments encouraging practices to work together in networks or hubs and increasing significantly the primary care workforce.
It is now clear that mainstream thinking recognises that investment in primary care premises is an essential enabler to the necessary NHS transformation.
Assuras bespoke approach one that works for the NHS for GPs for wider community health teams and for patients is well suited to deliver what is required.
Investment property value 1344.9m up by 21.2% Rent roll up by 16.6% Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Delivering longterm outperformance in property returns Assura is a constituent of the IPD All Healthcare Index and over the last five years we have delivered an annualised ungeared return of 8.9% This level of consistent performance over a long period is a testament to the skills and dedication of our property team and to the specialist knowledge we have in our sector.
The strong returns achieved in this fiveyear period are even more creditable given the development activity of this time has been at historically low levels as development activity is a key driver of Assuras returns in two ways.
Firstly we are typically able to source developments at an effective yield on cost that is 100 basis points higher than through acquisitions.
Secondly developments provide evidence of construction cost inflation that drives rental growth.
Our 398 medical centres have a rent roll of 74.4 million with the geographically diverse nature of the portfolio allowing us to serve more than 6% of the UKs population.
Our investment approach is to identify those assets we believe are best in class in their local catchment areas.
By acquiring those assets that provide a broad range of services to their local communities we believe these will provide greater prospects for lease renewal on expiry and so drive greater property returns over the long term.
A good example of this approach can be seen in our acquisition of Donnington Medical Practice in Shropshire.
This centre serves over 12500 patients and provides 17 additional services on site including blood pressure and coronary heart disease prevention dermatology minor surgery and smoking cessation programmes.
For key properties we are not afraid to acquire shorter leases and use our property skills to redevelop or enhance the premises whilst seeking to regear the lease to a longer period.
Net initial yield movement The attractiveness of the sector has resulted in a stable yield profile with modest yield compression in recent years.
IPD monthly UK index initial yield Assura Net Initial Yield 15year Gilt
Jun
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar % Rental income The key driver of our property return is the income from our longterm leases.
In the year rental growth was 1.6% from settled rent reviews.
Most of our rent reviews are on an open market basis set by reference to rental awards agreed with the District Valuer on new schemes.
This means that they are influenced by land and construction cost inflation over the medium term.
Over recent years there has been significant inflation in these costs but this increased cost is not yet fully reflected in our passing rents as the slowdown in new schemes has reduced the evidence of that inflation.
Our portfolio is well placed to capture this rental growth once new developments recommence and this gives us confidence for the mediumterm prospects for rental growth in our sector.
Capital growth The balance of our ungeared annualised return is generated from capital growth which has seen a likeforlike valuation growth of 5.6% in the past year.
This increase has primarily come from a movement in yields with our net equivalent yield moving by 23 basis points in the past year.
The portfolio net initial yield as at 31 March 2017 was 5.10%.
We completed two developments during the year at a total development cost of 13.8 million.
This has added 0.7 million to our annual rent roll.
We also add value through active asset management of our properties working with our GP tenants on proposals for physical extensions or agreeing new or extended lease terms.
During the year we agreed four extensions 15 new leases and 10 lease extensions.
Together this asset management activity added a further 0.4 million to our rent roll.
The combined impact of our investment and asset management activity has been to achieve a 7% growth in EPRA NAV to 49.4 pence per share.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information CEO review continued contributor to the 236 million increase in investment property in the year.
This has enabled our rent roll to grow by 17% to 74.4 million.
Our inhouse development team is currently busier than it has been for a number of years.
Although completed schemes in the year numbered only two sites for a gross development cost of 13.8 million the number of potential opportunities has increased markedly.
We are currently on site at a further six schemes with a gross development cost of 31 million which is a significant uplift from this time last year.
The pipeline remains strong with a further eight schemes with a gross development cost of 36 million where we expect to be on site within the next 12 months.
This increased level of activity is encouraging.
The schemes we are working on are being driven by pressing local requirements however we are yet to see the full effect of national policy imperatives or programmes.
The potential for the Sustainability and Transformation Plans STPs and the Estates and Technology Transformation Fund is real though we are not yet seeing that potential converted into significant investment.
We remain optimistic that these central initiatives will result in increased investment in the future.
We have the skills resources and capital to support and benefit from these plans when they convert into action.
Funding further growth At the year end we had an immediate acquisition pipeline of 86 million and we continue to identify new opportunities that meet our acquisition criteria.
To support this continued expansion of the portfolio we have been active in sourcing new funding over the past year.
In May 2016 we agreed a 200 million unsecured revolving credit facility with a club of four banks at an initial margin of 150 basis points.
At the year end we had utilised 100 million of these facilities and so to provide further scope for expansion we have now in May 2017 increased this facility to 250 million on the same terms.
Maximising operational efficiency The property additions have been integrated by our inhouse property management team which is delivering sectorleading tenant satisfaction across our portfolio.
In our annual tenant satisfaction survey over 95% of our tenants said they would recommend us as potential landlords to other GPs and our GPs remain our greatest source of referrals for new business.
We remain focused on understanding their evolving needs and demands so we can be at the forefront of the significant investment required in improving premises in the future.
Our team of portfolio and investment managers has responsibility for identifying value enhancing asset management opportunities such as lease extensions and redevelopments within our existing estate as well as new acquisition opportunities.
This structure enables us to ensure that we can maximise the efficiency with which we can translate increased rental income into underlying profit and hence dividends.
In the year we have delivered a 58% growth in EPRA earnings to 40.3 million.
This has been achieved from 21% growth in our investment property value and a reduction in our EPRA Cost Ratio from 17% to 14%.
The overall impact of all of these factors has enabled us to increase our quarterly dividend from January 2017 by 9% to 0.60 pence per share.
Continued focus on our specialist sector Assura represents a unique proposition in our sector as we act as investor developer and manager of our properties.
This gives us an unrivalled knowledge and understanding of the requirements of GPs for their premises.
We also maintain a database of every primary care property in the UK that enables us to identify and analyse potential acquisition opportunities.
This exceptional market knowledge has been a key contributor to our continued success in expanding our portfolio during the year and we closed the year with a portfolio of 398 properties and a valuation in excess of 1.3 billion.
The ongoing growth in the portfolio has largely been achieved through continued acquisitions.
In the year we completed 156 million of property additions which was the largest Tenyear Total Return vs standard deviation 20072016 since the inception of the IPD All Healthcare Index Total Return per annum 10% 8% 6% 4% reduced risk Risk standard deviation increased risk Source MSCI Residential index Primary Healthcare
Bonds
Retail
All property
Industrial
Ofce
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In October 2016 Assura issued 100 million of unsecured 10year notes at a fixed rate of 2.65%.
This was Assuras first issue in the US private placement market and demonstrates our ability to attract a new source of longterm funding at an attractive rate.
This unsecured funding increases operational flexibility and reduces transaction costs associated with financing the expanding property portfolio.
These new facilities highlight that the increased financial strength of Assura is enabling us to source new unsecured funding at attractive rates.
We have sustained a strong longterm and diversified debt profile with 81% of our borrowings now at fixed rate with an average maturity of 8.7 years while delivering a reduction in our weighted average cost of debt from 4.84% to 4.06%.
The loan to value ratio at the year end was 37% which provides further capacity for growth as we maintain a mediumterm target range of 40% to 50%.
Market developments Our purpose is simple to provide GPs and patients with the buildings they need now for the NHS of today and tomorrow.
Providing a wider range of health services closer to home from a broader range of primary care professionals is both more convenient for patients and significantly less expensive for the NHS.
Without the right buildings however the plans cannot be delivered.
The outdated and unfit converted residential stock of surgery premises must evolve into purpose built medical centres with the capacity and the capability to meet the challenges the NHS will face in the future.
Given the complex pressures on our National Health Service it is perhaps no surprise that the prosaic matter of bricks and mortar rarely makes it to the top of the policy agenda.
However in the past year the importance of improving the quality of physical infrastructure has been explicitly recognised as being part of the solution.
Local STPs delivered this year set out the optimal design for services in 44 geographical areas.
As ever there is a huge variety in the detail of the documents.
There is a common thread across all the plans that the primary care estate will be a crucial enabler of what they are trying to deliver.
The plans highlight the need for a significant increase in the primary care workforce  with the potential scope going significantly beyond the recruitment of new GPs.
More community pharmacists nurse practitioners physician associates and mental health therapists will operate from the primary care setting however if primary care premises do not have the capacity to host them these desperately needed boosts to staffing levels simply cannot be achieved.
A larger workforce represents a shift into a greater provision of primary care at scale.
This reflects that larger scale practices can more easily manage extra services and extended hours as well as potentially delivering greater efficiencies in operations and back office functions.
To this end there are a number of different ways that GPs can work together through formal alliances federations and clusters of merged practices.
All models of working at scale rely upon larger and more modern buildings.
Yet the level of government investment in primary care premises remains at historically low levels.
The Estates and Technology Transformation Fund offering 900 million of muchneeded investment for both GP premises and surgery technology has not resulted in significant progress for buildings.
Demand for funding far outstrips supply and the pace of projects cannot hope to match this demand.
We must wait to see how much of the pledged 325 million of additional capital for the most advanced STPs filters through to improve primary care estate and we await more detail on NHS Englands vision to create 150 urgent treatment centres to take the pressure off AandE units.
Of course health policy and health economics are extremely complex so we engage regularly with the NHS and government to make the case for further investment in primary care infrastructure both through our expanding inhouse capability and through our chairing of the British Property Federations Healthcare
We believe that our model offers the best solution to the NHSs capital problem for primary care estate so we work hard to ensure policymakers have a clear understanding of the benefits it can bring.
There is no doubt that the policy backdrop is more positive than it has been for a number of years.
However there is a risk that this fails to convert into significant investment on the ground.
In recent years investment has dropped to historically low levels despite a number of seemingly positive central initiatives.
Outlook
With a general election just a few weeks away all eyes will be on the next steps for NHS policy after 8 June.
Whatever the makeup of Parliament however the fundamentals for primary care estate will remain steadfast to reduce pressure on hospitals improve access to general practice and help the people who rely on health services the most to reach them closer to home GP surgery buildings and primary care premises must be fit for the future.
Assura is uniquely placed both to deliver and support in this time of unprecedented change.
Jonathan Murphy
22 May 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information What we need Our business model and strategy A business model designed to deliver superior risk adjusted returns.
Develop
Invest
Manage
How our strategy and business model work together Our strategic priorities drive the behaviours of our team to support our business model ensuring everything we do is tailored toward creating value for our shareholders and stakeholders.
Read more on pages 1819
Maintaining a strategic focus on a highly attractive market
Investing in our people and social infrastructure
Responding to the NHS agenda
Leveraging our teams skills to maximum advantage Customer relationships Knowledge of GPs evolving requirements through our involvement in the design and management of medical centres gives us a unique insight into their property needs.
Assets
Our bespoke medical centres are constructed in locations that are crucial to the local health economy and to the highest sustainability standards.
People
Our team of 43 people covers the key skills of real estate ownership and includes asset and property management development investment marketing and financing.
Partners
We maintain strategic partnerships with the leading architectural practice in the sector and a number of specialist healthcare developers to complement our inhouse expertise.
Capital
The support of our shareholders banking partners and bondholders is crucial to sustaining our investment in the UKs health infrastructure.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The value we create We develop invest and manage a portfolio of primary care medical centres across the UK.
We aim to generate attractive longterm financial and social returns for our shareholders and wider stakeholders by developing and investing in high quality sustainable medical centres that provide crucial infrastructure for their local health economy.
Our team of development managers works with our design and development partners to provide bespoke communityled property solutions for each of our healthcare partners.
We monitor and manage the process from design through to delivery of the completed building.
Our investment managers work to identify opportunities to build lasting relationships with GPs helping them to realise their longterm ambitions for their practice and growing our portfolio to provide scale benefits to our investors.
Our team of property surveyors supports the evolving requirements of our tenants liaising frequently to assist their efficient operation.
This integrated approach enables us to benefit both the tenants and our shareholders in securing lease renewals property extensions or colocating appropriate partners such as pharmacies.
Our competitive strengths We are unique in offering GPs a full property service so a partnership with Assura is a longterm approach.
Our ability to develop invest and manage gives us a crucial advantage when securing new development opportunities and other asset management initiatives.
Moreover our internally managed structure provides a highly scalable model that means as we grow the benefits of scale accrue to shareholders and drive our progressive dividend policy.
Key beneficiaries of our value creation GP customers Our purpose built medical centres provide the essential infrastructure to allow GPs to provide a broader range of healthcare services in the community.
Communities
Our medical centres provide a crucial community resource to aid improved health outcomes in their locations.
In the year we donated 24850 plus employee time to our local charity partners.
Shareholders
EPRA EPS of 2.4 pence and capital growth of 3.3 pence supporting dividends paid of 2.25 pence.
Employees
2.1 million paid to our employees.
In addition Assura actively promotes training and development for our staff.
Suppliers
50.8 million paid to suppliers of materials and services.
Our construction and management contracts are often with local suppliers to promote sustainability.
Government
2.6 million paid in taxes to the UK Government.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Our business model in action Providing bespoke communityled property solutions for each of our healthcare partners.
Develop
From the initial concept to handing over the keys our development team handles the whole process of creating modern fitforpurpose buildings to meet the changing needs of GPs wider community health teams the NHS and patients.
Together with our specialist design and development partners we are innovating now to create an estate that is fit for the NHS of the future.
Highlights
Two forward funded schemes completed Six schemes on site Appointed on eight more schemes with end value of approximately 36 million.
Supporting Sustainability and Transformation Plans
This year saw publication of the 44 STPs across the country each with its own unique estates needs.
It is clear that improvement and development both of existing estate and of new premises  will be fundamental to delivering on the NHSs goals of moving services tests and treatments from acute to primary care expanding access to general practice and increasing the primary care workforce.
We are engaging with STP leads around the country on how we can help with our expertise and access to capital.
The value of culture All of our development projects start and end  with the patients GPs and other health staff who will use the buildings.
We pride ourselves on investing the time to really understand how the spaces we create will need to look feel and perform for everyone who uses them.
Assuras development team Simon Gould and Paul Warwick Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The other side of the street West Gorton Medical Centre The contrast between this surgerys old building  with its lack of natural light metal shutters and decaying exterior  and its brand new space just across the road in West Gorton Greater Manchester could hardly be more striking.
But this building is unique for more than just its visual design.
Using the very latest in solar technology it is designed to be carbon neutral generating its own energy for heating and lighting.
Set to open to patients in May 2017  staff cannot wait to make the move.
This year we are also on site with a brand new building for Woodville Surgery in Swadlincote Derbyshire  that will offer a range of consulting and treatment rooms as well as a pharmacy to serve the 9000 patients funding conversion of a former school building into a fitforpurpose medical centre for Wivenhoe Surgery Essex  making space for a whole new range of services for patients and funding a state of the art new medical centre in Swansea to create more space and make sure there is access for patients with disabilities.
Project pipeline Completed On site
Number of schemes 2 6 8 Development cost 13.8m 31.0m 36.0m Completion timing 201718 201819 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Our business model in action continued Supporting the evolving requirements of the GPs.
Invest
We are here to protect improve and expand existing primary care premises for the future investing for the long term to support GPs who no longer want the risks and responsibility of owning their own premises.
With our help they can redevelop extend and refurbish  to help them manage growing demand ensure their premises are ready to deliver different models of care and accommodate a bigger primary care workforce.
Investment characteristics Strong leases typically long tenure No tenant breaks No rent free periods NHSfunded income means very low default risk Threeyearly rent review cycle with implicit linkage to cost inflation and low volatility Substantial ongoing development need No speculative development Strong risk adjusted returns.
The value of culture Our strong relationships with GPs and practice managers across the country underpin every investment we make.
We listen to and work with them to identify opportunities to grow and add value to our portfolio giving primary care teams the infrastructure they need to do their job most effectively.
Much of our investment work is driven by word of mouth  our reputation precedes us for taking excellent care of our buildings for the people who use them.
Assuras investment team Tom Ivinson Adam Lowe Robert Lawton Amanda Roddy Alexander Taylor Care closer to home in action at Donnington This modern purpose built medical centre serving more than 12000 patients joined our portfolio this year and we are proud to be supporting the team there to accommodate so many services in the community.
From antenatal clinics and dermatology to minor surgery cryosurgery smoking cessation and alcohol project clinics it is a living example of how a good primary care building can enable new ways of working.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Creating space at Newgate Health Centre Our acquisition of Newgate Health Centre in Worksop came with the opportunity to help the surgery and onsite pharmacy create more space for their patient list  one of the biggest in the country at more than 30000 patients.
The proposed work will create more than 600 sq. subject to relevant approvals.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Our business model in action continued Our integrated approach enables us to capture more development and other added value.
Manage
For every GP practice manager and patient using our buildings our inhouse team of property surveyors is here to help.
Whatever the issue from getting the boiler serviced to creating more space they are here to look after the evergrowing number of buildings in the Assura family.
Every
GP surgery and primary care centre is different responding to and innovating for its own unique local health picture and pressures.
We take the time to understand those pressures our knowledge of the local context in which our buildings operate is a vital part of our bespoke service.
The feedback we get shows why we put that intelligence at the heart of our business.
Almost all of our tenants over 95% tell us they are satisfied with their relationship with Assura while a similar proportion would recommend us to other GPs and practice managers.
The value of culture While we are only ever a phone call or email away for our tenants we are firm believers in the value of regular facetoface contact.
From John OGroats to Lands End our team is on the road paying regular visits to every property we own to ensure everything is running smoothly.
That personal touch makes all the difference.
Members of Assuras portfolio team Adam Waheed and Roger Thompson Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ready for the long term at Long Lane With three practices merged into one building Long Lane Surgery in Coalville Leicestershire was bursting at the seams.
With investment from Assura and a grant from NHS Englands Estates and Technology Transformation Fund the surgery has been fully refurbished this year with a new minor operations suite eight new clinical rooms administration space and improved reception and waiting areas.
With careful planning over the last year the surgery has been able to continue its work throughout the renovations  and we have managed the entire process.
The Assura team has worked closely with the builders to make this a reality.
Together theyve carried out a phenomenal remodelling  literally moving the walls of the building out in every direction while service as usual for our patients continued on site.
We now have the space and functionality to take us into the next stages of primary care and provide our patients with a whole range of new services closer to home.
Dr Nick Pulman lead GP Long Lane Surgery.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Focus We have a deep understanding of the economic dynamics of healthcare real estate.
By building on the knowledge and expertise of our team and engagement with our healthcare partners we believe we can generate superior Total Property Return through a strategic focus on a highly attractive market.
21.2% growth in investment property to 1344.9 million.
1.57% rental growth from rent reviews settled in the period.
Total Property Return of 9.7%.
Drive development opportunities to support rental growth evidence.
Investment managers to focus on asset enhancement opportunities.
Continue to seek growth opportunities through acquisitions and purchase and leasebacks.
The market is becoming increasingly competitive but our strong brand and reputation as a longterm investor in the sector mean we are well placed to secure further attractive opportunities.
Expertise
Our strong reputation for innovation derives from our bespoke designs for our medical centres.
Our designs have an emphasis on flexibility and adaptability to ensure that the buildings can adapt to the changing NHS agenda.
Delivered two newly constructed bespoke GPled medical centres.
Engaged with senior NHS leaders and politicians to support transforming primary care.
Complete developments currently on site.
Promote benefits of investment in primary care infrastructure for the NHS.
Work with emerging STPs to identify development opportunities.
Further changes to the organisational structures or policies of the NHS could lead to delays in further investment in primary care infrastructure.
However recent publications recommend an increasing role for primary care service provision.
Sustainability
We pride ourselves on our commitment to the highest possible standards in sustainability the personal development of our teams and our role in spearheading investment in social infrastructure.
First zero carbon and energy neutral building on site.
Both of the two newly constructed medical centres achieved Very Good BREEAM rating.
Develop more zero carbon medical centres of the future for the NHS and continue investment into the highest sustainability standards for new developments.
Further investment in our teams development.
Sustainable development and building design is an area of constant change and we seek to be fully up to date with the latest technologies and innovations.
Failure to recruit develop and retain our team with the right skills and experience may weaken our ability to deliver against our strategic priorities.
Effectiveness
We are committed to supporting the NHS in tackling the major underinvestment in UK primary care property and utilising our skills and capital in achieving this.
We have the right team to source and manage these opportunities and the right plans to leverage our teams skills to maximum advantage.
EPRA Cost Ratio reduced to 13.7% and weighted average cost of debt reduced to 4.06%.
EPRA EPS increased to 2.4 pence.
Total Accounting Return of 12.0%.
Seek further opportunities to expand the portfolio.
Continue to promote the Company to a wide shareholder base and a diverse group of debt funders.
Achieve further scale benefits.
Maintaining cost discipline as the business expands will be crucial in ensuring that we continue to reduce our overall EPRA Cost Ratio.
Included within this metric is the cost of vacant space and so letting this available space will improve this cost metric.
We have been successful in securing both equity and debt capital for supporting the expansion of the business although there is no certainty that future expansion will be supported in the same way.
We believe the fundamentals of the business remain very strong and attractive to both equity and debt funders.
Strategy at a glance Read more on page 22 Strategic priority Performance in 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Focus We have a deep understanding of the economic dynamics of healthcare real estate.
By building on the knowledge and expertise of our team and engagement with our healthcare partners we believe we can generate superior Total Property Return through a strategic focus on a highly attractive market.
21.2% growth in investment property to 1344.9 million.
1.57% rental growth from rent reviews settled in the period.
Total Property Return of 9.7%.
Drive development opportunities to support rental growth evidence.
Investment managers to focus on asset enhancement opportunities.
Continue to seek growth opportunities through acquisitions and purchase and leasebacks.
The market is becoming increasingly competitive but our strong brand and reputation as a longterm investor in the sector mean we are well placed to secure further attractive opportunities.
Expertise
Our strong reputation for innovation derives from our bespoke designs for our medical centres.
Our designs have an emphasis on flexibility and adaptability to ensure that the buildings can adapt to the changing NHS agenda.
Delivered two newly constructed bespoke GPled medical centres.
Engaged with senior NHS leaders and politicians to support transforming primary care.
Complete developments currently on site.
Promote benefits of investment in primary care infrastructure for the NHS.
Work with emerging STPs to identify development opportunities.
Further changes to the organisational structures or policies of the NHS could lead to delays in further investment in primary care infrastructure.
However recent publications recommend an increasing role for primary care service provision.
Sustainability
We pride ourselves on our commitment to the highest possible standards in sustainability the personal development of our teams and our role in spearheading investment in social infrastructure.
First zero carbon and energy neutral building on site.
Both of the two newly constructed medical centres achieved Very Good BREEAM rating.
Develop more zero carbon medical centres of the future for the NHS and continue investment into the highest sustainability standards for new developments.
Further investment in our teams development.
Sustainable development and building design is an area of constant change and we seek to be fully up to date with the latest technologies and innovations.
Failure to recruit develop and retain our team with the right skills and experience may weaken our ability to deliver against our strategic priorities.
Effectiveness
We are committed to supporting the NHS in tackling the major underinvestment in UK primary care property and utilising our skills and capital in achieving this.
We have the right team to source and manage these opportunities and the right plans to leverage our teams skills to maximum advantage.
EPRA Cost Ratio reduced to 13.7% and weighted average cost of debt reduced to 4.06%.
EPRA EPS increased to 2.4 pence.
Total Accounting Return of 12.0%.
Seek further opportunities to expand the portfolio.
Continue to promote the Company to a wide shareholder base and a diverse group of debt funders.
Achieve further scale benefits.
Maintaining cost discipline as the business expands will be crucial in ensuring that we continue to reduce our overall EPRA Cost Ratio.
Included within this metric is the cost of vacant space and so letting this available space will improve this cost metric.
We have been successful in securing both equity and debt capital for supporting the expansion of the business although there is no certainty that future expansion will be supported in the same way.
We believe the fundamentals of the business remain very strong and attractive to both equity and debt funders.
To see further evidence of our strategy in action turn to page 20 Read more on page 22 Read more on page 2833 Key risks Priorities in 2018 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Focus Maintaining a strategic focus on a highly attractive market Our success is built upon our indepth knowledge and understanding of local health economies which allow us to focus on those surgeries which best fit our investment criteria and which will complement our portfolio.
Keeping primary care at the core of our activities is a strategy underpinned by the evergrowing policy spotlight on the role of general practice wider access to clinical pharmacy and a range of other diagnostic and treatment services in the community.
By focusing on this most pressing need  for the right buildings in the right places for primary care  our business can make the biggest difference for patients GPs and the NHS.
6% UK population served by Assura buildings
Responding to the NHS agenda The unique skills mix of our team works in tandem with our UK database of primary care estate so that we can hold the most effective discussions with both current and prospective tenants.
We are actively engaged with policymakers and influencers at national and regional level to ensure that the buildings and developments we design support primary care policy for the long term and that the estate needed to support the transformation of the NHS is getting the attention it requires in national capital and estate planning.
As chair of the British Property Federations Healthcare Committee we are putting our expertise into action with colleagues across the sector.
This year we have met with ministers responsible for NHS estate as well as MPs from all parties and leaders in primary care.
86% NHSGP tenant covenant Summary of our strategy in action Claire Rick Head of Public Affairs Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainability Investing in our people and social infrastructure It is not just our partnerships with GPs which are designed for the long term.
Sustainability is also a hallmark of the way we design our buildings how we invest in our people and how we support better health in our communities.
Our developments in progress are all on track to achieve a BREEAM rating of at least Very Good thanks to our focus on designs which reduce impact on the environment.
We continue to support charities in making a difference to health in our local communities.
In the past year this included funding to help Life After Loss provide a new fetal heart monitor for Warrington General Hospital allowing potential problems to be detected and tracked earlier in pregnancy.
100% developments on track for BREEAM rating of Very Good or better
Leveraging our teams skills to maximum advantage Projects to improve our buildings  such as our refurbishment at Long Lane Surgery in Coalville Leicestershire  simply would not happen without our teams working together to make effective use of their specialist skill sets.
Our portfolio team is in regular contact with our tenants to identify opportunities to improve and develop buildings as the demands for space evolve and change while our development team works alongside to ensure designs hit the mark planning processes are smooth and construction works managed.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Key performance indicators Assura is the UKs leading healthcare REIT In order to sustain the leadership position we need to demonstrate that we can consistently outperform over time.
In order to measure ourselves against this objective we have a wide range of key performance indicators KPIs.
These can be distilled into three key areas.
Firstly Total Property Return which measures our success in choosing the right investments and managing these over time.
Secondly Total Accounting Return which measures the returns we have delivered to our shareholders in the form of dividends paid
Maintaining a strategic focus on a highly attractive market Rental growth from rent reviews 1.6% 2016 1.2% IPD annualised fiveyear Total Return 8.9% IPD 7 .0% Rental growth being the weighted average annualised uplift on reviews settled during the year provides an indicator of how cost inflation is translated into increased rent.
Total Property Return shows the return generated by our portfolio on a debt free basis with the IPD figure providing an equivalent fiveyear annualised figure.
This shows the quality of our investments to deliver a combination of rental income and capital growth.
We have delivered rental growth of 1.6% from rent reviews completed during the year.
This slight increase against 2016 has been driven mainly by reviews linked to inflation but we believe with construction cost inflation returning mediumterm prospects for rental growth are improving.
The Total Property Return for the year of 9.7% reflects the capital growth achieved on the portfolio in addition to the annual rental yield.
The IPD fiveyear Total Return of 8.9% per annum is in excess of the All Healthcare Benchmark of 7.0% demonstrating how our portfolio has delivered strong returns over a sustained period.
Total Property Return 9.7% 2016 8.9%
Responding to the NHS agenda % of tenant covenant
86% 2016 87%
13.2 years 2016 14 years NHS percentage is the proportion of our rent roll that is paid directly by GPs or NHS bodies.
Weighted Average Unexpired Lease Term WAULT is the average period until the next available break clause in our leases weighted by rent.
These measures show who we provide our buildings to and how long our existing leases last for demonstrating our position as a longterm partner to the NHS.
Developments both completed during the year and currently on site illustrate how our buildings are chosen by the NHS to provide a modern facility to suit the primary care needs of that particular location.
In a year of growth the WAULT of 13.2 years and effective NHS backing of rent of 86% have remained strong showing how investments during the year fit with our existing portfolio.
Development activity has improved during the year with two schemes completed during the year and six on site at the year end.
Although development activity in the sector has not yet returned to the levels we would hope for we have a pipeline of eight schemes development cost 36 million that we would hope to be on site in next 1218 months.
Complete developments 13.8m 2 sites 2016 16.4m 4 sites Developments on site 31.0m 6 sites 2016 13.5m 2 sites
Investing in our people and social infrastructure BREEAM rating achieved on developments  Very Good or better 100% 2016 100% BREEAM is the worlds foremost environmental assessment method and rating for buildings and sets the standard for best practice in sustainable building design construction and operation.
An Energy Performance Certificate EPC gives a building a rating for energy efficiency.
Strong performance against these measures demonstrates our commitment to building sustainable buildings that improve the local infrastructure.
Both of the developments completed during the year achieved our target of a BREEAM rating of Very Good and exceeded our target for EPC ratings by achieving an average of A.
In addition we are on site with our first zero carbon and energy neutral building and we expect all buildings on site to meet our BREEAM and EPC ratings targets.
Average EPC rating 2016 B
Leveraging our teams skills to maximum advantage EPRA Cost Ratio 13.7% 2016 16.5% EPRA EPS 2016 2.0p A reducing EPRA Cost Ratio shows the efficiency and scale benefits of our operating model being costs as a percentage of rental income.
EPRA EPS is a measure of recurring profit calculated in accordance with EPRA guidelines.
Total Accounting Return is the amount generated for shareholders in the form of dividends and movement in EPRA NAV.
TSR is the amount generated in the form of dividends and movement in share price.
These two measures are key measures in assessing our performance in the form of returns for shareholders and are the measures to which Directors longterm incentive plans are linked.
The efficient integration of the 77 properties acquired during the year has contributed to a reduction in our EPRA Cost Ratio to 13.7%.
This cost efficiency along with the growth achieved and reduction in weighted average cost of debt has been reflected in our EPRA EPS increasing to 2.4 pence per share.
Our Total Accounting Return of 12.0% reflects capital growth achieved during the year along with the consistent dividend returned to shareholders.
The TSR of 13.2% illustrates how the ratio of share price to EPRA has increased.
As at 31 March 2017 the share price premium to EPRA NAV was 17% 2016 15%.
Total Accounting
12.0% 2016 7 .2% Total Shareholder
13.2% 2016 11.4% Strategic priority KPI and benchmark Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Focus Maintaining a strategic focus on a highly attractive market Rental growth from rent reviews 1.6% 2016 1.2% IPD annualised fiveyear Total Return 8.9% IPD 7 .0% Rental growth being the weighted average annualised uplift on reviews settled during the year provides an indicator of how cost inflation is translated into increased rent.
Total Property Return shows the return generated by our portfolio on a debt free basis with the IPD figure providing an equivalent fiveyear annualised figure.
This shows the quality of our investments to deliver a combination of rental income and capital growth.
We have delivered rental growth of 1.6% from rent reviews completed during the year.
This slight increase against 2016 has been driven mainly by reviews linked to inflation but we believe with construction cost inflation returning mediumterm prospects for rental growth are improving.
The Total Property Return for the year of 9.7% reflects the capital growth achieved on the portfolio in addition to the annual rental yield.
The IPD fiveyear Total Return of 8.9% per annum is in excess of the All Healthcare Benchmark of 7.0% demonstrating how our portfolio has delivered strong returns over a sustained period.
Total Property Return 9.7% 2016 8.9%
Responding to the NHS agenda % of tenant covenant
86% 2016 87%
13.2 years 2016 14 years NHS percentage is the proportion of our rent roll that is paid directly by GPs or NHS bodies.
Weighted Average Unexpired Lease Term WAULT is the average period until the next available break clause in our leases weighted by rent.
These measures show who we provide our buildings to and how long our existing leases last for demonstrating our position as a longterm partner to the NHS.
Developments both completed during the year and currently on site illustrate how our buildings are chosen by the NHS to provide a modern facility to suit the primary care needs of that particular location.
In a year of growth the WAULT of 13.2 years and effective NHS backing of rent of 86% have remained strong showing how investments during the year fit with our existing portfolio.
Development activity has improved during the year with two schemes completed during the year and six on site at the year end.
Although development activity in the sector has not yet returned to the levels we would hope for we have a pipeline of eight schemes development cost 36 million that we would hope to be on site in next 1218 months.
Complete developments 13.8m 2 sites 2016 16.4m 4 sites Developments on site 31.0m 6 sites 2016 13.5m 2 sites
Investing in our people and social infrastructure BREEAM rating achieved on developments  Very Good or better 100% 2016 100% BREEAM is the worlds foremost environmental assessment method and rating for buildings and sets the standard for best practice in sustainable building design construction and operation.
An Energy Performance Certificate EPC gives a building a rating for energy efficiency.
Strong performance against these measures demonstrates our commitment to building sustainable buildings that improve the local infrastructure.
Both of the developments completed during the year achieved our target of a BREEAM rating of Very Good and exceeded our target for EPC ratings by achieving an average of A.
In addition we are on site with our first zero carbon and energy neutral building and we expect all buildings on site to meet our BREEAM and EPC ratings targets.
Average EPC rating 2016 B
Leveraging our teams skills to maximum advantage EPRA Cost Ratio 13.7% 2016 16.5% EPRA EPS 2016 2.0p A reducing EPRA Cost Ratio shows the efficiency and scale benefits of our operating model being costs as a percentage of rental income.
EPRA EPS is a measure of recurring profit calculated in accordance with EPRA guidelines.
Total Accounting Return is the amount generated for shareholders in the form of dividends and movement in EPRA NAV.
TSR is the amount generated in the form of dividends and movement in share price.
These two measures are key measures in assessing our performance in the form of returns for shareholders and are the measures to which Directors longterm incentive plans are linked.
The efficient integration of the 77 properties acquired during the year has contributed to a reduction in our EPRA Cost Ratio to 13.7%.
This cost efficiency along with the growth achieved and reduction in weighted average cost of debt has been reflected in our EPRA EPS increasing to 2.4 pence per share.
Our Total Accounting Return of 12.0% reflects capital growth achieved during the year along with the consistent dividend returned to shareholders.
The TSR of 13.2% illustrates how the ratio of share price to EPRA has increased.
As at 31 March 2017 the share price premium to EPRA NAV was 17% 2016 15%.
Total Accounting
12.0% 2016 7 .2% Total Shareholder
13.2% 2016 11.4% Performance Explanation and our growth in net asset value NAV.
Lastly we consider Total Shareholder Return TSR as measured by the stock market which reflects the value of dividends paid and the relative movement in our share price over the period.
These measures are complementary and should build on each other although the share price movement is also affected by other external factors outside of our control.
By managing the Property Return and Accounting Return over the medium term we should be able to deliver a superior TSR to our investors.
This overriding objective is reflected in the longterm management incentive schemes implemented with rewards linked to both TSR and NAV growth over a threeyear period.
Further detail is provided in the Remuneration Report on pages 52 to 65.
In order to achieve these objectives we have four strategic priorities and how we monitor ourselves against them is outlined below site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Resources and relationships Managing our resources to maximise value in the longterm.
What makes us unique is our emphasis on long term relationships to support our develop invest and manage business model aiming to create value for all stakeholders.
Brand
We place great value on our reputation as a longterm partner to our GP tenants supporting them through the lifecycle of their medical centre.
This reputation and our excellent relationships within the GP community lead to off market acquisition opportunities with GPs as our greatest source of referrals.
Our established track record in providing state of the art primary care premises helps secure our appointment on developments.
People
We have a small but very knowledgeable skilled and focused team.
Our internally managed model is highly scalable and our development capability enables us to grow the business without significant increase in overheads.
We recognise that our success depends on the quality of our people and we encourage all of our employees to reach their full potential.
Staff who wish to undertake relevant training are supported through study support and paid study leave and we currently have nine members training for professional qualifications including accountancy chartered secretarial chartered surveyor and marketing.
We also seek to promote from within and there have been several internal promotions during the past few years.
We strive to provide a great place to work and focus on employee wellbeing providing private medical insurance a cycle to work scheme and other incentives to promote a healthy lifestyle.
We understand the value of gender diversity and the structure and gender makeup of the Board senior management team and employee workforce is shown on page 27.
Our whistleblowing hotline allows staff and suppliers to raise any issues of concern in complete confidence.
No issues have been raised this year.
All of the above help us to attract engage and develop our people to enable the effective delivery of the Groups strategy over the longterm.
95.9% of tenants would recommend us shareholder meetings held in the year As far as the sale and leaseback process is concerned I found that Assura and NHS England have both been very supportive.
As a result we are now in a good position to recruit an additional doctor to work at the medical centre.
Thank you for your very kind support.
Dr Eddie F Lee Featherstone Family Health Centre Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Capital and funding Over the past few years we have significantly increased our shareholder base strengthening our financial soundness.
Shareholder engagement is a key priority for the business and 95 investor meetings have been held in the year.
We engage with our shareholders in an open and transparent way.
We have continued to strengthen our financial position through reducing our financing costs and improving the financial structure to make it more appropriate to support our business.
We have diversified our debt funding and obtained unsecured lending through a revolving credit facility and a US private placement.
Having these unsecured facilities increases operational flexibility and reduces transaction costs associated with financing properties.
We are grateful to our shareholders and debt providers for their support.
Customer relationships Our dedicated team of asset managers looks after our tenants property needs through regular communication and a supportive approach to property management.
Customer satisfaction is vital for the business and we monitor this through regular surveys.
In our most recent survey over 95% of tenants who responded said they would recommend us as potential landlords to other GPs.
We seek to develop a longlasting relationship with GPs working to meet their current and future premises aspirations.
Assura were absolutely fantastic to work with so straightforward and very good at working with the purchaser to achieve tight timescales.
Kevin Whitfield Wellspring Properties site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Supplier partnerships We work closely with our specialist healthcare developer partners including the leading architectural practice in the sector West Hart Partnership to secure development appointments and create state of the art healthcare premises.
We encourage the use of local suppliers to support local economies and our suppliers must confirm adherence to our zero tolerance modern slavery and antibribery policies.
We have worked hard with our external lawyers to streamline the acquisition and development process increase efficiencies and reduce costs.
Environmental impact We are committed to sustainable development and the creation of bespoke leading edge premises with minimal running costs and a flexible design capable of adapting to evolving needs.
We realise that our healthcare premises are crucial to the local health economy and aim to enhance the patient experience wherever possible.
To reduce the environmental impact of new developments we aim to achieve BREEAM rating of Excellent where possible.
The two new build properties completed during the year achieved ratings of Very Good and our first zero carbon and energy neutral building is currently on site.
The greenhouse gas emissions from operating activities and property occupied by the Group represented 91.3 mt CO e 2016 74.5mt CO e.
I have worked in conjunction with Assura within my role as a Practice Manager for the past four years.
I have developed a good working relationship with my portfolio manager Andy ensuring we provide a safe comfortable modern premises for our patients and staff.
Assura are committed to developing GP premises and aim to provide continuous support to practices to accommodate the changes within primary care.
Michelle Frankish Practice Manager Eastfield Medical Centre Resources and relationships continued Jim Hart and Steve West  West Hart Partnership Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Database and technology We have created a bespoke database of GP premises throughout the UK and this assists with targeted marketing and evaluation of acquisition opportunities with regard to their strategic importance to the local health economy.
Our investment in IT allows staff to access all relevant information when attending clients premises and to work remotely if necessary.
The threat of cyberattack evolves in sophistication and scope and we continue to monitor the security of our systems to mitigate this risk.
The NHS This is a particularly challenging time for the NHS as the headlines remind us every day.
And behind those headlines primary care estate sits as a relatively unheard story  yet recognised this year as second only to workforce in the list of factors that will ensure a sustainable future for primary care.
We believe the primary care estate is a fundamental part of the NHS conversation without the right buildings in the right places for patients many GPs simply will not have the infrastructure they need to offer extended appointment hours digital consultations and more services tests and treatment in the community.
We have welcomed the Governments focus on this issue this year with the ongoing Estates and Technology Transformation Fund the Naylor Review highlighting the important role of private investment for primary care premises and additional capital announced for the most advanced STPs.
However it is clear that despite these initiatives investment in the primary care estate still is not moving far enough or fast enough to meet the changing needs of GPs and to support the shift of services out of hospital and closer to home.
We are investing in specialist inhouse expertise to help us engage with and inform NHS organisations national and local government sector bodies patient groups and academics on ways in which we can help ensure the right primary care estate is in place today for the NHS of tomorrow.
We are proud to chair the British Property Federations Healthcare Committee working with our colleagues and partners across health and social care property to provide data expert analysis and policy solutions to government.
Employee gender diversity Male Female Board of Directors 4 1 Senior management 4 3 Employees 25 21 Total no.
Including NonExecutive Directors.
As a percentage breakdown Board of Directors 80% 20% Senior management 57% 43%
54% 46% Photovoltaic cells at Ardudwy Health Centre Harlech site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Risk management Effective risk management is crucial in delivering our strategic objectives.
Risk management is the responsibility of the Board which sets the risk appetite and tolerances for the business determines the nature and extent of the principal risks the Company is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives and ensures that risk management and internal controls are embedded in the businesss operations.
We target above market risk adjusted returns in our chosen healthcare real estate assets by developing assets ourselves as opposed to purchasing only completed developments and using debt to gear returns up to 50% loan to value LTV.
However we seek to avoid trap or heavily mitigate risks in all other areas of the business including Property event risk  by full insurance cover full due diligence and committed funds for acquisitions Development risk  by only undertaking developments where there is already an agreement for lease in place Control risk  by clear management controls and Board reporting Gearing risk  we maintain an appropriate range of lenders and debt maturities with variable rate debt being restricted to one third of our loan book on gearing up to 50% LTV Political risk  which could limit future growth but does not affect the current business assets.
The Risk Committee met six times in the year to review the risk register identify emerging risks and conduct deep dives into individual risks to ensure that sound assurance is in place.
The Risk Committee reports to the Audit Committee which regularly monitors risk management and internal control systems and reports to the Board.
The Board has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the business.
These are the risks which would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity and are summarised on pages 30 to 33.
The Board has also considered which of the Groups strategic objectives may be affected by these risks and its findings are set out in the table below.
During the year the Risk Committee Audit Committee and the Board considered the impact of Brexit on the basis that the Group is a wholly UK based operation with no reliance on exports and concluded that it did not in itself constitute a significant risk to the business.
Cyber security was investigated and following an upgrade to the IT systems security and processes during the year it was considered that an appropriate level of risk mitigation was in place.
Strategic objective
Expertise
Sustainability
Effectiveness
Principal risk
Changes to government policy Competitor threat Reduction in investor demand Failure to communicate
Reduction in availability andor increase in cost of finance Failure to maintain capital structure and gearing
Development overspend Key staff dependency Underperformance of assets Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2014 the Code the Board has conducted a review of the Companys current position and principal risks to assess the Companys longerterm viability.
A fiveyear period is considered appropriate for this review as this corresponds with the Companys strategic planning timeframe.
In addition the longterm nature of leases and debt facilities supports an assessment over this period.
Company forecasts are prepared using a comprehensive financial model which projects the income statement balance sheet cash flows and key performance indicators over the relevant timeframe.
The model allows various assumptions to be applied and altered in respect of factors such as level of investment investment yield availability and cost of finance rental growth and potential movements in interest rates and property valuations.
Having made reference to the principal risks facing the Company as laid out on pages 30 to 33 sensitivities which are considered severe but within the realms of possibility have been applied to the assumptions to review the potential impact on the Companys results and financial position.
Specific sensitivities applied include increases in interest rates a prolonged downturn in property investment valuations an increased risk of tenant default and a sustained absence of rent review growth.
This assessment has not assumed any significant changes to government policy with respect to NHS estates strategies or the GP reimbursement model or any specific implications as a result of Brexit.
Based on this consideration of principal risks and the forecasting exercise completed the Board has a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the fiveyear period assessed.
The Board considers that the longterm nature of the leases and financing arrangements in place means that the business model would remain viable in the event that further growth of the business was not achieved.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Principal risks and uncertainties Strategic risks Changes to government policy Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Reduced funding for primary care premises expenditure could lead to a reduction in our development pipeline and growth prospects.
A change to the reimbursement mechanism for GPs could lead to a change in the risk profile of our underlying tenants.
The Group proactively engages with the Government over policy that could impact the business both directly and through the Healthcare Committee of the British Property Federation.
The Board monitors changes in government policy and management reports to the Board at every meeting.
Net risk rating
Estates strategies and STPs have recommended increasing investment in the primary care estate.
The reimbursement mechanism is not currently under review.
The Group has recently recruited a head of public affairs with NHS experience to make the case to the Government and the NHS of the benefit of investment in primary care infrastructure.
Competitor threat Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Increased competition from new purchasers could lead to a reduction in our ability to acquire new properties and a general increase in prices across the sector.
We maintain our specialist knowledge team structure and strong brand recognition with GPs and focus heavily on customer care.
The Board receives regular property reports highlighting where we have lost to competitors and when new entrants are identified.
The market is increasingly competitive and every proposed transaction is reviewed by our Investment Committee to ensure that the prospective returns are adequate.
Continuing use of our specialist expertise.
Net risk rating
A further significant increase in asset prices increases the risk of these returns not achieving our required level and our rate of acquisitions slowing significantly.
We have made substantial additions to our portfolio during the year.
Reduction in investor demand Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Reduced investor demand for UK primary care property could lead to a reduction in asset valuations and a fall in future profits.
This could arise from Changes in NHS policy Health of the UK economy Availability of finance Relative attractiveness of other asset classes.
We are open in communicating our strategy to investors and maintain an LTV range which is acceptable to the market.
The overall economy and its impact on the Groups operations are regularly assessed and considered in reviewing the Groups strategy.
The Board receives regular reports on investor relations and the development of our share register.
The dividend yield and the underlying strength of the cash flows supporting it remain attractive relative to other asset classes.
Net risk rating
The fundamentals for our sector remain very strong and the longevity and security of our cash flows have continued to generate strong investor demand for our shares in the past year.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Failure to communicate Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Failure to adequately communicate the Companys strategy and explain performance may result in an increased disconnect between investors perceptions of value and actual performance.
Strategic priorities are clearly articulated in corporate communications and the Groups performance is transparently reported.
We communicate regularly with investors and analysts.
The Board receives regular reports on investor attitudes and the market.
The Group maintains close links with its two brokers which communicate investor thoughts and concerns.
Investor communication particularly through facetoface meetings remains a key priority.
Net risk rating
95 meetings have been held during the year.
Financial risks Reduction in availability andor increase in cost of finance Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
A reduction in available financing could adversely affect the Groups ability to source new funding and refinance existing facilities.
This could delay or prevent the development of new premises.
Increasing financing costs could increase the overall cost of debt to the Group and so reduce underlying profits.
The Group has predominantly longterm facilities which reduce these refinancing risks.
The Group regularly monitors and manages its refinancing profile and cash requirements.
The Group actively engages with a range of funders to ensure a breadth of funder and maturity profiles.
We continue to explore financing options with other lenders as well as maintaining strong relationships with existing lenders.
Net risk rating
The current appetite for lending into the sector is very strong given the quality of the underlying cash flows and during the year the Group obtained 300 million of unsecured debt at attractive rates.
Failure to maintain capital structure and gearing Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Property valuations are inherently uncertain and subject to significant judgement.
A fall in property values or income could adversely affect bank covenants.
Breach of covenants could lead to forced asset disposals which could reduce the Groups net assets and profitability.
Valuations and yields are regularly benchmarked against comparable portfolios.
The Board has established a target range for a net LTV ratio over the medium term of 40% to 50%.
All financial forecasting including for new acquisitions considers gearing and covenant headroom.
The Group engages two external valuers to review property valuations.
The valuations are formally reviewed by the Board twice a year.
Covenant headroom and gearing are regularly monitored with reference to possible valuation movements and future expenditure.
The Board regularly reviews the capital structure of the Group.
It is possible to dispose of properties to preserve covenants as certain facilities are unsecured.
Net risk rating
The level of gearing is currently at 37% and this provides generous covenant headroom.
Key
New
No change
Medium
High site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Operational risks Development overspend Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Development risk could adversely impact the performance of the Group as a result of cost overruns and delays on new projects.
The Group has a dedicated and experienced development team.
The Groups policy is to engage in developments that are substantially prelet with fixed price or capped price build contracts.
A high level of due diligence is undertaken before works commence and detailed designs are negotiated to prevent variations.
Regular reviews are conducted of latest cost estimates as each project progresses.
We remain confident of our ability to manage this risk through our experienced team of development surveyors and reduce the potential risk through the use of fixed price contracts and the use of performance bonds.
A performance bond insures against the risk of the main contractor becoming insolvent.
Net risk rating
The potential impact of this has not changed during the year as the number of developments remains at a historically low level.
Key staff dependency Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Failure to recruit develop and retain staff and Directors with the right skills and experience may result in underperformance.
Competitive salary and benefit packages are aligned with appropriate peer groups and periodically benchmarked.
Professional development and training are encouraged and costs are met by the Group.
Succession plans are in place for each department.
Longterm incentive plans span fiveyear periods to encourage retention of key staff.
Succession planning team structure and skill sets are regularly evaluated and planned.
The appraisal process acts as a two way discussion forum to identify employee aspirations and any dissatisfaction.
Any employee resignations are reported at each Board meeting.
Net risk rating
Nine members of staff are currently working towards a professional qualification.
We successfully recruited six qualified surveyors a qualified accountant and a head of public affairs in the year and staff turnover remains low.
Principal risks and uncertainties continued Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Underperformance of assets Risk Avoid Trap Mitigate
Not all rent reviews are upwards only and challenges to reviews and appeals could lead to lack of rental growth.
The Group engages experienced third parties to conduct rent reviews.
Leases are carefully reviewed on acquisition and the Group does not acquire leases with a tenant right to trigger a downward rent review.
The Group targets Retail Price Index RPI reviews for new leases but if this is unachievable then open market upwards only reviews or open market landlord trigger only reviews are accepted.
Net risk rating Loss of income could arise from failing practices handing back GP contracts losing the right to rent reimbursement and becoming unable to meet their financial obligations under the lease.
The strategic importance of a practice to its location is a key investment decision.
We are in regular contact with GPs to ensure there are no financial issues.
We liaise with GPs and NHS commissioning bodies to ensure continuing provision of services from that practice.
GPs remain personally liable as named individuals under the lease.
We review financial information provided by the NHS on our tenants and as part of the acquisition due diligence.
Net risk rating
Approximately 28% of leases have fixed uplifts or are linked to RPI.
There are very limited cases of GPs threatening to hand back medical contracts and we are in active discussion with the tenants and NHS commissioning bodies in these cases.
Key
New
No change
Medium
High site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Business review A year of growth delivering further scale benefits.
Portfolio as at 31 March 2017 1315.3 million 2016 1088.0 million Our business is built on our investment portfolio of 398 properties with a passing rent roll of 74.4 million 2016 63.8 million 86% of which is underpinned by the NHS.
The WAULT is 13.2 years and 75% of the rent roll will still be contracted in 2027 .
At 31 March 2017 our portfolio of completed investment properties was valued at a total of 1315.3 million see Note 10 to the accounts 2016 1088.0 million which produced a net initial yield NIY of 5.10% 2016 5.29%.
Taking account of potential lettings of unoccupied space and any uplift to current market rents on review our valuers assess the net equivalent yield to be 5.29% 2016 5.52%.
Adjusting this Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors standard measure to reflect the advanced payment of rents the true equivalent yield is 5.47% 2016 5.72%.
Our EPRA NIY based on our passing rent roll and latest annual direct property costs was 5.05% 2016 5.23%.
Net rental income 67.9 58.4 Valuation movement 56.5 36.4 Total Property Return 124.4 94.8 Expressed as a percentage of opening investment property plus additions Total Property Return was 9.7% compared with 8.9% in 2016.
Our annualised Total Return over the five years to 31 December 2016 as calculated by IPD was 8.9% compared with the IPD All Healthcare benchmark of 7.0% over the same period.
The valuation gain in the year of 56.5 million represents a 5.6% uplift on a likeforlike basis net of actual purchase costs associated with properties acquired during the year.
The uplift has arisen due to the downward pressure on yields with increased demand for assets in the sector.
Despite the downward pressure the NIY on our assets continues to represent a substantial premium over the 15year gilt which traded at 1.49% at 31 March 2017 .
Investment and development activity We have invested substantially during the period with this expenditure split between investments in completed properties developments forward funding projects extensions and fitout costs enabling vacant space to be let as follows Acquisition of completed medical centres 155.6
Likeforlike portfolio improvements 2.4 Total capital expenditure 178.9 The bulk of the growth in our investment portfolio has come from the acquisition of 76 properties seeing us invest 155.6 million during the period.
Details of our properties valued over 10 million are on page 3.
Despite the continued delay in NHS approval of new developments we have completed two developments during the period both under forward funding agreements with a total development cost of 13.8 million.
This has added 0.7 million to our annual rent roll and generated a 5.0% yield on cost.
Total Property Return 9.7% 2016 8.9% Capital invested 2016 144.9m EPRA Cost Ratio 13.7% 2016 16.5% Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 During the year we recorded a revaluation gain of 1.5 million in respect of investment property under construction and a deficit of 0.7 million in respect of land held for sale.
This resulted in a net gain of 0.8 million 2016 0.7 million.
As at 31 March 2017 we had six developments on site under a forward funding agreement with a total committed investment value of 31.0 million and a further eight which we would hope to be on site shortly estimated cost of 36.0 million.
Live developments and forward funding arrangements
Development costs
West Gorton July17 3.5m 2.3m 1280 sq.
Swansea Dec17 2.0m 1.2m 979 sq.
Kibworth Jun17 2.8m 1.5m 975 sq.
Woodville Oct17 2.9m 1.6m 993 sq.
Middlesbrough Jan18 18.3m 4.7m 4389 sq.
Wivenhoe Jan18 1.5m 0.5m 628 sq.
Portfolio management We have continued to deliver rental growth and have successfully concluded on 156 rent reviews during the year to generate a weighted average annual rent increase of 1.57% 2016 1.20% on those properties.
Our
The majority of our portfolio is subject to open market reviews and these have generated an average uplift of 0.88% during the period.
We have a dedicated team of asset managers who are in regular communication with our customers and we monitor progress through regular customer satisfaction surveys.
During the period we have secured 15 new tenancies with an annual rent roll of 0.4 million covering 4377 square metres.
Our EPRA Vacancy Rate was 2.1% 2016 3.0%.
Administrative expenses The Group analyses cost performance by reference to EPRA Cost Ratios including and excluding direct vacancy costs which were 13.7% and 12.4% respectively 2016 16.5% and 16.0%.
We also measure operating efficiency as the proportion of administrative costs to the average gross investment property value.
This ratio during the year was 0.57% 2016 0.60% and administrative costs stood at 7.0 million 2016 6.1 million.
Portfolio analysis by capital value Number of properties
Total value % Portfolio analysis by region Number of properties
Total value % Midlands 77 274.2 21 Scotland 21 44.8 3 Wales 26 66.0 5 Portfolio analysis by tenant covenant
Total rent roll % NHS body 13.7 18 Pharmacy 5.6 8 Other 4.8 6 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Financing In May 2016 we replaced our existing 120 million revolving credit facility with a new fiveyear 200 million facility on an unsecured basis.
The initial interest rate is 150 basis points above LIBOR subject to leverage.
Subsequent to the year end we have further extended this facility to 250 million.
In October 2016 we announced that the Group had signed agreements in the US private placement market for new unsecured 10year notes totalling 100 million.
These have a fixed interest rate of 2.65% and were drawn in full.
At 31 March 2017 we had undrawn facilities and cash of 123.3 million.
Financing statistics 2017 2016 Net debt 499.6m 327.9m
Weighted average interest rate 4.06% 4.84% % of debt at fixedcapped rates 81% 88% Interest cover 296% 218% Loan to value 37% 30% Interest cover is the number of times net interest payable is covered by EPRA earnings before net interest.
Our LTV ratio currently stands at 37% which is below our target range of 4050% but will increase as we invest in our pipeline in the short term.
81% of the debt facilities are fixed with a weighted average debt maturity of 8.7 years compared with a WAULT of 13.2 years which highlights the security of the cash flows of the business.
Business review continued Details of the facilities and their covenants are set out in Note 17 to the accounts.
Net finance costs presented through EPRA earnings in the year amounted to 20.6 million 2016 24.0 million.
In addition 1.4 million of loan issue costs were written off following the change in the revolving credit facility.
EPRA earnings Net rental income 67.9 58.4
Net finance costs 20.6 24.0
EPRA earnings 40.3 25.5 The movement in EPRA earnings can be summarised as follows Year ended 31 March 2016 25.5 Net rental income 9.5 Administrative expenses 0.9 Net finance costs 3.4 Sharebased payments and taxation 2.8 Year ended 31 March 2017 40.3 EPRA earnings has grown 58% to 40.3 million in the year to 31 March 2017 reflecting the property acquisitions completed and the reduced finance costs from reducing our LTV and the average cost of borrowings.
Alternative Performance Measures APMs The financial performance for the year is reported including a number of APMs financial measures not defined under
We believe that including these alongside IFRS measures provides additional information to help understand the financial performance for the year and calculations with reconciliations back to reported IFRS measures are included where possible.
Underlying profit is no longer reported to avoid confusion being similar to the industry standard EPRA measure.
Earnings per share The basic earnings per share EPS on profit for the period was 5.8 pence 2016 2.2 pence.
EPRA EPS which excludes the net impact of valuation movements nonrecurring finance costs and gains on disposal was 2.4 pence 2016 2.0 pence.
Based on calculations completed in accordance with IAS 33 sharebased payment schemes are currently expected to be dilutive to EPS with 3.3 million new shares expected to be issued.
The dilution is not material as illustrated by the table below EPS measure Basic Diluted Profit for year 5.8p 5.8p EPRA 2.4p 2.4p
Total dividends paid in the year to 31 March 2017 were 37.0 million 2016 27.2 million or 2.25 pence per share 2016 2.05 pence per share.
5.1 million of this was satisfied through the issuance of shares via scrip.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 As a REIT with the requirement to distribute 90% of taxable profits the Group expects to pay out as dividends at least 90% of recurring cash profits.
All dividends paid during the year were normal dividends nonPID with an associated tax credit as a result of brought forward tax losses and available capital allowances.
It is expected that some proportion of dividends paid out in the 201718 financial year will need to include a PID element.
The table below illustrates our cash flows over the period Opening cash 44.3 66.5 Net cash flow from operations 39.0 22.9 Dividends paid 31.9 26.3
Property acquisitions 157.9 122.5
Sale of properties 1.4 1.5 Other 0.3 0.2
Net proceeds from equity issuance  299.1
Closing cash 23.5 44.3 Net cash flow from operations differs from EPRA earnings due to movements in working capital balances and noncash items such as sharebased payment charges and movements in deferred tax.
Net assets EPRA NAV movement
EPRA NAV at 31 March 2016 754.5 46.1
Capital revaluations and capital gains 56.4 3.3 Dividends 37.0 2.3 Shares issued 1.7 Other 1.6 0.1 EPRA NAV at 31 March 2017 817.5 49.4 Our Total Accounting Return per share for the year ended 31 March 2017 is 12.0% of which 2.25 pence per share 4.9% has been distributed to shareholders and 3.3 pence per share 7.1% is the movement on EPRA NAV.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Business review continued EPRA performance measures The European Public Real Estate Association EPRA has published Best Practice Recommendations with the aim of improving the transparency comparability and relevance of financial reporting within the real estate sector across Europe.
This section details the rationale for each performance measure as well as our performance against each measure.
Summary table 2017 2016 EPRA EPS p 2.4p 2.0p EPRA NAV p 49.4p 46.1p EPRA NNNAV p 44.7p 42.4p EPRA NIY % 5.05% 5.23% EPRA toppedup NIY % 5.05% 5.23% EPRA Vacancy Rate 2.1% 3.0% EPRA Cost Ratio including direct vacancy costs % 13.7% 16.5% EPRA Cost Ratio excluding direct vacancy costs % 12.4% 16.0% EPRA EPS 2016 2.0p Diluted EPRA EPS 2016 2.0p
Earnings from operational activities.
Purpose
A key measure of a companys underlying operating results and an indication of the extent to which current dividend payments are supported by earnings.
The calculation of EPRA EPS and diluted EPRA EPS are shown in Note 7 to the accounts.
EPRA NAV 2016 46.1p
NAV adjusted to include properties and other investment interests at fair value and to exclude certain items not expected to crystallise in a longterm investment property business.
Purpose
Makes adjustments to IFRS NAV to provide stakeholders with the most relevant information on the fair value of the assets and liabilities with a true real estate investment company with a longterm investment strategy.
The calculation of EPRA NAV is shown in Note 8 to the accounts.
EPRA NNNAV 2016 42.4p
EPRA NAV adjusted to include the fair values of i financial instruments ii debt and iii deferred taxes.
Purpose
Makes adjustments to EPRA NAV to provide stakeholders with the most relevant information on the current fair value of all the assets and liabilities within a real estate company.
The calculation of EPRA NNNAV is shown in Note 8 to the accounts.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EPRA NIY 5.05% 2016 5.23% EPRA toppedup NIY 5.05% 2016 5.23% Definition  EPRA NIY Annualised rental income based on the cash rents passing at the balance sheet date less nonrecoverable property operating expenses divided by the market value of the property increased with estimated purchasers costs.
Definition  EPRA toppedup NIY This measure incorporates an adjustment to the EPRA NIY in respect of the expiration of rent free periods or other unexpired lease incentives such as discounted rent periods and step rents.
Purpose
A comparable measure for portfolio valuations this measure should make it easier for investors to judge for themselves how the valuation compares with that of portfolios in other listed companies.
EPRA Vacancy Rate 2.1 % 2016 3.0%
Estimated rental value ERV of vacant space divided by ERV of the whole portfolio.
Purpose
A pure % measure of investment property space that is vacant based on ERV.
Investment property 1344.9 1109.4 Less developments 20.2 11.5
Allowance for estimated purchasers costs 85.4 71.7 Gross up completed investment property B 1410.1 1169.6 Annualised cash passing rental income 74.4 63.8 Property outgoings 3.2 2.6 Annualised net rents Notional rent expiration of rent free periods or other incentives Topped up annualised rent  C 71.2 61.2 EPRA NIY  AB % 5.05 5.23 EPRA topped up NIY  CB % 5.05 5.23 EPRA Cost Ratio including direct vacancy costs 13.7% 2016 16.5% EPRA Cost Ratio excluding direct vacancy costs 12.4% 2016 16.0%
Administrative and operating costs including and excluding direct vacancy costs divided by gross rental income.
Purpose
A key measure to enable meaningful measurement of the changes in a companys operating costs.
Direct property costs 3.2 2.6 Administrative expenses 7.0 6.1 Sharebased payment costs 0.1 1.9 Net service charge costsfees 0.2 0.2
Ground rent costs 0.4 0.4 EPRA costs inc direct vacancy costs  A 9.7 10.0 Direct vacancy costs 0.9 0.3 EPRA costs exc direct vacancy costs  B 8.8 9.7 Gross rental income less ground rent costs per IFRS 70.7 60.6 Gross rental income  C 70.7 60.6 EPRA Cost Ratio inc direct vacancy costs  AC 13.7% 16.5% EPRA Cost Ratio exc direct vacancy costs  BC 12.4% 16.0% 2017 2016 ERV of vacant space m 1.6 2.0 ERV of completed property portfolio m 76.7 66.5 EPRA Vacancy Rate % 2.1 3.0 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the Corporate Governance Report which sets out how the Board and its Committees operate and how we are committed to maintaining the highest level of Corporate Governance.
People and culture As members of the Board we have an important role in setting the Groups culture.
We strive to lead by example and the Board culture is one of openness mutual respect and constructive debate.
Leadership
The Board is collectively responsible for the longterm success of the Group.
We announced the sad death of Graham Roberts in July 2016.
Graham had been on sick leave since March 2016 and during this period I had been acting as Executive Chairman.
Jonathan
Murphy was appointed Interim CEO in October 2016 and my role reverted to NonExecutive Chairman.
Chairmans introduction to governance Good governance is essential to support the delivery of our strategy.
Simon Laffin NonExecutive Chairman Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We were delighted to confirm Jonathans permanent appointment as CEO in February 2017.
We also welcomed Andrew Darke Property Director to the Board in October 2016 retaining responsibility for the property operations and developments.
Relations with shareholders Effective communication with shareholders is a key priority and 95 investor meetings have been held during the year.
Shareholders are encouraged to attend the Annual General Meeting AGM in July where all Board members will be on hand to answer questions.
Performance evaluation As in previous years we carried out an internal evaluation of the Board and its Committees.
Further details on the process and results are set out on page 47.
The Board was content given its small size and its strong spirit that this years review was conducted internally and at no cost.
This was overseen on a confidential basis by Orla Ball our Company Secretary.
We will keep under review the need for an independent external agency to assist the process.
Effectiveness
I believe that the Board has an effective wellbalanced structure.
Board members have a wealth of skills and experience as shown on pages 44 and 45 which enable them to challenge motivate and support the business.
I consider that all the Directors continue to devote sufficient time to discharging their duties to a high standard and remain committed to their roles.
Remuneration
We were pleased to have received over 99% of votes in favour of both our Remuneration Policy and Remuneration Report at the 2016 AGM and I am grateful to shareholders for the level of engagement and support during the year.
Compliance with the Code As a Board we believe that good governance will support the delivery of the Groups strategy.
In accordance with the Listing Rules I confirm that throughout the year ended 31 March 2017 the Company was compliant with all the relevant provisions as set out in the Code save for during the period when I acted as Executive Chairman.
The Company ceased to be a smaller company as defined by the Code from 1 April 2017 and as such my membership of the Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee does not comply with Code Provisions C.3.1 and D.2.1.
We believe that given the quality of the Board this has in no way adversely affected our performance and controls.
We have commenced the search for a new independent NonExecutive Director who will join these Committees and ensure that we comply with Code Provision B.1.2 which requires at least half the Board to be independent when a new Finance Director is appointed.
I am pleased to confirm that the Company is compliant with all other provisions of the Code at the date of this Annual Report.
Simon Laffin NonExecutive Chairman 22 May 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Audit Committee Executive Board
Risk Committee Investment Committee IT Committee Nominations Committee
Remuneration Committee
BOARD
July 2016 AGM key highlights All resolutions passed.
Full Director attendance.
1249 to 1332 million votes cast for each resolution.
All Directors retired and were reelected to the Board.
Role of the Board The Company has an effective Board which is collectively responsible for the longterm success of the Company by directing and supervising its activities.
The Board has approved a schedule of matters reserved for decision by the Board.
This includes all corporate acquisitions or corporate disposals debt raising above 50 million the Remuneration Policy the annual budget approval and amendments to delegated authorities.
The Board meets at least six times per year for scheduled meetings.
It also meets as required to consider any important or urgent business.
The relevant Board committees are shown below.
Relations with shareholders The Board welcomes open communication with its shareholders and works with its stockbrokers Liberum Capital and Stifel to ensure that an appropriate level of communication is maintained.
The dialogue with shareholders is facilitated by a series of investor relations mechanisms including regular meetings between the Executive Directors institutional investors sales teams and industrysector analysts.
Feedback from these meetings is regularly relayed to the Board in order to ensure that all Board members and NonExecutive Directors in particular develop an understanding of the views of major shareholders.
This process augments the regular dissemination of annual reports and other market updates.
Copies of these announcements and any accompanying presentational materials are available on the Companys website at site The Board responds to ad hoc requests for information from shareholders and all shareholders have access to the Board with an opportunity to raise questions at the AGM and other shareholder meetings.
The Board together with its professional advisors actively analyses the shareholder register.
Accountability
The Board understands its responsibility to present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups position and prospects to assess the principal risks facing the Group to ensure that there are effective systems of risk management and internal control and to provide a statement as to the Groups longterm viability.
The steps it has taken to comply with these requirements are set out in this section of the Annual Report.
Governance framework
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Division of responsibilities Role Responsibilities Chairman  The effective running of the Board Ensuring the Directors receive accurate and timely information Promoting high standards of Corporate Governance Ensuring Board agendas take full account of relevant issues and Board members concerns As Chair of the Nominations Committee ensuring effective Board succession plans are in place CEO  Running the Companys business Implementing the business strategy and culture Regularly updating the Board on progress against approved plans Providing effective leadership of the Executive Board to achieve agreed strategies and objectives NonExecutive Directors  Constructively challenging and helping to develop proposals on strategy Satisfying themselves as to the integrity of the financial information and that there are effective systems of risk management and financial control Serving on relevant Committees Senior Independent Director  Acting as Chair of the Board if the Chairman is conflicted If necessary acting as a conduit to the Board for communicating shareholder concerns Ensuring the Chairman is provided with effective feedback on performance Serving as an intermediary for other Directors when necessary Company Secretary Ensuring good information flow within the Board and Committees Facilitating induction and training of Board members Advising the Board on all governance matters Board and Committee meeting attendance Director Board
Committee
Remuneration
Committee Audit Committee Simon Laffin 77 66 78 44 Jonathan Murphy On appointment as CEO On appointment as CEO 44 David Richardson 77 66 88 44 Jenefer Greenwood Andrew Darke 77 na na 44 Board and Committee meeting timeline MAY 16 JUN 16 JUL 16 AUG 16 SEP 16 OCT 16 NOV 16 JAN 17 DEC 16 FEB 17 MAR 17
Audit
Remco
13 May
5 July
Nomco
20 September
Nomco
20 February
23 March
6 June
23 August
27 September
30 September
17 November
25 February written resolutions
8 August
Nomco
24 January site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Skills and experience Simon has served as Chairman of Assura since 2011 and is Chairman of Flybe Group plc a NonExecutive Director at Watkin Jones plc and Chairman of the Audit Committee of Dentsu Aegis
Previously he served as Chairman of Hozelock Group and a NonExecutive Director of Quintain Estates and Development plc Mitchells and Butlers plc Aegis Group plc and Northern Rock plc as part of the rescue team.
Between 1995 and 2004 he was Group Chief Financial Officer of UK grocery retailer Safeway plc which he joined in 1990 and was latterly also responsible for property.
Prior to that he held a variety of finance and management roles in Mars Confectionery Rank Xerox and BP .
He is a qualified accountant.
Skills and experience Jonathan is the CEO of Assura and was previously the Finance Director having joined the Group in January 2013.
He has significant experience in real estate capital markets and investment gained during his time as Finance Director and Interim CEO of the Group and in his previous position as Managing Director for the property management business of Brooks Macdonald Group plc.
Jonathan was previously Finance Director for the fund management business of Brooks Macdonald and Braemar Group plc.
His earlier career included commercial and strategic roles at Spirit Group and Vodafone.
Jonathan qualified as a Chartered Accountant with PricewaterhouseCoopers holding management roles in both the UK and Asia.
He holds an MBA from IESE the European Business School in Barcelona.
Skills and experience Andrew is a Chartered Surveyor and has been with Assura since flotation having acquired the seed portfolio in 2003.
He has led the property team through its growth since 2003 and been instrumental in all aspects of the property development investment and portfolio management.
Prior to joining Assura Andrew held investment and development roles at Barlows plc Rowlinson Securities plc and Royal and Sun
He started his career at the District Valuers Office following graduation from Liverpool University.
Appointed
August 2011 Other current appointments Simon is also NonExecutive Chairman of Flybe Group plc a NonExecutive Director of Watkin Jones plc and Chairman of the Audit Committee at Dentsu Aegis Network.
Appointed
February 2017 Other current appointments
Appointed
October 2016 Other current appointments
Simon Laffin NonExecutive Chairman Jonathan Murphy
Andrew Darke Property Director Board of Directors Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Skills and experience David is a NonExecutive Director of Assura whose skills and experience include finance and accounting mergers and acquisitions and corporate governance.
Previously he spent 22 years at Whitbread Plc where he was the Strategic Planning Director for eight years and the Finance Director for four years.
At Whitbread he played a pivotal role in transforming the Group from a brewing and pubs company into a market leader in hotels restaurants and leisure clubs.
Following this he has held a number of NonExecutive roles in FTSE listed companies including Serco Group plc Forth Ports plc now called Forth Ports Ltd Tomkins plc now called Gates Worldwide Limited Dairy Crest plc and De Vere Group plc.
He is a Chartered Accountant.
Skills and experience Jenefer is a Chartered Surveyor who started her career at Hillier Parker in 1978 becoming Executive Director and Head of Retail on merger with CBRE.
She worked for Grosvenor Estate from 2003 until 2012.
Jenefers skills include real estate customer focus and marketing.
Jenefer has previously served on the Board of The Crown Estate and chaired its Remuneration
She has held positions as Chair of the National Skills Academy for Retail and President of the British Council of Shopping Centres.
Skills and experience Orla qualified as a solicitor with Eversheds Manchester and gained significant corporate governance and mergers and acquisitions experience working as a corporate lawyer for over 14 years.
Her move inhouse to Braemar Group plc subsequently acquired by Brooks Macdonald plc provided her with further property skills as she looked after the legal matters for its property management and property funds business.
Orla is Head of Legal for the Group and Chair of the Risk Committee.
David Richardson Senior Independent Director Jenefer Greenwood OBE NonExecutive Director Orla Ball Company Secretary
January 2012 Other current appointments David is currently Chairman of BBGI SICAV S. of The Edrington Group.
Independent
Appointed
May 2012 Other current appointments Jenefer sits on the Supervisory Board of INTERNOS Global Investors and was appointed to the Board of DCH Group in August 2014.
Independent
Appointed
April 2015 Other current appointments
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Effectiveness Strategy property and funding Regular updates on portfolio and portfolio valuations Approval of unsecured revolving credit facility and private placement and consideration of future funding requirements Regular public affairs updates and presentations by internal and external speakers Consideration and debate on future strategy Leadership culture and people Staff recruitment and leaver updates Staff succession updates from Nominations Committee Appointment of CEO and Property Director following Nominations Committee recommendation Setting the Groups culture and leading by example Approval of whistleblowing hotline Financial performance Regular financial updates and reviews of KPIs Approval of dividends and dividend policy Competitor analysis Review of direct property costs vacant space and asset enhancements initiatives Approval of final and interim results and trading statements Updates on REIT requirements Internal control and risk management Setting the Groups risk appetite Reviewing the risk register and internal controls following Audit Committee recommendations Review of IT systems and capital expenditure requirements Consideration of Brexit implications Market Abuse Regulation training and implementation of share dealing and inside information policies Governance stakeholders and shareholders Setting the environmental modern slavery and antibribery policies Approval of electronic shareholder communications Consideration of shareholder activism Regular review of shareholder register Investor roadshow feedback Governance updates Board activities in the year The table below shows a selection of Board activities in the financial year.
Board Committees To assist in its Corporate Governance responsibilities the Board has established standing Committees.
All NonExecutive Directors and the Chairman served on all Committees.
This was appropriate given the relatively small size of the Board.
Each
Committee follows Terms of Reference which are reviewed annually and are available on the Companys website.
However Simon Laffin stepped down from the Audit Committee during his period as Executive Chairman.
Information flow The Board manages the Groups growth closely and secures its understanding of the business through comprehensive Board papers which include minutes of all Executive Board meetings and also through staff presentations.
At least one Board meeting a year is held at the Groups head office in Warrington and Board members meet staff in an informal setting before the meeting to encourage feedback and foster a closer relationship between staff and the Board.
Time commitments Other directorships of the Board members are set out on pages 44 and Executive Directors are permitted to serve on other boards if they can demonstrate this will not interfere with their time commitment to the Company.
At present neither of the Executive Directors holds any NonExecutive Director positions.
The Nominations Committee remains satisfied that all Directors devote sufficient time to discharging their duties to a high standard and are committed to their roles.
Induction and professional development On appointment new Directors receive a full briefing on the role duties and responsibilities of a director of a listed company and on the Company and its Board.
An induction pack with important information is provided.
Training needs are reviewed annually as part of the Board evaluation.
Each Board member is permitted to take professional advice on any matter which relates to their position role and responsibilities as a director at the cost of the Company and have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who advises the Board on Corporate Governance matters.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Reelection of Directors In accordance with Corporate Governance best practice it is the Companys policy that all Directors will submit themselves for reelection at the 2017 AGM.
All Directors resigned and were reelected at the 2016 AGM.
Board and Committee performance evaluation An internal evaluation of the Board and its Committees was carried out during the year.
Board members completed a comprehensive questionnaire returning it confidentially to the Company Secretary who prepared an anonymous summary of the results.
The feedback was extremely positive.
The only significant points to arise were The continued need for succession planning for all roles at the appropriate time The benefit of a greater diversity of skills at Board level The requirement for a further NonExecutive Director to ensure compliance with the Code A need for further strategic discussion and consideration of emerging issues.
Board composition Chairman 1 Executive Directors 2
Directors
Board strengths
NonExecutive Chairman Executive Director NonExecutive Director Simon Laffin NonExecutive Chairman Experienced Chairman
Finance
Andrew Darke Property Director Real Estate Customer Focus
Jonathan Murphy
Corporate Finance Capital Markets
Risk Management
Jenefer Greenwood NonExecutive Director Real Estate Customer Focus
David Richardson Senior Independent Director Finance and Accounting Mergers and Acquisitions Corporate Governance
The Nominations Committee will be focusing on succession planning and recruitment of a new NonExecutive Director this year and the Board will continue to devote more time to strategic discussions.
The 2015 evaluation had noted the opportunity for enhanced nonfinancial performance measures and at least three nonfinancial performance measures were included in the Executive Board objectives for the year.
Board tenure in current role 02 years 2 46 years 3 Board gender balance Female 1 Male 4 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Responsibilities The Terms of Reference which are reviewed annually and are available to view on the Companys website require the Nominations Committee the Committee to meet at least once per year.
Key issues Reelection of all Directors at the July 2016 AGM.
Responding to the illness of our CEO and temporary arrangements to cover his absence.
Appointment of interim and permanent CEO and the Property
Review of succession planning.
Review of Board composition Committee composition and Committee Chairmanship.
Consideration of training needs and skills updating.
Board performance evaluation.
Considered and confirmed that the NonExecutive Directors were independent.
Nominations Committee Report Nominations Committee members Simon Laffin Committee Chair Jenefer Greenwood Jonathan Murphy since February 2017 David Richardson Number of meetings in the year
Attendees
Orla Ball  Company Secretary Key activities of the Committee Board and Committee changes The Committee met six times through the year tackling a number of significant issues.
In particular it debated how to respond to the absence from work and then sad death of our CEO Graham Roberts both in the short term and for longerterm succession.
In the first instance the Committee decided to appoint me as Executive Chairman in March 2016 when Graham Roberts took three months sick leave during his treatment for cancer.
Following
Grahams sad death in the summer the Committee began an extensive search for a new CEO first by selecting executive recruitment firm Odgers Berndtson which has no other connection with Assura from a shortlist of three such firms to assist with the process.
The firms brief was to provide a long and then a short list of external candidates together with consideration of any internal candidates.
A long list of potential candidates was reviewed by the Committee and from this a short list selected.
The Committee then interviewed a number of candidates.
In October 2016 the Board appointed on the recommendation of the Nominations Committee Jonathan Murphy as Interim CEO enabling me to revert to my former role as NonExecutive Chairman.
In February 2017 the Committee recommended to the Board that Jonathan Murphy was the best candidate for the role and so the Board approved his appointment.
Jonathan had proved himself a capable leader whilst Interim CEO and with his knowledge and experience gained as Finance Director the Committee considered him to be the right person for the role.
The Committee also recommended that Andrew Darke be appointed to the Board as Property Director.
The
Board approved this appointment in October 2016.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Commitments of the Chairman I am also NonExecutive Chairman of Flybe Group plc and NonExecutive Director at Watkin Jones plc.
The
Committee considered that I manage my time effectively in order to allocate sufficient time to each of my roles.
Diversity
The Board believes that a diverse workforce and management team improve the culture of the organisation and add value to the business as a whole.
Odgers Berndtson was particularly tasked with searching for possible CEO candidates who could increase the diversity of the Board.
The Board targeted having at least 20% female representation which was achieved in 2012.
The Committee will continue to consider gender and wider aspects of diversity such as experience nationality disability and age when recommending any future Board appointments and recruitment firms are instructed to include a diverse list of candidates for the Committees consideration.
Final appointments will always be made on merit.
Succession planning Succession planning was a focus of the Committee during 2016.
The Committee considered the immediate cover required for the CEO position as well as considering development of talent within the business to fill more senior roles over the medium and long term.
The Committee acknowledges that given the size of the workforce there will not be successors for every senior role.
However the culture of the business is to develop our people and promote from within where possible.
The Committee has identified the need for a further NonExecutive Director to ensure compliance with the Code and has appointed recruitment firm The Zygos Partnership to assist with the search process.
Following Jonathan Murphys appointment as CEO the position of Finance Director must now be filled and Warren Partners has been selected to assist with the recruitment process.
Jonathan will continue to fulfil the Finance Director role until a suitable candidate is found.
Board performance evaluation The Board has reviewed its performance and the performance of its Committees and individual Directors based on an internal evaluation overseen by the Company Secretary on a confidential basis in January 2017.
The Board concluded that its access to relevant information is good the strategy and goals of the Company are clear and discussions around the boardroom table are constructive and challenging.
The
Board continues to have an appropriate mix of skills and experience as shown in the strengths table on page 47 which will be supplemented by the skills of the new Finance Director and NonExecutive Director once appointed.
The Nominations Committee also met in the absence of the Chairman to appraise the Chairmans performance.
There were no major changes adopted in the way the Board operates.
Simon Laffin Chair of the Nominations Committee 22 May 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Audit Committee Report
Financial statements and reports To monitor the integrity of the half year and annual financial statements before submission to the Board reviewing significant financial reporting matters and judgements focusing particularly on matters of material financial impact.
To review the effectiveness of the Companys system of internal control.
To conduct an annual review of the need to establish an internal audit function.
To discuss the issues arising from the interim and final audits.
To monitor and review annually the auditors independence objectivity and effectiveness.
To develop and implement the policy for provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor.
To make recommendations to the Board in relation to the selection process for the appointment of the external auditor.
Key activities of the Committee Financial statements and reports Reviewed the Annual Report and financial statements and half year financial report and made recommendations to the Board regarding the approval of these documents.
Review of external audit Reviewed considered and agreed the scope and fees for the audit work to be undertaken by the external auditor.
Reviewed the effectiveness performance and fees of the external auditor.
Review of external valuers Received presentations from both external valuers and raised queries on these.
Reviewed the effectiveness performance and fees of the external valuers.
Review of Committee The Committee reviewed its performance and was found to be performing to a high standard.
Review of risk management and internal controls Reviewed the effectiveness of the Companys internal controls and risk management processes and the disclosures made in the Annual Report.
Received the minutes from the Risk Committee and reviewed the principal risks derived from the risk register along with any movement in those risks in the year.
Reviewed the appropriateness of the accounting policies and the design and operation of the internal controls.
Others
Monitored compliance with the REIT rules.
Reviewed the requirement for an internal audit function.
Reviewed the viability statement and supporting evidence.
Reviewed the approved treasury counterparties.
Audit Committee members David Richardson Committee Chair Jenefer Greenwood Simon Laffin Reappointed following return to NonExecutive Chairman position Number of meetings in the year
Additional attendees  as appropriate Deloitte LLP Savills Commercial Limited and Jones Lang LaSalle Jonathan Murphy  CEO Andrew Darke  Property Director Orla Ball  Company Secretary Paul Carroll  Financial Controller David Purcell  Group Finance Manager Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear Shareholder As Chairman of the Audit Committee the Committee I have pleasure in setting out below the formal report on its activities for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The Committee is aware of the Codes requirements in relation to risk and the monitoring of internal control systems.
During the year the Committee received minutes from the meetings of the Risk Committee reviewed the risk register monitored the Groups risk management and internal control systems and was kept appraised of the upgrades being made to the IT systems security and processes.
The Committee has not identified any significant failings or weakness in these control systems during the year.
The Committee performs a detailed review of the content and tone of the Annual Report and half year results and has satisfied itself that there are robust controls over the accuracy and consistency of the information presented.
Accordingly the Committee has advised the Board that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Company ceased to be a smaller company as defined by the Code on 1 April 2017 and as such membership of the Audit Committee does not comply with Code Provisions C.3.1.
We have commenced the search for a new independent NonExecutive Director to join the Committee.
Significant financial reporting matters Valuation of investment properties including those under construction valuations and yields are discussed with management and benchmarked against comparable portfolios.
The two external valuers present to and are challenged by the Committee on their valuations.
Validity of the going concern basis and the availability of finance going forward  the Committee considers the financing requirements of the Group in the context of committed facilities and evaluates managements assessment of going concern and the assumptions made.
The external auditor also reports to the Committee following its review.
Viability statement  the Committee considered the viability statement proposed for inclusion in the Annual Report and the supporting analysis produced by management.
The statement was approved for inclusion in the 2017 report and appears on page 29.
Other financial reporting matters In addition to the significant financial reporting matters discussed above the Committee considers other financial reporting matters as and when they arise to ensure appropriate treatment in the accounts.
During the year this included the following Sharebased payment charges for the Value Creation Plan VCP and Performance Share Plan PSP.
Distributable reserves within the Group.
Presentation of nonrecurring expenses such as loan issue costs written off.
Internal restructuring plan for banking purposes.
We are satisfied that there were no matters arising from each of the above that we wish to draw to the attention of the shareholders.
Internal controls The Groups internal control systems include a detailed authorisation process formal documentation of all transactions a robust system of financial planning including cash flow forecasting and scenario testing and a robust appraisal process for all property investments.
Changes to internal controls or controls to respond to changing risks identified are addressed by the Risk Committee with appropriate escalation to the Audit Committee as required.
Internal audit The Audit Committee is satisfied that the current level of control and risk management within the business adequately meets the Groups current needs.
The Committee considers that the additional cost of an internal audit department is not currently justified.
However specific pieces of work are commissioned by the Audit Committee to examine particular processes and controls as deemed necessary.
Auditnonaudit fees payable to external auditor The external auditor did not carry out any services beyond the audit of this Annual Report and review of the interim accounts.
The fees paid to the external auditor are disclosed in Note 4a to the accounts and the policy for nonaudit services is in the Audit Committee Terms of Reference available on our website.
Effectiveness of external audit process The Committee assessed the effectiveness of the external audit process initially reviewing and challenging the audit planning memorandum prepared by Deloitte and then monitoring fulfilment of this plan.
The Committee received regular feedback from management on the service and support provided by Deloitte had a meeting at the end of the audit to discuss judgements and concluded that the external audit was carried out efficiently and effectively with objective independent challenge.
Accordingly the Committee recommends Deloittes reappointment at the 2017 AGM.
Deloitte was appointed following a competitive tender in March 2012 and the latest date by which the Company is required to tender and appoint an external auditor is for the financial year beginning 1 April 2022.
The current lead auditor Rachel Argyle was appointed in March 2015.
There are no current intentions to conduct an audit tender in the next 12 months.
David Richardson Chair of the Audit Committee 22 May 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Remuneration Report
The Terms of Reference which are reviewed annually and are available to view on the Companys website require the Committee to meet at least once per year.
The Committees activities during the year included Consideration of objectives and targets for annual bonuses Consideration of annual pay awards and bonuses Overseeing the continued vesting of awards under the VCP Commencing operation of the new PSP Addressing remunerationrelated issues arising from the changes to the Executive Board.
Remuneration Committee members Jenefer Greenwood Committee Chair Simon Laffin David Richardson Number of meetings in the year
Additional attendees  as appropriate Jonathan Murphy  CEO Orla Ball  Company Secretary FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to introduce the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
This report has been prepared by the Remuneration Committee the Committee and approved by the
The report is split into two parts The Directors Remuneration Policy  which provides an at a glance summary of the Remuneration Policy for which shareholder approval was obtained at the 2016 AGM and which will continue to apply without amendment for the forthcoming year.
The Annual Report on Remuneration  which sets out payments and awards made to the Directors and details the link between Company performance and remuneration for the 201617 financial year.
We were very pleased to secure such strong levels of support from shareholders at the 2016 AGM for our new Remuneration Policy with over 99% of votes in favour of this resolution and the accompanying resolution to establish the new PSP.
As no changes are proposed to the existing policy only one remuneration resolution will be tabled at the 2017 AGM i.
Annual Report on Remuneration.
Context to the Committees decisions The last financial year marked a further period of success for Assura with continued strong growth.
See our Business Review on pages 34 to 39.
201617 also saw various changes in the structure of our Executive Board to reflect Graham Roberts very sad death.
It was in this context that the Committee made its key decisions which included Agreeing to pay Jonathan Murphy a nonpensionable and nonbonus attracting salary supplement of 5417 per month to reflect his assuming the role of Interim CEO between 3 October 2016 and 27 February 2017 when he was appointed to the role of CEO and became entitled to a base salary of 335000 Agreeing the package of Andrew Darke upon his appointment to the Board as Property Director Determining the approach to Grahams remuneration following his death Reflecting another year of strong performance determining that the Executive Directors earned bonuses equal to 72.8% and 65.5% of salary for Jonathan Murphy and Andrew Darke respectively.
Further details of how this bonus outturn was calculated can be found on page 58.
Making the first awards under Assuras new PSP which will vest based upon performance against a blend of absolute NAV per share and TSR growth targets Confirming that the next outstanding tranche of the VCP awards could vest the minimum TSR threshold having been met for that tranche as described more fully on page 60.
Remuneration in 201718 We do not intend to alter our approach to executive remuneration in the forthcoming year the main features of which will be Base salaries Jonathan Murphys and Andrew Darkes base salaries will be 335000 unchanged and 225000 increased by 5000 respectively.
Annual bonus We will retain the current approach to bonus target setting and assessment.
Therefore the performance objectives set under the annual bonus will continue to relate to matters such as valueadded opportunities within the portfolio and from market activity financial targets customer satisfaction etc.
Jonathan
Murphys maximum bonus opportunity will be 100% reflecting our policy for the CEO role with Andrew Darkes maximum bonus being 75% of salary.
A deferred share element was introduced into the annual bonus plan as part of last years policy review under which up to 50% of any bonus earned by an Executive Director is deferred into shares for two years to the extent that the Executive Director does not already hold shares worth at least 300%.
Clawbackmalus provisions will continue to apply.
Longterm incentives A further round of awards will be made under the PSP over shares worth 150% of salary which will vest based on performance against a blend of absolute NAV per share and TSR growth targets.
A twoyear post vesting holding period will also apply unless shares worth 300% of salary are already held with clawback malus provisions also applying.
In conclusion I trust you find this report helpful and informative.
I look forward to receiving your support for the resolution on the Annual Report on Remuneration at our forthcoming AGM.
Jenefer Greenwood Chair of the Remuneration Committee 22 May 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information PART A REMUNERATION POLICY AND PRACTICE AT A GLANCE Shareholder approval was obtained at the 2016 AGM for a new Directors Remuneration Policy.
This policy has been developed with regard to the UK Corporate Governance Code and is felt to be appropriate to support the longterm success of the Company while ensuring that it does not promote inappropriate risk taking.
More particularly the policy is framed to support the Companys strategic drivers which are set out on pages 18 and 19.
The Committee aims for the policy and its use of performance metrics to support shareholder value creation by incentivising sustainable performance consistent with the strategic drivers and appropriate risk management and that The interests of shareholders and management should be aligned Excessive risk taking should be discouraged and effective risk management given due consideration It should retain and motivate based on selection and interpretation of appropriate benchmarks Poor performance should not be rewarded The longterm interests of the Company should be promoted.
Our goal is to maximise returns for shareholders over the long term.
Our
Total Property Return  measuring income and capital appreciation generated from the portfolio.
Total Accounting Return  measuring total reported returns for the Company after all overheads and including the effect of leverage.
Total Shareholder Return  the dividend and capital appreciation experienced by shareholders.
Our remuneration arrangements either directly or indirectly encourage delivery of outstanding performance against these KPIs.
The table below shows progress on the three KPIs over the last three years Total Property Return 24.1% Total Accounting Return 28.0% Total Shareholder Return 49.7% Our full policy can be found in last years Report and on our website site.
However for convenience we have set out opposite a summary of the policys key terms
Remuneration Report continued
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Element Operation Maximum opportunity Fixed remuneration Base salary An Executive Directors base salary is considered by the Committee on appointment and then reviewed periodically or when an individual changes position or responsibility.
When making a determination as to the appropriate salary level the Committee first considers remuneration practices within the Group as a whole and where considered relevant conducts objective research on companies within the Companys peer group.
The results of any benchmarking will only be one of many factors taken into account by the Committee.
Other
Individual performance and experience Pay and conditions for employees across the Group The general performance of the Company The economic environment.
In the normal course of events increases in the Executive Directors salaries will not exceed the average increase for employees save where there is a clear misalignment with market levels.
However individuals who are recruited or promoted to the Board may on occasion have their salaries set below the targeted policy level until they become established in their role.
In such cases subsequent increases in salary may be higher than the average until the target positioning is achieved.
Pensionbenefits A market competitive suite of benefits is provided which are reviewed periodically to ensure that they remain appropriate.
Executive Directors can receive pension contributions to personal pension arrangements or if a Director is impacted by annual or lifetime limits on contribution levels to qualifying pension plans the balance or all can be paid as a cash supplement.
Benefit values vary year on year depending on premiums and the maximum value is the cost of the provision of these benefits.
The maximum employers contribution is 20% of base salary.
Actual contributions are currently 13.5% for the CEO and the Property Director.
Performancebased variable remuneration Bonus Payouts may be made in a mix of cash and deferred shares determined by the Committee following the financial year end based on achievement against a range of financial and strategic targets which may include but are not limited to Delivering specific addedvalue activities Delivering financial goals Improving operational performance Developing the performance capability of the team.
Bonus payments are not pensionable but are subject to clawback provisions.
The maximum annual bonus for Executive Directors is 100% of salary.
At threshold performance 0% of maximum can be earned.
At target up to 75% of maximum can be earned.
Longterm incentives Awards under the PSP may be granted as nilnominal cost options or conditional awards which vest to the extent performance conditions are satisfied over a period of at least three years with a post vesting holding period also potentially applying.
Vested awards may also be settled in cash.
Clawback and malus provisions apply to PSP awards.
150% of base salary in normal circumstances up to 300% if the Committee considers that it is in shareholders interests to do so e. circumstances exist relating to a recruitment.
Shareholding requirement Executive Directors may not sell any shares acquired via any sharebased incentive plan if the sale would take their shareholding below the shareholding requirement.
The Executive Directors are expected to acquire shares equal to at least 300% of their salary.
At the Committees discretion this may be acquired over a timeframe determined by the Committee.
The full policy also provides full details of our approach to Setting performance targets for the annual bonus and PSP Committee discretions Differences between our approach to remuneration for Executive Directors and the wider workforce Travel and hospitality Considering the views of our shareholders Recruitments terminations and service contracts Chairman and NonExecutive Directors fees External appointments.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Illustrations of application of Remuneration Policy The policy of the Committee is to align Executive Directors interests with those of shareholders and to give the Executive Directors incentives to perform at the highest levels.
To achieve this the Committee seeks to ensure that a significant proportion of the remuneration package varies with the performance of the Company and that targets are aligned with the Companys stated business objectives.
The composition and total value of the Executive Directors remuneration package for the financial year 201718 at minimum ontarget and maximum performance scenarios are set out in the charts below Fixed elements MIninum Ontarget Maximum MIninum Ontarget Maximum CEO  Jonathan Murphy Property Director  Andrew Darke Annual variable Multiple reporting periods 100% 44% 32% 100% 48% 35% 28% 28% 27% 22% 22% 41% 30% 43% 1235k Assumptions used in determining the level of payout under given scenarios are as follows
Consists of base salary benefits and pension.
Base salary is the salary to be paid in 201718.
Benefits measured as benefits paid in the year ended 31 March 2017.
Pension measured as the defined contribution or cash allowance in lieu of Company contributions of 13.5% of salary.
Base salary
Pension
Total fixed Jonathan Murphy Andrew Darke Ontarget Based on what the Director would receive if performance were ontarget excluding share price appreciation and dividends Annual bonus consists of the ontarget bonus 75% of maximum opportunity used for illustrative purposes.
Longterm incentive consists of the midpoint level of vesting 50% vesting under the PSP.
Maximum
Based on the maximum remuneration receivable excluding share price appreciation and dividends Annual bonus consists of maximum bonus of 100% of salary for Jonathan Murphy and 75% of salary for Andrew Darke.
Longterm incentive consists of the face value of awards at 150% of salary.
Total equity exposure of Executives at 31 March 2017 Jonathan Murphy and Andrew Darke owned 1640346 and 1159115 shares respectively as at 31 March 2017.
A table summarising their interests is included in the Annual Report on Remuneration Part B below on page 62.
Remuneration Report continued
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PART B ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION  UNAUDITED UNLESS STATED This Annual Report on Remuneration contains details of how the Companys Remuneration Policy for Directors was implemented during the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
This report has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the Regulations.
An advisory resolution to approve this report will be put to shareholders at the AGM.
Consideration by the Committee of matters relating to Directors remuneration The members of the Committee during 201617 were Jenefer Greenwood Committee Chairman Simon Laffin and David Richardson.
The members of the Committee have no personal financial interest other than as shareholders in matters to be decided and no potential conflicts of interest arising from crossdirectorships.
Other
The Committee is responsible for recommending to the Board the remuneration policy for Executive Directors and the senior management and for setting the remuneration packages for each Executive Director.
The Committee sets the fees of the Chairman and the fees for the Non Executive Directors are set by the Chairman in conjunction with the CEO.
The Committee also has oversight of the remuneration policy and packages for other senior members of staff.
The written Terms of Reference of the Committee are available on the Companys website and from the Company on request.
The Committee held eight meetings during the year.
Its activities during and relating to the financial year 201617 included Consideration of objectives and targets for annual bonuses Consideration of annual pay awards and bonuses Overseeing the continued vesting of awards under the VCP Commencing operation of the new PSP Addressing remunerationrelated issues arising from the changes to the Executive Board Preparing this report.
Advisors to the Committee During 201617 the Committee received advice from FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FIT its independent advisor.
FIT is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The
Committee reviewed the nature of the services provided by FIT and was satised that no conict of interest exists or existed in the provision of these services.
The total fees paid to FIT in respect of services to the Committee during the year were 42500.
Fees were determined based on the scope and nature of the projects undertaken for the Committee.
The Committee also sought the views of Jonathan Murphy during the year.
The CEO is given notice of all meetings and at the request of the Chairman of the Committee attends part of the meetings.
The CEO may request that he attends and speaks at Committee meetings.
In normal circumstances the CEO will be consulted on general policy matters and matters concerning the other Executive Director and employees.
Single total figure of remuneration  Executive Directors audited The remuneration of Executive Directors showing the breakdown between components with comparative figures for the prior year is shown below.
Figures provided have been calculated in accordance with the Regulations Executive Director 000 Year Salary
Pensions
Longterm incentives
Graham Roberts 201617 101 5  17 3366 3489 2015 3114 3747 Jonathan Murphy 2015 1445 1812 Andrew Darke 2016  277 Further details of Graham Roberts remuneration can be found on page 64.
Jonathan Murphys 201516 longterm incentive figure includes the value of vested Executive Recruitment Plan awards.
Andrew Darke joined the Board on 3 October 2016 and figures above relate to amounts after appointment only.
A portion of Jonathan Murphys bonus for 201617 is deferred as explained on page 58.
The longterm incentives column includes the value of the VCP awards that vested during the year as described more fully below.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Remuneration Report continued
Taxable benefits comprised health insurance death in service benefits critical illness group income protection and company car allowance.
201617 annual bonus plan outcome In determining the award for 201617  the Committee took into account the Companys financial performance and achievements against key shortterm objectives established at the beginning of the year.
This involved establishing in advance what would constitute success for good strong or outstanding performance.
The performance targets and performance are summarised below.
It is the Committees approach to view the performance in the round at the end of the year taking into account extraneous events and changing priorities where relevant.
The key success factors for the year were identified as continuing to increase the investment portfolio and to reduce the overall cost of borrowing.
For 201617 the maximum potential bonus awards were 100% of salary for Graham Roberts as CEO and 75% of salary for Jonathan Murphy and Andrew Darke.
Following Graham Roberts resignation due to illhealth in June 2016 no bonus was paid to him relating to 201617.
Performance measures Actual targets set at the beginning of the year Actual performance outcome Grow the scale of the portfolio Good 105 million additions Strong 140 million Outstanding 190 million Strong 173 million Grow income through extensions annualised Good 140000 additional rent Strong 175000 Outstanding 215000
Let vacant space Good 360000 Strong 510000 Outstanding Strong 556000 Deliver underlying budget Good 100% Strong 105% Outstanding 110% Strong 105% Reduce average cost of debt Good 30 basis points reduction Strong 40 basis points Outstanding 50 basis points Outstanding 78 basis points Increase the percentage of tenants asserting they would recommend Assura to others Good 90% Strong 92.5% Outstanding 95% Outstanding 96% The Committee reviewed the performance of Jonathan Murphy.
His financial targets were as above overall being rated Strong.
His individual targets were to develop a data analytic tool to financially appraise current and prospective tenants deepen his understanding of the wider healthcare property market sustain excellent communication with the Board and deliver an operational efficiency and savings plan.
The Committee concluded that Jonathan had performed strongly on all these objectives.
It also noted that Jonathan assumed additional responsibility during the year following the resignation of Graham Roberts and was appointed Interim CEO on 1 October 2016 and confirmed as CEO on 27 February 2017.
As a result the Committee decided to award Jonathan a bonus of 177652 equating to 72.8% 93.2% of maximum bonus of his total salary excluding the salary supplement paid to him while acting as Interim CEO.
The Committee also considered the performance of Andrew Darke.
His financial targets were as above overall being rated Strong.
His individual targets were to strengthen and develop the property team deepen his understanding of the wider healthcare property market sustain excellent business performance communication with the Board and continue to enhance the GP property market database.
The Committee concluded that Andrew had performed strongly on these objectives.
As a result the Committee decided to award Andrew a bonus of 144100 equivalent to 65.5% 87.3% of maximum bonus of annual base salary.
Up to 50% of any bonus earned by an Executive Director must be deferred into shares for two years to the extent that the Executive Director does not already hold shares worth at least 300% of salary.
While Andrew Darke holds the requisite number of shares Jonathan Murphy does not resulting in a portion of his bonus being deferred.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Total pension entitlements No Executive Director or any member of staff is entitled to a defined benefit pension arrangement.
Graham Roberts Jonathan Murphy and Andrew Darke received payments in lieu of pension contributions equivalent to 20.0% 13.5% and 13.5% of salary respectively for 201617.
Vesting of longterm incentive awards audited Value Creation Plan As reported previously to take account of three significant capital raising events certain adjustments were made to the VCP payout algorithm to ensure the potential VCP benefit created at each Measurement Date was Attributable to managements performanceachievement of the VCP performance conditions i. an 8% p.
Aligned with the value created for shareholders during the relevant measurement period.
More particularly the Committee amended the Threshold Price applicable to the first Measurement Date i.
20 August 2015 whereby for each capital raising event to be known as Tranches a Threshold Price was set which must be exceeded before any value could be earned by participants.
The paragraphs below summarise the alterations.
The Threshold Price applicable to each Tranche of shares at the first Measurement Date was set as follows
Shares
Original
Threshold
Price pence
Threshold
Price pence Share capital at the start of the VCP 1 529.5 39.37 39.37 Capital issued for MP Realty Holdings Ltd acquisition 2 44.3 39.37 44.95 Capital issued following placingoffer to shareholders 3 414.3 39.37 45.06 Capital issued for Metro MRI Ltd acquisition 4 18.8 39.37 51.29 Each Tranche under the VCP was tested on the first Measurement Date and on 20 August 2015 was subject to the original terms and conditions of the VCP except that as shown above each Tranche had its own Threshold Price.
At subsequent Measurement Dates i.
Tranche will be the higher of The highest return achieved at any previous Measurement Date treated as separate Tranches and 8% p.
TSR from the Base Price for Tranche 1 or the capital raising priceprice on the day of issue for Tranches 2 3 and 4 and others if further capital raising events occur.
Each Tranche has its own minimum return threshold which must be achieved before any awards earned and deferred at previous Measurement Dates vest at the second or third Measurement Dates.
This means that awards rolled over i. but not vested from previous Measurement Dates must sustain an 8% p.
TSR from the Base Price for Tranche 1 or the capital raising priceprice on the day of issue for Tranches 2 3 and 4.
The maximum aggregate number of shares that can be issued to satisfy awards under the VCP to all participants remained limited to 25 million.
Therefore no adjustments were made to the cap on the number of shares that could be earned under the VCP as a result of the changes to the share capital.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information As previously reported the first Measurement Date occurred on 20 August 2015.
The table below sets out the actual value creation under the VCP as calculated at the first Measurement Date using as prescribed in the plan rules the average share price over three months following the announcement of the Companys financial results for the 201415 financial year plus dividends paid on shares in issue Tranche 1 pence per share Tranche 2 pence per share Tranche 3 pence per share Tranche 4 pence per share Average share price at first Measurement Date A 56.27 56.27 56.27 56.27 Dividends paid per share in issue B 5.0625 2.40 1.95 1.50 Measurement Price CAB 61.3325 58.67 58.22 57.77 Threshold Price T 39.37 44.95 45.06 51.29 Value created CT 21.9625 13.72 13.16 6.48 As per the VCP performance condition the total participant benefit available was 10% of the above value created for each Tranche multiplied by the number of shares in each Tranche which amounts in total to 17.8 million.
As a consequence of the Companys strong performance up to the first Measurement Date the VCP units converted virtually in full into nilcost options over 24999950 shares out of the total 25 million pool.
This resulted in Graham Roberts units converting into 11779255 nilcost options Jonathan Murphys into 5153423 options and Andrew Darkes into 5889627 options.
Under the rules 50% of any shares that accrued at the first Measurement Date in the form of nilcost options became exercisable at the first Measurement Date 50% of the remainder become exercisable at the second and 100% at the third provided the minimum return thresholds for each Tranche are achieved at each Measurement Date.
On 25 September 2015 Messrs Roberts and Murphy exercised the first 50% of their nilcost options resulting in them receiving after the payment of income tax and NICs 3121503 and 1365657 shares respectively.
The share price on 25 September 2015 was 54.25 pence.
On 30 August 2016 Messrs Murphy and Darke exercised the next 25% of their nilcost options resulting in them receiving after the payment of income tax and NICs 682829 and 780376 shares respectively.
The share price on 30 August 2016 was 58.5 pence.
Graham Roberts held outstanding awards under the VCP on his death.
The Committee exercised its discretion to allow these outstanding awards including the Tranche that was due to vest in 2017 to vest at the same time as the 2016 award using the minimum return threshold used in 2016 this award already having provisionally vested in full in 2015.
The impact of the conversion of the Executive Directors units into nilcost options and the above exercises is set out in the table below
Year of grant
Granted during the year
Exercised during the year
Exercise price
Graham Roberts 2015 2944814   2944814  Nilcost Aug 1623 Graham Roberts 2015 2944813   2944813  Nilcost Aug 1723 Jonathan Murphy 2015 1288356   1288356  Nilcost Aug 1623 Jonathan Murphy 2015 1288355    1288355 Nilcost Aug 1723 Andrew Darke 2015 1472407   1472407  Nilcost Aug 1623 Andrew Darke 2015 1472406    1472406 Nilcost Aug 1723
Remuneration Report continued
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Performance Share Plan Shareholder approval was obtained at the 2016 AGM for the establishment of a new PSP.
The following awards were made under the PSP to Messrs Murphy and Darke over shares worth 150% of salary Executive Date of grant
Awards granted during the year
Awards lapsed during the year
Normal vesting exercise date Jonathan Murphy 8 August 2016  607759   607759 From 8 August 2019 Andrew Darke 8 August 2016  530172   530172 From 8 August 2019
A twoyear post vesting holding period will apply to the extent that on vesting a participant does not comply with the shareholding guideline in place at that time currently 300% of salary.
The above PSP awards were granted at the closing share price on the day before the grant.
The exercise price is nil.
The minimum share price in 201617 was 49.4 pence and the maximum share price was 60.6 pence.
The closing share price on 31 March 2017 was 57.85 pence.
These awards vest based on performance against the following targets which encourage the generation of sustainable long term returns to shareholders over a three year performance period commencing on the year of grant Absolute TSR growth 50% of award Absolute average annual compound TSR growth over performance period Percentage of this portion of award that vests Below 5% 0% 5% 0% 15% 100% NAV per share growth including the value of dividends paid 50% of award Absolute average annual compound NAV per share growth over performance period Percentage of this portion of award that vests Below 5% 0% 5% 0% 15% 100% Straight line vesting will occur between each target.
Single total figure of remuneration  NonExecutives audited The remuneration of NonExecutive Directors showing the breakdown between components with comparative figures for the prior year is shown below.
Figures provided have been calculated in accordance with the Regulations NonExecutive Director 000 Basic fees
Total fees Simon Laffin 201617 130.5  130.5 David Richardson 201617 36.9 16.5 53.4 Jenefer Greenwood 201617 36.9 8.3 45.2
Additional fees represent Senior Independent Director and Chairman of Board Committee fees.
Simon Laffin received no additional fees for acting as Executive Chairman between March and October 2016.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Statement of Directors shareholding and share interests audited Directors share interests and where applicable achievement of shareholding requirements are set out below.
In order that their interests are aligned with those of shareholders Executive Directors are expected to build up and maintain a personal shareholding equal to 300% of their basic salary in the Company.
Shareholding and other interests at 31 March 2017
Shares required to be held percentage of salary Number of shares required to hold Number of beneficially owned shares Total interests held at 31 March
Executive
Graham Roberts na na 4000000 4000000 na Jonathan Murphy 300 1737251 1640346 1640346 No Andrew Darke 300 1140881 1159115 1159115 Yes
Simon Laffin   3357664 3357664 na David Richardson   414835 414835 na Jenefer Greenwood   117256 117256 na
Shareholding requirement calculation is based on the share price at the end of the year 57.85 pence at 31 March 2017.
Beneficial interests include shares held directly or indirectly by connected persons.
Figures relate to the share interests of Graham Roberts on his death.
Portion of current year bonus deferred as explained on page 58.
The Company funds its share incentives through a combination of new issue and market purchased shares.
The Company monitors the levels of share grants and the impact of these on the ongoing requirement for shares.
In accordance with guidelines set out by the Investment Association the Company can issue a maximum of 10% of its issued share capital in a rolling 10year period to employees under all its share plans with an inner 5% limit applying to discretionary plans.
There has been no movement in Directors shareholdings since the year end.
Performance graph and table The Committee believes that the Executive Directors Remuneration Policy and the supporting reward structure provide clear alignment with the Companys performance.
The Committee believes it is appropriate to monitor the Companys performance against the FTSE All Share Real Estate Investment Trusts index for these purposes.
The graph below sets out the TSR performance of the Company compared to the FTSE All Share Real Estate Investment Trusts index and for comparison the FTSE All Share index over an eightyear period as required by the Regulations
FTSE Real Estate Investment Trusts FTSE All Share
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
Mar
1telRemuneration Report continued Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The table below shows the CEOs remuneration packages over the past eight years Year Name Single figure of total remuneration
Longterm incentive vesting rates as percentage maximum opportunity Jonathan Murphy 1232tel17 Graham Roberts 3489  100 201516 Graham Roberts 3747tel15 Graham Roberts 677 90 201314 Graham Roberts 680 95 201213 Graham Roberts 674 100 201112 Nigel Rawlings 201011 Nigel Rawlings 314 75 200910 Nigel Rawlings from 160310 11 200910 Richard Burrell until 150310 487
Both Graham Roberts and Jonathan Murphys remuneration details have been included as they both served as CEO during the year.
Includes base salary taxable benefits bonus payments for the relevant financial year longterm incentive awards that vested for performance related to the financial year and cash in lieu of pension.
Nigel Rawlings ceased to be a Director with effect from 30 April 2012.
The bonus of 100000 was a oneoff award reflecting his contribution to selling the Pharmacy business.
Richard Burrell ceased to be a Director on 15 March 2010.
During the financial year 200910 Richard Burrell was CEO from 1 April 2009 until 15 March 2010 when Nigel Rawlings assumed the position.
The amounts above are therefore reflective of the relative lengths of service.
Percentage change in the CEOs remuneration The table below compares the percentage increase in the CEOs pay including salary and fees taxable benefits and annual bonus with the wider employee population.
The Company considers the 43 fulltime employee population excluding the Executive Board to be an appropriate comparator group
Taxable benefits % increase
CEO 4.0  na Total employee pay 3.6 1.9 39.7 Average employee pay 3.0 6.0 102.0
No comparison has been made as Jonathan Murphys bonus for the year related to his performance as Finance Director.
Graham Roberts remuneration details have been used as the basis for the above table subject to a prorata increase as appropriate to reflect his part year service.
Relative importance of spend on pay The table below sets out the overall spend on pay for all employees compared with the returns distributed to shareholders Significant distributions m % change Overall spend on pay for employees including Executive Directors 3.3 3.3 Distributions to shareholders by way of dividends 37.0 27.2 36.0 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Payments to past Directors or for loss of office The remuneration of Graham Roberts on his death was approached as follows Graham received his usual pay pension and car allowance plus contractual benefits up to his death.
Graham did not receive any bonus relating to the year.
Graham held outstanding awards under the VCP on his death.
The Committee exercised its discretion to allow these outstanding awards including the Tranche that was due to vest in 2017 to vest at the same time as the 2016 award using the minimum return threshold used in 2016 these awards already having provisionally vested in full in 2015.
Statement of shareholder voting The table below shows the advisory vote on the 201516 Directors Remuneration Report and the binding vote on the new Remuneration Policy at the AGM held on 14 June 2016 2016 AGM resolution Votes for % Votes against %
Annual Report on Remuneration 1320733144 99.09 12097233 0.91 6634 Remuneration Policy 1322798958 99.25 10029694 0.75 8359 Statement of implementation of Remuneration Policy for 201718 Executive Directors
In setting salary levels for 201718 for the Executive Directors the Committee considered a number of factors including individual performance and experience pay and conditions for employees across the Group the general performance of the Company pay levels in other comparable companies and the economic environment.
The salaries for 201718 and the relative increases are set out below Executive Director salary salary 000 % change Jonathan Murphy 335 Andrew Darke 220
Jonathan Murphys salary at the 201617 year end.
Salary on appointment as Director.
Pension and benefits As was the case last year Jonathan Murphy and Andrew Darke will receive payments in lieu of pension contributions equivalent to 13.5% of salary respectively.
Benefits will be provided in line with the Remuneration Policy.
Annual bonus The maximum bonus opportunity for 201718 will be 100% of salary for Jonathan Murphy and 75% of salary for Andrew Darke.
The performance objectives under the annual bonus plan for 201718 will continue to relate to valueadded opportunities within the portfolio and from market activity and financial targets.
The Committee is of the opinion that the precise performance targets for the bonus plan are commercially sensitive and that it would be detrimental to the interests of the Company to disclose them before the start of the financial year.
Appropriate levels of disclosure of the actual targets performance achieved and awards made will be published at the end of the performance period so shareholders can fully assess the basis for any pay outs.
The Committee will also follow the practice of previous years and view the weightings for bonus purposes at the end of the year having regard to all known factors.
As was the case with the 201617 bonus a deferred share element will apply under which up to 50% of any bonus earned by an Executive Director will be deferred into shares for two years to the extent that the Executive Director does not already hold shares worth at least 300% of salary.
Longterm incentives A further grant of awards will be made under the PSP to Jonathan Murphy and Andrew Darke over shares worth 150% of salary which will vest subject to the extent to which the following performance conditions are satisfied.
A post vesting holding period will also apply to the extent that on vesting a participant does not comply with the shareholding guideline in place at that time currently 300% of salary.
Remuneration Report continued
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Absolute TSR growth 50% of award Absolute average annual compound TSR growth over performance period Percentage of this portion of award that vests Below 5% 0% 5% 0% 15% 100% NAV per share growth including the value of dividends paid 50% of award Absolute average annual compound NAV per share growth over performance period Percentage of this portion of award that vests Below 5% 0% 5% 0% 15% 100% Straight line vesting would occur between each target.
NonExecutive Directors The following table sets out the fee rates for the NonExecutive Directors from 1 April 2017 000 % change Chairman fee 133.4 130.5 2.2 NonExecutive Director base fee 37.7 36.9 2.2 Additional fee for Chairmanship of Audit and Remuneration Committee 8.5 8.3 2.4 Additional fee for Senior Independent Director 8.5 8.3 2.4 By order of the Board Jenefer Greenwood Chair of the Remuneration Committee 22 May 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Directors Report Financial and business reporting The Directors present their Annual Report and Accounts on the affairs of the Group together with the financial statements and auditors report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The
Corporate Governance Statement set
The Directors Report and the other sections of this Annual Report contain forwardlooking statements.
The extent to which the Companys shareholders or anyone may rely on these forward looking statements is set out in the Glossary on page 105.
Principal activities Assura plc is a leading primary care property investor and developer.
It owns and procures good quality primary care properties across the UK.
The subsidiary and associated undertakings are listed in Note 9 to the accounts.
Business review
The Group is required to include a business review in this report.
The information that fulfils the requirements of the business review can be found on pages 34 to 39 which are incorporated in this report by reference.
Going concern Assuras business activities together with factors likely to affect its future performance are set out in the business review on pages 34 to 39.
In addition Note 23 to the accounts includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and its exposure to credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Group has facilities from a number of financial institutions none of which are repayable before May 2021 other than modest annual amortisation.
In addition to surplus available cash of 23.3 million at 31 March 2017 2016 43.7 million the Group has undrawn facilities of 100 million at the balance sheet date.
The Groups primary care property developments in progress are all substantially prelet.
The Group has adequate headroom in its banking covenants.
The Group has been in compliance with all financial covenants on its loans throughout the year.
The Groups properties are substantially let with rent paid or reimbursed by the NHS and they benefit from a weighted average lease length of 13.2 years.
They are diverse both geographically and by lot size and therefore represent excellent security.
The Groups financial forecasts show that borrowing facilities are adequate and the business can operate within these facilities and meet its obligations when they fall due for the foreseeable future.
The Directors believe that the business is well placed to manage its current and reasonably possible future risks successfully.
Accordingly the Board considers it appropriate that the financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis of accounting and there are no material uncertainties to the Companys ability to continue to prepare them on this basis over a period of at least 12 months.
Longterm viability statement The Companys viability statement is on page 29.
Internal controls and risk management The Board accepts and acknowledges that it is both accountable and responsible for ensuring that the Group has in place appropriate and effective risk management and internal control systems including financial operational and compliance control systems.
The Board monitors these systems on an ongoing basis and this years review found them to be operating effectively.
Dividends
Details of the dividend can be found in Note 19 to the accounts.
The Group benefits from brought forward tax losses which results in all dividends paid during the year being paid as ordinary dividends with an associated tax credit.
Details of the Groups dividend policy can be found in the business review on page 37.
Supplier payment policy The Group has not signed up to any specific supplier payment code it is Assuras policy to comply with the terms of payment agreed with its suppliers.
Where specific payment terms are not agreed the Group endeavours to adhere to the suppliers standard payment terms.
As at 31 March 2017 the average number of days taken by the Group to pay its suppliers was 10 days 2016 22 days.
Post balance sheet events Subsequent to the year end the revolving credit facility has been extended to 250 million.
Directors liability insurance The Company has arranged insurance cover in respect of legal action against its Directors.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company share scheme The Assura plc Employee Benefit Trust holds 61898 0.004% of the issued share capital of the Company in trust for the benefit of employees of the Group and their dependants.
The voting rights in relation to these shares are exercised by the Trustees who will take into account any recommendation made to them by the Board of Assura plc.
Donations
In the year to 31 March 2017 Assura donated 24850 to charities 2016 26520 all of which were UK registered charities and no contributions were made for political purposes 2016 nil.
More details of our chosen charities can be found on our website.
Employees
Employees are encouraged to maximise their individual contribution to the Group.
In addition to competitive remuneration packages they participate in an annual bonus scheme which links personal contribution to the goals of the business.
Outperformance against the annual targets can result in a bonus award proportionate to the individuals contribution.
Employees are provided regularly with information regarding progress against the budget financial and economic factors affecting the businesss performance and other matters of concern to them.
In addition all staff are eligible to participate in a defined contribution pension scheme.
The views of employees are taken into account when making decisions that might affect their interests.
Assura encourages openness and transparency with staff having regular access to the Directors and being given the opportunity to express views and opinions.
The Group is committed to the promotion of equal opportunities supported by its Equal Opportunity and Diversity Policy.
The policy reflects both current legislation and best practice.
It highlights the Groups obligations to race gender and disability equality.
Full and fair consideration is given to applications for employment from disabled persons and appropriate training and career development are provided.
Share capital As at 31 March 2017 the issued share capital of the Company is 1655040993 Ordinary Shares of 10 pence each.
Authority was obtained at the 2016 AGM for the purchase of up to 10% of share capital if deemed appropriate by the Directors.
This expires at the conclusion of the 2017 AGM.
Interests in voting rights As at 19 May 2017 the Company had been notified of the following interests in accordance with DTR 5 31 March 2017 19 May 2017 Name of shareholder
Shares
Percentage of Ordinary
Invesco Limited 18.97 16.66 Artemis Investment Management 9.99 no change BlackRock BGI 6.50 no change Aberdeen Asset Management 5.06 no change Legal and General 3.01 no change site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Price risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow risk Full details of how these risks are mitigated can be found in Note 23 to the accounts.
Future developments Details of future developments are discussed on pages 34 to 37 in the business review.
Competition and Markets Authority CMA Order The Company confirms that it has complied with the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 published by the CMA on 26 September 2014.
Greenhouse gas emissions The greenhouse gas emissions from the head office activities is provided on page 26.
This has been calculated by reference to kilowatt hours used and miles driven with appropriate conversion factors applied.
Auditor
Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirms that So far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and The Director has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
The Directors on recommendation from the Audit Committee intend to place a resolution before the AGM to reappoint Deloitte LLP as auditor for the year ending 31 March 2018.
Directors Report continued Amendments to the Articles of Incorporation The Articles of Incorporation of the Company may be amended by special resolution of the Company.
Annual General Meeting The AGM of the Company will be held at the offices of DWF 20 Fenchurch Street London EC3M 3AG on 18 July 2017 at 11am.
Both the Directors Report and the Strategic Report were approved by the Board and signed on its behalf.
Orla Ball Company Secretary 22 May 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have also chosen to prepare the Parent Company financial statements under IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements IAS 1 requires that Directors Properly select and apply accounting policies Present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information Provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance and Make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
We confirm that to the best of our knowledge The financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole The strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and The Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board Orla Ball Company Secretary 22 May 2017 Directors Responsibility Statement site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Independent Auditors Report Opinion on financial statements of Assura plc In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups and Parent Companys profit for the year then ended the Group and Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The financial statements that we have audited comprise the Consolidated and Parent Company Income Statements the Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Parent Company Balance Sheets the Consolidated and Parent Company Cash Flow Statements the Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of Changes in Equity and the related notes 1 to 26 and A to F.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group and Parent Company financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Summary of our audit approach Key risk The key risk that we identified in the current year was the valuation of the property portfolio excluding properties under development.
Materiality
The materiality applied in the current year was 16.0 million which was determined on the basis of 2% of net assets and specific materiality applied was 1.9 million which was determined on the basis of 5% of EPRA earnings as defined on page 38.
Significant changes in our approach The following significant changes in our approach from the prior year comprise
In the prior year materiality was determined with reference to profit before tax of which it represented 5% whereas for the current year we have determined materiality for the Group based upon net assets with a lower specific materiality based upon the EPRA profit measure.
Risk identification In the prior year we identified a key risk in relation to acquisitions.
Although the Group has made corporate acquisitions in the year ended 31 March 2017 this was not an area that had a significant effect on our audit strategy nor the allocation of resources in the audit hence it is not considered to be a key risk in the current year.
We have also refined our key risk regarding valuation of the property portfolio to exclude the valuation of properties under development as a significant risk of material misstatement.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Going concern and the Directors assessment of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the Directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained on page 66 of the Directors Report and the Directors statement on the longerterm viability of the Group contained within the Strategic Report on page 29.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation on page 28 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages 30 to 33 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors statement on page 66 of the Directors Report about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements and the Directors explanation on page 29 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We confirm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Independence
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also confirm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Our assessment of risks of material misstatement The assessed risk of material misstatement described below is that which had the greatest effect on our audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
Valuation of property portfolio excluding properties under development Risk description The Group owns and manages a portfolio of 398 modern primary healthcare properties that are carried at fair value in the financial statements.
The portfolio is valued at 1315.3 million as at 31 March 2017 and comprises the majority of the assets in the Group balance sheet.
The Group uses professionally qualified external valuers Savills and Jones Lang LaSalle the Valuers to fair value the Groups portfolio twice annually.
The Valuers are engaged by the Directors and perform their work in accordance with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Valuation  Professional Standards.
The Valuers used by the Group are wellknown firms and have considerable experience in the markets in which the Group operates.
The valuation of the portfolio is inherently subjective and is underpinned by a number of assumptions.
The existence of significant estimation uncertainty coupled with the fact that only a small percentage difference in individual property valuations when aggregated could result in a material misstatement on the income statement and balance sheet warrants specific audit focus in this area.
In determining a propertys valuation the Valuers take into account propertyspecific information such as current tenancy agreements and rental income attached to the asset.
The portfolio excluding development properties is valued by the investment method of valuation.
Key inputs into the valuation exercise are yields and Estimated Rental Value ERV which are influenced by prevailing market yields comparable market transactions and the specific characteristics of each property in the portfolio.
Valuation of property represents a key source of estimation uncertainty for the Group as described in the Groups accounting policies on page 80 and a significant financial reporting matter considered by the Audit Committee as described on page 51.
How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Given the inherent subjectivity involved in the valuation of investment properties the need for deep market knowledge when determining the most appropriate assumptions and the technicalities of a valuation methodology we engaged our internal valuation specialists qualified chartered surveyors to assist us in our audit of this key risk area.
We read the valuation reports for all properties and attended meetings with each of the Valuers.
We confirmed that the valuation approach for each was in accordance with RICS guidance and suitable for use in determining the carrying value in the Group balance sheet.
We assessed the Valuers qualifications and expertise and read their terms of engagement with the Group to determine whether there were any matters that might have affected their objectivity or may have imposed scope limitations upon their work.
We also considered other engagements which exist between the Group and the Valuers.
We carried out procedures on a sample basis to test whether propertyspecific data supplied to the Valuers by management reflected the underlying property records held by the Group and which had been tested during our audit.
We assessed managements process for reviewing and challenging the work of the external Valuers including managements experience and knowledge to undertake this activity.
We observed discussions between management and the Valuers which evidenced that alternative assumptions and recent market transactions were considered and evaluated before the final valuation was determined.
We compared the yields used by the Valuers to an estimated range of expected yields determined via reference to published benchmarks and to recent transactions.
We also considered the reasonableness of other assumptions that are not so readily comparable to published benchmarks such as Estimated Rental Value and void rates.
Additionally we evaluated yearonyear movements in capital value with reference to published benchmarks.
Where assumptions were outside the expected range or otherwise deemed unusual andor valuations appeared to experience unexpected movements we undertook further investigations and when necessary held further discussions with the Valuers in order to challenge the assumptions.
We also considered the adequacy of the Groups disclosures about the degree of the estimation and sensitivity to key assumptions made when valuing these properties disclosed in Note 10.
Key observations We found that the assumptions used in the valuations were supportable in light of available and comparable market evidence.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Independent Auditors Report continued
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Materiality Overall Group materiality 16.0 million.
Specific Group materiality 1.9 million.
Applied to EPRA impacting balances.
Basis for determining materiality 2% of net assets.
5% of EPRA earnings.
Rationale for the benchmark applied In arriving at this judgement we had regard to the carrying value of the Groups assets acknowledging that the primary performance measure of the Group is the carrying value of investment property.
In addition to net assets we consider EPRA earnings to be a critical financial performance measure for the Group and we applied a lower threshold of 1.9 million based on less than 5% of that measure for testing of all impacted balances classes of transactions and disclosures.
The materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 1.5 million for 201516.
This was determined with reference to profit before tax of which it represented 5%.
For 201617 we have determined materiality for the Group based upon net assets with a lower specific materiality based upon the EPRA profit measure.
Given the growth in the business through acquisitions we consider that these two measures better align with the principal considerations of the shareholders of the Group and are more aligned to practices observed with industry peers.
This is a change to the approach adopted last year.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 800000 2016 30000 or 95000 for differences impacting EPRA as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its internal and external environment.
This included assessing Groupwide controls assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level and in particular looking at where the Directors make subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates or adoption of accounting policies that are underpinned by a number of assumptions.
As in all our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
The Group is audited in its entirety by the Group audit team.
Our audit work on the individual subsidiary entities was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each individual entity which were lower than Group materiality.
This results in full scope audit procedures performed on 99% of the Groups net assets.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to conclude that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Corporate Governance Statement
Under the Listing Rules we are also required to review part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the Companys compliance with certain provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
Our duty to read other information in the Annual Report Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the Directors statement that they consider the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the Annual Report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We confirm that we have not identified any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
We also comply with International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are effective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the Parent Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Rachel Argyle Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor Manchester UK 22 May 2017
Independent Auditors Report continued
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site
EPRA
Capital and other
EPRA
Capital and other
Continuing operations Gross rental and related income 3 71.1  71.1 61.0  61.0 Property operating expenses Net rental income Administrative expenses 4 7.0  7.0 6.1  6.1 Revaluation gains 10  56.5 56.5  36.4 36.4 Lossgain on sale of property Sharebased payment charge 20 0.1  0.1 1.9  1.9 Finance revenue 3 0.1  0.1 0.2  0.2 Finance costs 5 20.7 1.4 22.1 24.2  24.2 Early repayment costs 17     34.1 34.1 Profit before taxation Taxation 6 0.1  0.1 0.9  0.9 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent EPRA EPS basic and diluted 7 2.4p EPS  basic EPS  diluted 7 There were no items of other comprehensive income or expense and therefore the profit for the year also reflects the Groups total comprehensive income.
Consolidated income statement For the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated income statement For the year ended 31 March 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 76 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated balance sheet As at 31 March 2017
Noncurrent assets Investment property 10 1344.9 1109.4
Property plant and equipment 11 0.4 0.2 Deferred tax asset 22 0.5 0.4 1345.8 1110.4 Current assets Cash cash equivalents and restricted cash 12 23.5 44.3 Trade and other receivables 13 9.4 7.5 Property assets held for sale Total assets 1379.6 1163.9 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 14 16.4 16.5 Borrowings 17 4.3 4.0 Deferred revenue 15 16.3 14.2 Provisions 16  0.3 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 17 515.8 365.2 Obligations due under finance leases 14 3.0 3.0 Deferred revenue 15 5.8 6.4 Total liabilities Net assets Capital and reserves Share capital 18 165.5 163.8 Own shares held 18  0.6 Share premium Merger reserve
Total equity NAV per Ordinary Share basic 8 49.4p 46.1p diluted 8 49.3p 45.7p EPRA NAV per Ordinary Share basic 8 49.4p 46.1p diluted 8 49.3p 45.8p The financial statements were approved at a meeting of the Board of Directors held on 22 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Simon Laffin Jonathan Murphy NonExecutive Chairman
Consolidated balance sheet As at 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site
Share capital
Share premium
Reserves
Total equity 1 April 2015 Profit attributable to equity holders Total comprehensive income Issue of Ordinary Shares Issue costs
Employee sharebased incentives 31 March 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders Total comprehensive income
Employee sharebased incentives 31 March 2017 Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 78 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated cash flow statement For the year ended 31 March 2017
Operating activities Rent received Interest paid and similar charges Fees received Interest received Cash paid to suppliers and employees Net cash inflow from operating activities 21 39.0 22.9 Investing activities Purchase of investment property Development expenditure Proceeds from sale of property and investments Expenditure on property plant and equipment Net cash outflow from investing activities Financing activities Issue of Ordinary Shares Issue costs paid on issuance of Ordinary Shares Dividends paid 19 31.9 26.3 Repayment of loans 17 59.0 188.5 Longterm loans drawdown 17 210.0 45.0 Early repayment costs 17  34.1 Loan issue costs 17 2.2 1.4 Net cash inflow from financing activities Decrease in cash and cash equivalents Opening cash and cash equivalents Closing cash and cash equivalents 12 23.5 44.3 Consolidated cash flow statement For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts For the year ended 31 March 2017 Corporate information and operations Assura plc Assura is incorporated in England and Wales and the Companys Ordinary Shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange.
As of 1 April 2013 the Group has elected to be treated as a UK REIT.
See Note 6 for further details.
Significant accounting policies Basis of preparation The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis except for derivative financial instruments and investment properties including investment properties under construction and land which are included at fair value.
The financial statements have also been prepared in accordance with IFRSs and interpretations adopted by the European Union and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Standards affecting the financial statements The following standards and amendments became effective for the Company in the year ended 31 March 2017.
The pronouncements either had no material impact on the financial statements or resulted in changes in presentation and disclosure only n Annual improvements 20102012 cycle n Annual improvements 20112013 cycle Standards in issue not yet effective The following standards and amendments are in issue as at the date of the approval of these financial statements but are not yet effective for the Company.
The Directors do not expect that the adoption of the standards listed below will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Company in future periods but are continuing to assess the potential impact effective for periods beginning on or after the date in brackets.
In particular lease income is outside the scope of IFRS 15 and as the Group is a lessor IFRS 16 is not expected to materially impact the treatment of leases to tenants.
The financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis as explained in the Directors Report on page 66 and are presented in sterling.
The accounting policies have been applied consistently to the results other gains and losses liabilities and cash flows of entities included in the consolidated financial statements.
All intragroup balances transactions income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Key sources of estimation and uncertainty The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation and uncertainty at the balance sheet date that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Property valuations The key source of estimation and uncertainty relates to the valuation of the property portfolio where a valuation is obtained twice a year from professionally qualified external valuers.
The evidence to support these valuations is based primarily on recent comparable market transactions on an arms length basis.
However the assumptions applied are inherently subjective and so are subject to a degree of uncertainty.
Property valuations are one of the principal uncertainties of the Group.
Details of the accounting policies applied in respect of valuation are set out on page 80 and they key unobservable inputs relating to the valuations are set out in Note 10.
Notes to the accounts For the year ended 31 March 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 80 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued Critical judgements in applying the Groups accounting policies In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies which are described below the Directors do not consider there to be significant judgements applied with regards to the policies adopted.
Basis of consolidation
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date of acquisition being the date on which the Group obtains control and continue to be consolidated until the date that such control ceases.
Control comprises the power to govern the financial and operating policies of the investee so as to obtain benefit from its activities.
In the Company financial statements investments in subsidiaries are held at cost less any provision for impairment.
In addition the Company recognises dividend income when the rights to receive payment have been established normally when declared and paid.
Where properties are acquired through the purchase of a corporate entity but the transaction does not meet the definition of a business combination under IFRS 3 the purchase is treated as an asset acquisition.
Where the acquisition is considered a business combination the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired is held as goodwill initially recognised at cost with subsequent impairment assessments completed at least annually.
Where the initial calculation of goodwill arising is negative this is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Property portfolio Properties are externally valued on an open market basis which represents fair value as at the balance sheet date and are recorded at valuation.
Any surplus or deficit arising on revaluing investment properties and investment property under construction IPUC is recognised in the income statement.
All costs associated with the purchase and construction of IPUC are capitalised including attributable interest.
Interest is calculated on the expenditure by reference to specific borrowings where relevant and otherwise on the average rate applicable to shortterm loans.
When IPUC are completed they are classified as investment properties.
In determining whether leases and related properties represent operating or finance leases consideration is given to whether the tenant or landlord bears the risks and rewards of ownership.
Leasehold properties that are leased out to tenants under operating leases are classified as investment properties or development properties as appropriate and included in the balance sheet at fair value.
Where an investment property is held under a head lease it is initially recognised as an asset as the sum of the premium paid on acquisition and the present value of minimum ground rent payments.
The corresponding rent liability to the head leaseholder is included in the balance sheet as a finance lease obligation.
The market value of investment property as estimated by an external valuer is increased for the unamortised pharmacy lease premium held at the balance sheet date.
Net rental income Rental income is recognised on an accruals basis and recognised on a straight line basis over the lease term.
A rent adjustment based on open market estimated rental value is recognised from the rent review date in relation to unsettled rent reviews.
Pharmacy lease premiums received from tenants are spread over the lease term even if the receipts are not received on such a basis.
The lease term is the noncancellable period of the lease.
Property operating expenses are expensed as incurred and property operating expenditure not recovered from tenants through service charges is charged to the income statement.
Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Significant accounting policies continued Gains on sale of properties Gains on sale of properties are recognised on the completion of the contract and are calculated by reference to the carrying value at the end of the previous reporting period adjusted for subsequent capital expenditure.
Financial assets and liabilities Trade receivables and payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost and discounted as appropriate.
Other investments are shown at amortised cost and held as loans and receivables.
Loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment.
Interest income is recognised by applying the effective interest rate.
Debt instruments are stated at their net proceeds on issue.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are spread over the period to redemption at a constant rate on the carrying amount of the liability.
Financial instruments Where the Group uses derivative financial instruments in the form of interest rate swaps to hedge its risks associated with interest rate fluctuations they are initially recognised at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value by reference to market values for similar instruments.
The resulting gains or losses are recognised through the income statement.
Cash equivalents are limited to instruments with a maturity of less than three months.
Tax
Current tax is expected tax payable on any nonREIT taxable income for the period and is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the income statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are not taxable or tax deductible.
Deferred tax is provided on items that may become taxable at a later date on the difference between the balance sheet value and tax base value.
Income statement definitions EPRA earnings represents profit calculated in accordance with the guide published by the European Public Real Estate
See Note 7 for details of the adjustments.
Underlying profit is no longer reported to avoid confusion being very similar to the industry standard EPRA EPS measure which is now reported.
Capital and other represents all other statutory income statement items that are excluded from EPRA earnings.
Employee costs Defined contribution pension plans Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans are charged to the income statement as incurred.
Sharebased employee remuneration Sharebased employee remuneration is determined with reference to the fair value of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted and charged to the income statement over the vesting period on a straight line basis.
The fair value of share options is calculated using the Black Scholes option pricing model or the Monte Carlo Model and is dependent on factors including the exercise price expected volatility option life and risk free interest rate.
IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment has been applied to share options granted.
Segmental information The Group is run as one business and as such no segmental analysis is presented for the current or prior year results.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 82 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Rental revenue Other related income Gross rental and related income 71.1 61.0 Finance revenue Bank and other interest 0.1 0.2 Total revenue 71.2 61.2 Administrative expenses
Wages and salaries Social security costs Auditors remuneration 4a 0.2 0.2 Directors remuneration and fees Other administrative expenses a Auditors remuneration Fees payable to auditor for audit of Companys annual accounts 0.1 0.1 Fees payable to auditor for audit of Companys subsidiaries Total audit fees 0.2 0.2 The Audit Committee considers the level of nonaudit fees prior to work commencing to ensure independence is maintained.
The only nonaudit fees incurred during the year were 15000 in respect of the interim review 2016 15000.
Detail of considerations during the year is provided on page 51.
The average monthly number of employees during the year was 39 2016 33.
Key management are the Executive Directors and other key management personnel.
Key management staff Salaries pension holiday pay payments in lieu of notice and bonus 1.4 1.8 Cost of employee sharebased incentives including related social security costs 0.1 1.8 Social security costs 0.3 0.3 Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Finance costs Interest payable 20.4 24.1 Interest capitalised on developments 0.4 0.5 Amortisation of loan issue costs 0.7 0.6 Finance costs presented through EPRA profit 20.7 24.2 Write off of loan issue costs 1.4 Early repayment costs Note 17  34.1 Total finance costs 22.1 58.3 Interest was capitalised on property developments at 5% 2016 5%.
Taxation
Consolidated income tax Deferred tax Relating to origination and reversal of temporary differences 0.1 0.9 Income tax creditcharge reported in consolidated income statement 0.1 0.9 The differences from the standard rate of tax applied to the profit before tax may be analysed as follows Profit before taxation 95.2 28.8 UK income tax at rate of 20% 2016 20% 19.0 5.8 Effects of Nontaxable income including REIT exempt income 18.6 6.0 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes  0.6 Movement in unrecognised deferred tax 0.5 0.5 The Group elected to be treated as a UK REIT with effect from 1 April 2013.
The UK REIT rules exempt the profits of the Groups property rental business from corporation tax.
Gains on properties are also exempt from tax provided they are not held for trading or sold in the three years post completion of development.
The Group will otherwise be subject to corporation tax at 19% in 2018 2017 20%.
The Group tax creditcharge relates to its nonproperty income.
As the Group has sufficient brought forward tax losses no tax is due and so the amount represents the movement in deferred tax.
The movement in part relates to brought forward losses that have been utilised during the year with the remainder representing a change in the estimated losses that will be utilised in the future.
As a REIT the Group is required to pay Property Income Distributions PIDs equal to at least 90% of the Groups rental profit calculated by reference to tax rules rather than accounting standards.
In the year to 31 March 2016 the taxable rental profit of the Group was nil as a result of capital allowances available and consequently no PID was required.
A small PID is expected to be required for the year to 31 March 2017 which will be distributed in due course within the usual quarterly dividends and in advance of the payment deadline of 31 March 2018.
To remain as a UK REIT there are a number of conditions to be met in respect of the principal company of the Group the Groups qualifying activities and the balance of business.
The Group remains compliant at 31 March 2017.
Further reductions in the main rate of corporation tax have been substantively enacted the rate reduced to 19% from 1 April 2017 and will reduce to 17% from 1 April 2020.
These changes have been reflected in the calculation of deferred tax.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 84 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Earnings per Ordinary Share
EPRA earnings
EPRA earnings Profit for the year Early repayment costs Revaluation gains Lossgain on sale of property Write off of loan issue costs EPRA earnings Weighted average number of shares in issue  basic 1647388495 1647388495 1300338908 1300338908 Potential dilutive impact of share options 3243291 3243291 11243261 11243261 Weighted average number of shares in issue  diluted 1650631786 1650631786 1311582169 1311582169 Earnings per Ordinary Share  basic 5.8p 2.4p 2.2p 2.0p Earnings per Ordinary Share  diluted 5.8p 2.4p 2.1p 2.0p As set out on pages 59 and 60 the current estimated number of shares over which nilcost options may be issued to participants of the VCP is 3.2 million 2016 12.5 million.
After allowing for shares held by the Employee Benefit Trust this would amount to a potential issuance of a further 3.2 million 2016 11.2 million shares in September 2017.
Options issued under the PSP are not currently considered dilutive.
Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 NAV per Ordinary Share
NNNAV
EPRA
NNNAV
EPRA NAV Mark to market of fixed rate debt EPRA NNNAV EPRA NNNAV per Ordinary Share  basic The EPRA measures set out above are in accordance with the Best Practices Recommendations of the European Public Real Estate Association dated November 2016.
Mark to market adjustments have been provided by the counterparty or by reference to the quoted fair value of financial instruments.
NAV
EPRA
NAV
NAV
EPRA
NAV
Own shares held Deferred tax EPRA NAV Number of shares in issue 1655040993 1655040993 1637706738 1637706738 Potential dilutive impact of VCP Note 7 3243291 3243291 11243261 11243261 Diluted number of shares in issue 1658284284 1658284284 1648949999 1648949999 NAV per Ordinary Share  basic 49.4 49.4 46.1p 46.1p NAV per Ordinary Share  diluted 49.3 49.3 45.7p 45.8p site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 86 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Below is listing of all subsidiaries of Assura plc Indicates subsidiary owned by intermediate subsidiary of Assura plc.
All companies are wholly owned by the Group and registered in England unless otherwise indicated.
All companies registered in England have a registered address of The Brew House Greenalls Avenue Warrington WA4 6HL.
The companies registered in Guernsey have a registered address of Old Bank Chambers La Grande Rue St Martins Guernsey.
Taking into consideration the facts of each transaction acquisitions of companies owning property completed during the years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 have been accounted for as asset purchases as opposed to business combinations.
The Group also holds an investment in Virgin Healthcare Holdings Limited made up of a 2% equity holding book value nil and a 4 million loan note receivable book value nil 2016 nil.
During the year the Group agreed to dispose of the 15% investment in GB Partnerships Investments Limited at book value 0.4 million.
Property investment companies Holding or dormant companies Abbey Healthcare Group Ltd AH Medical Properties Ltd Abbey Healthcare Property Investments Ltd Assura AHI Ltd Ashdeane Investments Ltd Assura Aylesham Ltd Assura Aspire Ltd Assura Banbury Ltd Assura Aspire UK Ltd Assura CS Ltd Assura Beeston Ltd Assura Financing Ltd Assura CVSK Ltd Assura Grimsby Ltd Assura HC Ltd Assura Group Ltd Guernsey Assura HC UK Ltd Assura HC Holdings Ltd Assura Health Investments Ltd Assura IH Ltd Assura Medical Centres Ltd Assura Investments Ltd Assura PCP UK Ltd Assura Kensington Ltd Assura Primary Care Properties Ltd Assura Management Services Ltd Assura Properties plc Assura Pharmacy Holdings Ltd Guernsey Assura Properties UK Ltd Assura Pharminvest Ltd Assura Trellech Ltd Assura Property Ltd Guernsey BHE Heartlands Ltd Assura Property Management Ltd BHE St James Ltd Assura Retail York Ltd Birchdale Investments Ltd Assura Services Ltd Broadfield Surgery Ltd Assura Southampton Ltd Cae Court Developments Ltd Assura Stanwell Ltd Cloverleaf Investments Ltd Assura Todmorden Ltd Donnington Healthcare Ltd Assura Tunbridge Wells Ltd
Projects Ltd MP Realty Holdings Ltd Malmesbury Medical Enterprise Ltd PCI Management Ltd Medical Properties Ltd PH Investment No.
1 Ltd Metro MRH Ltd Primary Care Initiatives Macclesfield Ltd Metro MRI Ltd Riddings Pharmco Ltd Metro MRM Ltd South Kirkby Property Ltd Newton Healthcare Ltd SPCD Balsall Common Ltd Park Medical Services Ltd SPCD Crawcrook Ltd Pentagon HS Ltd SPCD Davyhulme Ltd PVR Investments Ltd SPCD Didcot Ltd SPCD Silsden Ltd SPCD Kincaidston Ltd The Third Party Development Corporation SPCD Rugeley Ltd Trinity Medical Properties Ltd SPCD Sutton in Ashfield Ltd The 3P Development Ltd Trinity Medical Developments Ltd Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Property assets Investment property and investment property under construction IPUC Properties are stated at fair value which has been determined for the Group by Savills Commercial Limited and Jones Lang LaSalle as at 31 March 2017.
The properties have been valued individually and on the basis of open market value in accordance with RICS Valuation  Professional Standards 2014 the Red Book.
Valuers are paid on the basis of a fixed fee arrangement subject to the number of properties valued.
Initial yields mainly range from 4.40% to 5.00% 2016 4.65% to 5.25% for prime units increasing up to 8.00% March 2016 6.15% for older units with shorter unexpired lease terms.
For properties with weaker tenants and poorer units the yields range from 6.00% to 12.00% March 2016 6.15% and over 8.0% and higher for those very close to lease expiry or those approaching obsolescence.
A 0.25% shift of valuation yield would have approximately a 68.1 million 2016 54.2 million impact on the investment property valuation.
Investment
IPUC
Total
Investment
IPUC
Total
Opening fair value
Development costs
Transfer from assets held for sale Capitalised interest  0.4 0.4  0.5 0.5 Disposals 0.9 0.2 1.1 0.6 0.8 1.4 Unrealised surplus on revaluation Closing market value 1321.7 20.2 1341.9 1094.9 11.5 1106.4 Add finance lease obligations recognised separately 3.0  3.0 3.0  3.0 Closing fair value of investment property 1324.7 20.2 1344.9 1097.9 11.5 1109.4 Market value of investment property as estimated by valuer 1315.3 1088.0 Add IPUC 20.2 11.5 Add pharmacy lease premiums 6.4 6.9 Add finance lease obligations recognised separately 3.0 3.0 Fair value for financial reporting purposes 1344.9 1109.4 Land held for sale 0.9 1.7 Total property assets 1345.8 1111.1 Three land sites are held as available for sale 2016 three land sites.
Fair value hierarchy The fair value measurement hierarchy for all investment property and IPUC as at 31 March 2017 was Level 3  Significant unobservable inputs 2016 Level 3.
There were no transfers between Levels 1 2 or 3 during the year.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 88 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Property assets continued Descriptions and definitions relating to valuation techniques and key unobservable inputs made in determining fair values are as follows Valuation techniques used to derive Level 3 fair values The valuations have been prepared on the basis of fair market value which is defined in the RICS Valuation Standards as the estimated amount for which a property should exchange on the date of valuation between a willing buyer and a willing seller in an armslength transaction after proper marketing wherein the parties had acted knowledgeably prudently and without compulsion.
Unobservable inputs These include estimated rental value ERV based on market conditions prevailing at the valuation date estimated average increase in rent based on both market estimations and contractual situations equivalent yield defined as the weighted average of the net initial yield and reversionary yield and the physical condition of the property determined by inspections on a rotational basis.
A decrease in the ERV would decrease market value.
A decrease in the equivalent yield would increase the market value.
An increase in the remaining lease term would increase the fair value.
Property plant and equipment The Group holds computer and other equipment assets with cost of 1.0 million 2016 0.7 million and accumulated depreciation of 0.6 million 2016 0.5 million giving a net book value of 0.4 million 2016 0.2 million.
Additions during the year were 0.3 million 2016 0.2 million and depreciation charged to the income statement was 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million.
Cash cash equivalents and restricted cash Cash held in current account 23.3 43.7 Restricted cash 0.2 0.6 Restricted cash arises where there are rent deposits interest payment guarantees cash is ringfenced for committed property development expenditure which is released to pay contractors invoices directly or under the terms of security arrangements under the Groups banking facilities or its bond.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables 5.1 4.2 Prepayments and accrued income 1.2 1.2 Other debtors 3.1 2.1 Trade and other receivables disclosed above are classified as loans and receivables and are therefore measured at amortised cost.
The Groups principal customers are invoiced and pay quarterly in advance usually on the English quarter days.
Other debtors are generally on 3060 days terms.
No bad debt provision was required during the year 2016 nil.
Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Trade and other receivables continued As at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 the analysis of trade debtors that were past due but not impaired is as follows Past due but not impaired
Neither past due nor impaired 30 days 60 days 90 days 120 days The bulk of the Groups income derives from the NHS or is reimbursed by the NHS hence the risk of default is minimal.
Trade and other payables Trade creditors 1.4 2.8 Other creditors and accruals 12.8 11.8 VAT creditor 2.2 1.9 Finance lease arrangements are amounts payable in respect of leasehold investment property held by the Group.
The amounts due after more than one year which total 3.0 million 2016 3.0 million have been disclosed in noncurrent liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
The maturity of trade and other payables and the minimum payments due under finance leases are disclosed in Note 23.
The fair value of the Groups lease obligations is approximately equal to their carrying value.
Deferred revenue Arising from rental received in advance 15.7 13.7 Arising from pharmacy lease premiums received in advance 6.4 6.9 Current 16.3 14.2 Noncurrent 5.8 6.4
At 1 April 0.3 0.4 Utilisation of provision 0.3 0.1 At 31 March Provisions related to the onerous property lease on the former Pall Mall office.
The lease expired in July 2016.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 90 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
At 1 April Amount drawn down in year 210.0 45.0 Amount repaid in year 59.0 188.5 Loan issue costs 2.2 1.4 Amortisation of loan issue costs Write off of loan issue costs 1.4 At 31 March Due within one year 4.3 4.0 Due after more than one year 515.8 365.2 At 31 March The Group has the following bank facilities 10year senior secured bond for 110 million at a fixed interest rate of 4.75% maturing in December 2021.
The secured bond carries a loan to value LTV covenant of 75% 70% at the point of substitution of an investment property or cash and an interest cover requirement of 1.15 times 1.5 times at the point of substitution.
In addition the bond is subject to a WAULT covenant of 10 years which if breached gives the bondholder the option to change the facility to an amortising basis.
Loans from Aviva Commercial Finance with an aggregate balance of 213.8 million at 31 March 2017 2016 217.8 million.
The Aviva loans are partially amortised by way of quarterly instalments and partially repaid by way of bullet repayments falling due between 2024 and 2044 with a weighted average term of 13.8 years to maturity 4.3 million is due within a year.
These loans are secured by way of charges over specific medical centre investment properties with crosscollateralisation between the loans and security.
The loans are subject to fixed allin interest rates ranging between 4.11% and 6.66% and a weighted average of 5.43%.
The loans carry a debt service cover covenant of 1.05 times and an LTV covenant of 70% calculated across all loans and secured properties.
In November 2015 in line with the debt reduction plan announced in the Prospectus for the October 2015 equity raise 182.0 million of loans were repaid along with associated early repayment costs of 34.1 million.
Fiveyear club revolving credit facility with RBS HSBC Santander and Barclays for 200 million on an unsecured basis at an initial margin of 1.50% above LIBOR expiring in May 2021.
The margin increases based on the LTV of the subsidiaries to which the facility relates up to 2.0% where the LTV is in excess of 50%.
The facility is subject to a historical interest cover requirement of at least 175% maximum LTV of 60% and a weighted average lease length of seven years.
As at 31 March 2017 100 million of this facility was drawn.
This facility replaced the previous 120 million secured revolving credit facility.
Subsequent to the year end the available facility has been increased to 250 million.
10year notes in the US private placement market for a total of 100 million.
The notes are unsecured have a fixed interest rate of 2.65% and were drawn on 13 October 2016.
The facility is subject to a historical interest cover requirement of at least 175% maximum LTV of 60% and a weighted average lease length of seven years.
The Group has been in compliance with all financial covenants on all of the above loans as applicable throughout the year.
Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Share capital Number of shares
Number of shares
Ordinary Shares issued and fully paid At 1 April 1637706738 163.8 1006900141 100.7 Issued 20 July 2015   4545455 0.4 Issued 25 September 2015   3543975 0.4 Issued 14 October 2015   618000000 61.8 Issued 4 November 2015   2229072 0.2 Issued 20 January 2016  scrip   1611873 0.2 Issued 27 January 2016   876222 0.1 Issued 20 April 2016  scrip 2291541 0.2 Issued 27 July 2016  scrip 1880037 0.2 Issued 26 August 2016 8000000 0.8 Issued 19 October 2016  scrip 2130150 0.2 Issued 18 January 2017  scrip 3032527 0.3 At 31 March 1655040993 165.5 1637706738 163.8 Own shares held 61898  1256714 0.6 Total share capital 1654979095 165.5 1636450024 163.2 Ordinary Shares issued on 20 July 2015 4 November 2015 and 27 January 2016 represent shares issued as part consideration to discharge the monetary liability for the acquisition of investment properties held in corporate vehicles.
The shares were valued based on the closing share price the day before issuance with this amount appropriately allocated between share capital and share premium.
On 25 September 2015 and 26 August 2016 3543975 and 8000000 Ordinary Shares were issued following employees exercising nilcost options awarded under the VCP.
Further information can be found in respect of the VCP in Note 20 and on pages 59 and 60 of the Remuneration Report.
On 14 October 2015 618000000 Ordinary Shares were issued by way of a Firm Placing Placing and Open Offer and Offer for Subscription at a price of 50 pence per Ordinary Share.
Gross proceeds to the Company were 309.0 million which has been allocated appropriately between share capital 61.8 million and share premium 247.2 million.
Issue costs totalling 9.5 million were incurred and have been allocated against share premium.
On 20 January 2016 1611873 Ordinary Shares were issued to shareholders who elected to receive Ordinary Shares in lieu of a cash dividend under the Company scrip dividend alternative.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 9334255 Ordinary Shares were issued to shareholders who elected to receive Ordinary Shares in lieu of a cash dividend under the Company scrip dividend alternative.
Post year end on 19 April 2017 1514247 Ordinary Shares were issued to shareholders who elected to receive Ordinary Shares in lieu of a cash dividend under the Company scrip dividend alternative.
Own shares held comprise shares held by the Employee Benefit Trust.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 92 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dividends paid on Ordinary Shares Payment date Pence per share Number of Ordinary Shares 30 April 2015 0.5 1006900141  5.0 22 July 2015 0.5 1006900141  5.0 4 November 2015 0.5 1632989571  8.2 20 January 2016 0.55 1635218643  9.0 20 April 2016 0.55 1637706738 9.0 27 July 2016 0.55 1639998279 9.0 19 October 2016 0.55 1649878316 9.1 18 January 2017 0.60 1655040993 9.9 A quarterly dividend for 201718 of 0.60 pence per share is currently planned to be paid on 19 July 2017 to shareholders on the share register at 16 June 2017.
A scrip dividend alternative was introduced with effect from the January 2016 quarterly dividend.
Details of shares issued in lieu of dividend payments can be found in Note 18.
The dividends paid do not include any PIDs as defined under the REIT regime.
Sharebased payments As at 31 March 2017 the Group had two longterm incentive schemes in place  the Value Creation Plan VCP and the Performance Share Plan PSP.
The longterm incentive arrangements are structured so as to align the incentives of relevant Executives with the longterm performance of the business and to motivate and retain key members of staff.
To the extent practicable longterm incentives are provided through the use of sharebased or sharefulfilled remuneration to provide alignment of objectives with the Groups shareholders.
Longterm incentive awards are granted by the Remuneration Committee which reviews award levels on a case by case basis.
As at 31 March 2017 the Employee Benefit Trust held a total of 61898 2016 1256714 Ordinary Shares of 10 pence each in Assura plc.
Previous longterm incentive plans have lapsed without vesting.
Value Creation Plan As at 31 March 2017 a total of 3305149 nilcost options were outstanding to employees including 2760761 outstanding to Executive Directors as detailed in the Remuneration Committee Report.
Participants have the opportunity to receive 10% of the total value created for shareholders above a threshold price determined at three Measurement Dates in a fiveyear measurement period from March 2012 to March 2017.
Before any awards vest which are granted as nilcost options on conversion of any value created a minimum level of Total Shareholder Return of 8% per annum compound growth from the Base Price at each Measurement Date must be achieved.
At the first Measurement Date in August 2015 nilcost options over 24999450 Ordinary Shares were awarded to scheme participants.
50% of these were exercisable in September 2015 with the remainder exercisable in 2016 or 2017 subject to achievement of certain performance hurdles.
Further details in respect of the VCP are provided in the Remuneration Committee Report on pages 59 and 60.
Performance Share Plan During the year 1137931 nilcost options were awarded to Executive Directors under the newly created PSP.
Participants awards will vest if certain targets relating to TSR and growth in NAV are met as detailed in the Remuneration Committee Report.
Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Sharebased payments continued The fair value of the newly issued PSP equity settled units granted during the year was estimated as at the date of grant using the Stochastic Model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which units were granted.
The following table lists the inputs to the models used for the year ended 31 March 2017 Expected share price volatility % 23 Risk free interest rate % 0.03 Expected life of units years 3 The expected volatility reflects the assumption that the historical volatility is indicative of future trends which may not necessarily be the actual outcome.
The fair value of the units granted in 2017 was 454600 based on the market price at the date the units were granted.
This cost is allocated over the vesting period.
The cost allocation for all outstanding units in the period was a charge of 318000 2016 468500 and a credit has been recorded during the year in respect of the lower than expected employer national insurance contributions payable on the awards that vested during the period so that the total income statement charge was 0.1 million 2016 1.9 million.
As at 31 March 2017 1137931 share options were outstanding 2016 nil.
Note to the consolidated cash flow statement Reconciliation of net profit before taxation to net cash inflow from operating activities Net profit before taxation 95.2 28.8 Adjustments for Increasedecrease in debtors 2.8 0.5 Increasedecrease in creditors 1.2 1.5 Decrease in provisions 0.3 0.1 Revaluation gain 56.5 36.4 Interest capitalised on developments 0.4 0.5 Lossgain on disposal of properties 0.1 0.1 Depreciation 0.1 0.1 Early repayment costs Employee sharebased incentive costs 0.3 2.6 Amortisation of loan issue costs 0.7 0.6 Write off of loan issue costs 1.4 Net cash inflow from operating activities 39.0 22.9 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 94 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Deferred tax Deferred tax consists of the following At 1 April 0.4 1.3 Income statement movement 0.1 0.9 At 31 March The amounts of deductible temporary differences and unused tax losses which have not been recognised are as follows Tax losses 225.6 213.4 Other timing differences 1.9 6.0 The majority of tax losses carried forward relate to capital losses generated on the disposal of former divisions of the Group.
The following deferred tax assets have not been recognised due to uncertainties around future recoverability Tax losses Other temporary differences 0.3 1.1 Derivatives and other financial instruments The Group holds cash and liquid resources as well as having debtors and creditors that arise directly from its operations.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments and properties are credit risk liquidity risk interest rate risk and capital risk.
The Board regularly reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks and these are summarised below.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or counterparty will be unable or unwilling to meet a commitment that it has entered into with the Group.
In the event of a default by an occupational tenant the Group will suffer a rental income shortfall and may incur additional costs including legal expenses in maintaining insuring and reletting the property.
Given the nature of the Companys tenants and enhanced rights of landlords who can issue proceedings and enforcement by bailiffs defaults are rare and potential defaults are managed carefully by the credit control department.
The maximum credit exposure in aggregate is one quarters rent of circa 18 million however this amount derives from all the tenants in the portfolio and such a scenario is hypothetical.
The Groups credit risk is well spread across circa 800 tenants at any one time.
Furthermore the bulk of the Groups property income derives from the NHS or is reimbursed by the NHS which has an obligation to ensure that patients can be seen and treated and steps in when GPs are unable to practise hence the risk of default is minimal.
The maximum credit risk exposure relating to financial assets is represented by their carrying values as at the balance sheet date.
Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will encounter in realising assets or otherwise raising funds to meet financial commitments.
Investments in property are relatively illiquid however the Group has tried to mitigate this risk by investing in modern purpose built medical centres which are let to GPs and NHS PropCo.
In order to progress its property investment and development programme the Group needs access to bank and equity finance both of which may be difficult to raise notwithstanding the quality long lease length NHS backing and geographical and lot size diversity of its property portfolio.
The Group manages its liquidity risk by ensuring that it has a spread of sources and maturities.
The Group has entered into commercial property leases on its investment property portfolio.
These noncancellable leases have remaining terms of up to 30 years and have a weighted average lease length of 13.2 years.
All leases are subject to revision of rents according to various rent review clauses.
Future minimum rentals receivable under noncancellable operating leases along with trade and other receivable as at 31 March are as follows Receivables as at 31 March 2016
Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years 5 years
Noncancellable leases  15.9 47.8 252.7 629.0 945.4 Trade and other receivables  7.5    7.5 The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities including interest at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 based on contractual undiscounted payments at the earliest date on which the Group can be required to pay.
The total contracted discounted payments are higher than the total minimum rentals receivable due to the rent receivable not including any residual values on properties at the end of the lease contract.
In practice the Group expects a significant renewal of leases at the end of the lease term.
Payables as at 31 March 2017
Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years 5 years
Nonderivative financial liabilities Interest bearing loans and borrowings  6.4 19.2 327.5 388.2 741.3 Trade and other payables  12.7 3.7 0.2 2.7 19.3 Total financial liabilities  19.1 22.9 327.7 390.9 760.6 Payables as at 31 March 2016
Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years 5 years
Nonderivative financial liabilities Interest bearing loans and borrowings  6.5 14.4 99.8 406.8 527.5 Trade and other payables  13.3 3.2 0.2 2.8 19.5 Total financial liabilities  19.8 17.6 100.0 409.6 547.0 Receivables as at 31 March 2017
Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years 5 years
Noncancellable leases  18.8 56.5 289.0 648.5 1012.8 Trade and other receivables  9.5    9.5 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 96 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Interest rate risk The Groups exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to the Groups cash deposits and as debt is utilised longterm debt obligations.
The Groups policy is to manage its interest cost using fixed rate debt or by interest rate swaps for the majority of loans and borrowings although the Group will accept some exposure to variable rates where deemed appropriate and restricted to one third of the loan book.
The swaps are revalued to their market value by reference to market interest rates at each balance sheet date.
The ageing analysis of the financial assets and liabilities excluding trade receivables and payables of the Group at 31 March 2017 was as follows
1 year 1 to 5 years 5 years
Floating rate asset Cash 23.5   23.5 Liabilities fixed rate unless stated Longterm loans Revolving credit facility variable rate  100.0  100.0 Private placement   100.0 100.0 Payments due under finance leases  0.2 2.8 3.0 In November 2011 the Group issued a 110.0 million 10year senior secured bond at 4.75%.
Aviva loans decreased during the period to 213.8 million 2016 217.8 million.
The Aviva loans are partially amortised by way of quarterly instalments and partially repaid by way of bullet repayments falling due between 2024 and 2044.
4.3 million is due within a year.
These loans are secured by way of charges over specific medical centre investment properties with crosscollateralisation between the loans and security.
The loans are subject to fixed allin interest rates ranging between 4.11% and 6.66%.
The Group has a revolving credit facility of 200 million which expires in 2021.
Interest is charged at an initial rate of LIBOR plus 1.5% subject to LTV.
On 3 October 2016 the Group agreed new 10year notes in the US private placement market for a total of 100 million.
The notes are unsecured and have a fixed interest rate of 2.65%.
The ageing analysis of the financial assets and liabilities excluding trade receivables and payables of the Group at 31 March 2016 was as follows
1 year 1 to 5 years 5 years
Floating rate asset Cash 44.3   44.3 Liabilities fixed rate unless stated Longterm loans Revolving credit facility variable rate  45.0  45.0 Payments due under finance leases  0.2 2.8 3.0 Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Sensitivity analysis As at 31 March 2017 81% of debt drawn by the Group is subject to fixed interest rates.
A 0.25% movement in interest rates would change profit by 0.2 million based on the amount of variable rate debt drawn.
Book value Fair value Longterm loans 520.1 369.2 597.8 429.4 Payments due under finance leases 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 The Group is exposed to the valuation impact on investor sentiment of longterm interest rate expectations which can impact transactions in the market and increase or decrease valuations accordingly.
Capital risk The Group manages its capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions.
To maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may make disposals adjust the dividend payment to shareholders return capital to shareholders or issue new shares.
The Group monitors capital structure with reference to LTV which is calculated as net debt divided by total property.
The LTV percentage on this basis is 37% at 31 March 2017 30% at 31 March 2016.
Investment property 1324.7 1097.9 Investment property under construction 20.2 11.5 Held for sale  land 0.9 1.7 Total property 1345.8 1111.1 Finance lease 3.0 3.0 Cash 23.5 44.3 Net debt 499.6 327.9 LTV 37% 30%
At the year end the Group had seven 2016 two committed developments of which six were on site with a contracted total expenditure of 39.7 million 2016 13.5 million of which 15.9 million 2016 8.5 million had been expended.
Related party transactions Details of transactions during the year and outstanding balances at 31 March 2017 in respect of associates are detailed in Note 9.
Details of payments to key management personnel are provided in Note 4.
Post balance sheet events Subsequent to the year end the revolving credit facility has been extended to 250 million.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 98 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company income statement For the year ended 31 March 2017
Dividends received from subsidiary companies Group management charge Total revenue Administrative expenses Sharebased payment charge Impairment of investment in subsidiary Operating profit Profit before taxation
Profit attributable to equity holders All amounts relate to continuing activities.
There were no items of other comprehensive income or expense and therefore the profit for the period also reflects the Companys total comprehensive income.
Company income statement For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Company balance sheet As at 31 March 2017
Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiary companies B 372.5 396.7 Current assets Cash and cash equivalents C  5.2 Other receivables Amounts owed by subsidiary companies D 380.7 345.8 Current liabilities Trade and other payables The financial statements were approved at a meeting of the Board of Directors held on 22 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Simon Laffin Jonathan Murphy NonExecutive Chairman
Company registered number Net assets Capital and reserves Share capital Share premium Own shares held Merger reserve B 183.7 295.4
Total equity Company balance sheet As at 31 March 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 100 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March 2017
Share capital
Own
Merger reserve
Total equity 1 April 2015 Profit attributable to equity holders Total comprehensive income Issue of Ordinary Shares 18 62.5 250.7 0.3   312.9 Share issue costs Dividends 19 0.2 0.7   27.2 26.3 Employee sharebased incentives 31 March 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders Total comprehensive income Merger reserve release Dividends 19 0.9 4.2   37.0 31.9 Employee sharebased incentives 31 March 2017 Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company cash flow statement For the year ended 31 March 2017
Operating activities Dividends received from subsidiaries Charges received from subsidiaries Amounts paid to suppliers and employees Net cash outflowinflow from operating activities Investing activities Net loans advanced to subsidiaries Net cash inflowoutflow from investing activities Financing activities Issue of Ordinary Shares Issue costs paid on issuance of Ordinary Shares Dividends paid Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at start of period Cash and cash equivalents at end of period C  5.2 Company cash flow statement For the period ended 31 March 2017 site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information 102 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company accounts For the year ended 31 March 2017
Accounting policies and corporate information The accounts of the Company are separate to those of the Group.
The accounting policies of the Company are consistent with those of the Group which can be found in Note 2 to the Group accounts.
The auditors remuneration for audit and other services is disclosed in Note 4. a to the Group accounts.
Disclosure of individual Directors remuneration share interests share options longterm incentive schemes pension contributions and pension entitlements required by the Companies Act 2006 and those specified for audit by the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority are shown in the Remuneration Report on pages 57 to 63 and form part of these accounts.
B.
Investments in subsidiary companies Provision for diminution in value 111.7 Details of all subsidiaries as at 31 March 2017 are shown in Note 9 to the Group accounts.
The Company directly holds investments in Assura Group Limited and Assura IH Limited which are both intermediate holding companies for the property owning subsidiaries in the Assura plc group.
During the period the Company received a dividend of 150 million from its wholly owned subsidiary company Assura Group Limited which was settled by clearing an intercompany balance owed by Assura plc to Assura Group Limited.
The resulting reduction in net assets of Assura Group Limited led to management completing an impairment assessment of the investment held in Assura Group Limited.
Following this assessment an impairment charge of 111.7 million was recorded.
A corresponding amount has been transferred from the merger reserve to retained earnings which is considered distributable.
C.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash held in current account  5.2
Loans to subsidiary companies  current Amounts owed by Group undertakings 380.7 345.8 The above loans are unsecured noninterest bearing and repayable upon demand.
The recoverable amount of loans receivable from subsidiaries is reviewed annually by reference to the subsidiary balance sheet and expected future activities with a provision recorded to the extent the loan is not considered recoverable.
No provision has been deemed necessary.
E.
Related party transactions
Dividends received
Amounts owed to Group undertakings 31 March 2016 1.2 50.0 345.8 The above transactions are with subsidiaries.
31 March 2017 2.1 150.0 380.7 Notes to the Company accounts For the period ended 31 March 2017 Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Notes to the Company accounts continued For the year ended 31 March 2017
Risk management
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or counterparty will be unable or unwilling to meet a commitment that it has entered into with the Company.
Credit risks within the Company derive from nonpayment of loan balances.
However as the balances are receivable from subsidiary companies the risk of default is considered minimal.
The maximum credit risk exposure relating to financial assets is represented by the carrying value as at the balance sheet date.
The Company balance sheet largely comprises illiquid assets in the form of investments in subsidiaries and loans to subsidiaries which have been used to finance property investment and development activities.
Accordingly the realisation of these assets may take time and may not achieve the values at which they are carried in the balance sheet.
The Company had trade and other payables of 1.0 million at 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 1.5 million.
There are no differences between the book value of cash and trade payables nor is there any meaningful interest rate sensitivity.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Glossary AGM is Annual General Meeting.
Average Debt Maturity is each tranche of Group debt multiplied by the remaining period to its maturity and the result divided by total Group debt in issue at the year end.
Average Interest Rate is the Group loan interest and derivative costs per annum at the year end divided by total Group debt in issue at the year end.
BPF is the British Property Federation which is the membership organisation and the voice of the UK real estate industry.
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method BREEAM assesses the sustainability of buildings against a range of criteria.
Code is the UK Corporate Governance Code 2014 a full copy of which is available on the website of the Financial Reporting Council.
Clinical Commissioning Groups CCGs are the groups of GPs and other healthcare professionals that took over commissioning of primary and secondary healthcare from PCTs in England with effect 1 April 2013.
Company is Assura plc.
Consumer Price Index CPI is an official measure of the general level of inflation as reflected in the weighted average of prices of a basket of consumer goods and services such as transportation food clothing etc.
CPI is commonly calculated on a monthly and annual basis.
Debt Service Cover is the number of times net interest payable plus debt amortisation is covered by underlying profit before net interest.
Direct Property Costs comprise ground rents payable under head leases void costs other direct irrecoverable property expenses rent review fees and valuation fees.
District Valuer DV is the District Valuer Service being the commercial arm of the Valuation Office Agency
It provides professional property advice across the public sector and in respect of primary healthcare represents NHS bodies on matters of valuation rent reviews and initial rents on new developments.
Earnings per Ordinary Share from Continuing Operations EPS is the profit attributable to equity holders of the parent divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the period.
European Public Real Estate Association EPRA is the industry body for European REITs.
EPRA is a registered trade mark of the European Public Real Estate Association.
EPRA Net Asset Value EPRA NAV is the balance sheet net assets excluding own shares held mark to market derivative financial instruments including associates and deferred taxation.
EPRA NNNAV is the EPRA NAV adjusted to reflect the fair value of debt and derivatives.
Equivalent Yield true and nominal is a weighted average of the Net Initial Yield and Reversionary Yield and represents the return a property will produce based upon the timing of the income received.
The true equivalent yield assumes rents are received quarterly in advance.
The nominal equivalent assumes rents are received annually in arrears.
Estimated Rental Value ERV is the external valuers opinion as to the open market rent which on the date of valuation could reasonably be expected to be obtained on a new letting or rent review of a property.
Gross Rental Income is the gross accounting rent receivable.
Group is Assura plc and its subsidiaries.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 IFRS is International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union.
Interest Cover is the number of times net interest payable is covered by EPRA earnings before net interest.
Interest Rate Swap is a contract to exchange fixed payments for floating payments linked to an interest rate and is generally used to manage exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.
IPD is Investment Property Databank Limited which provides performance analysis for most types of real estate and produces an independent benchmark of property returns.
IPD Healthcare Index is Investment Property Databanks UK Annual Healthcare Property Index.
IPD Total Return is calculated as the change in capital value less any capital expenditure incurred plus net income expressed as a percentage of capital employed over the period as calculated by IPD.
KPI is Key Performance Indicators.
Loan to Value LTV is the ratio of net debt to the total value of property assets.
London Interbank Offered Rate LIBOR is the interest rate charged by one bank to another for lending money.
Mark to Market is the difference between the book value of an asset or liability and its market value.
NAV is Net Asset Value.
Net Initial Yield NIY is the annualised rents generated by an asset after the deduction of an estimate of annual recurring irrecoverable property outgoings expressed as a percentage of the asset valuation after notional purchasers costs.
Development properties are not included.
Net Rental Income is the rental income receivable in the period after payment of direct property costs.
Net rental income is quoted on an accounting basis.
NHS Property Services Limited NHS PropCo is the company wholly owned and funded by the Department of Health which as of 1 April 2013 has taken on all property obligations formerly borne by the PCTs.
Primary Care Property is the property occupied by health services providers who act as the principal point of consultation for patients such as GP practices dental practices community pharmacies and high street optometrists.
Property Income Distribution PID is the required distribution of income as dividends under the REIT regime.
It is calculated as 90% of exempted net income.
PSP is Performance Share Plan.
Real Estate Investment Trust REIT is a listed property company which qualifies for and has elected into a tax regime which exempts qualifying UK profits arising from property rental income and gains on investment property disposals from corporation tax but requires the distribution of a PID.
Rent Reviews take place at intervals agreed in the lease typically every three years and their purpose is usually to adjust the rent to the current market level at the review date.
Rent Roll is the passing rent being the total of all the contracted rents reserved under the leases.
Retail Price Index RPI is an official measure of the general level of inflation as reflected in the retail price of a basket of goods and services such as energy food petrol housing household goods travelling fares etc.
RPI is commonly computed on a monthly and annual basis.
Reversionary Yield is the anticipated yield which the initial yield will rise to once the rent reaches the ERV and when the property is fully let.
It is calculated by dividing the ERV by the valuation.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information RPI Linked Leases are those leases which have rent reviews which are linked to changes in the RPI.
Sustainability and Transformation Plans STPs are 44 regional proposals to improve health and care in that area.
Total Accounting Return is the overall return generated by the Group including the impact of debt.
It is calculated as the movement on EPRA NAV for the year plus the dividends paid divided by the opening EPRA NAV.
Total Property Return is the overall return generated by properties on a debt free basis.
It is calculated as the net rental income generated by the portfolio plus the change in market values divided by opening property assets plus additions.
Glossary continued Total Shareholder Return TSR is the combination of dividends paid to shareholders and the net movement in the share price during the year.
It is calculated as the movement in the share price for the period plus the dividends paid divided by the opening share price.
VCP is Value Creation Plan.
Weighted Average Unexpired Lease Term WAULT is the average lease term remaining to first break or expiry across the portfolio weighted by contracted rental income.
Yield on cost is the estimated annual rent of a completed development divided by the total cost of development including site value and finance costs expressed as a percentage return.
Yield shift is a movement usually expressed in basis points in the yield of a property asset or likeforlike portfolio over a given period.
Yield compression is a commonly used term for a reduction in yields.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate information Registered Office The Brew House Greenalls Avenue
WA4 6HL Company Secretary Orla Ball
Deloitte LLP 2 Hardman Street
M3 3HF Legal Advisors Ernst and Young LLP 100 Barbirolli Square
M2 3EY Stockbrokers Stifel Nicolaus Europe Limited 150 Cheapside
EC2V 6ET Liberum Capital Limited Ropemaker Place 25 Ropemaker Street
EC2Y 9LY Bankers Aviva plc Barclays Bank plc HSBC plc Santander UK plc The Royal Bank of Scotland plc site Strategic report Governance Financial statements Additional information Forwardlooking statements This document contains certain statements that are neither reported financial results nor other historical information.
These statements are forward looking in nature and are subject to risks and uncertainties.
Actual future results may differ materially from those expressed in or implied by these statements.
Many of these risks and uncertainties relate to factors that are beyond Assuras ability to control or estimate precisely such as future market conditions the behaviour of other market participants the actions of governmental regulators and other risk factors such as the Companys ability to continue to obtain financing to meet its liquidity needs changes in the political social and regulatory framework in which the Company operates or in economic or technological trends or conditions including inflation and consumer confidence on a global regional or national basis.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forwardlooking statements which speak only as of the date of this document.
Assura does not undertake any obligation to publicly release any revisions to these forwardlooking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this document.
Information contained in this document relating to the Company should not be relied upon as a guide to future performance.
Assura plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 This report is printed on Galerie Satin which is made from pulp sourced from well managed forests and other controlled sources.
Both the paper and the print factory are FSC Forest Stewardship Council certified.
Assura plc The Brew House Greenalls Avenue
WA4 6HL
