Annual Report 2017 Tate and Lyle Annual Report 2017 Making food extraordinary Tate and Lyle is a global provider of ingredients and solutions We work with our customers to make food healthier and tastier creating extraordinary food for consumers
Investing in higher growth markets
Meeting global demand for healthier food Contents Strategic Report At a Glanc e Chairman s St at ement Inv es tment Case
Chief Executives Review
Busines s Model Key Performance Indicators 26 Speciality Food Ingredients Inno v ation and Commercial Development Bulk Ingr edient s Gl obal Oper ations Group Financial Results Risk s Corpor at e R esponsibility
Board of Directors Chairmans introduction to Corporate Governance 57 Corporate Governance Audit Committee Report Nominations Committee Report Corpor at e R esponsibility Committee Report
Directors Remuneration Report
Dir ect or s  R eport Dir ect or s  St at ement of Responsibilities Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report to
Consolidat ed Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements P ar ent Company Financial Statements Useful Information Group Fiveyear Summary Additional Inf ormation Information for Investors Gl os sary
SPLENDA and the SPLENDA logo are trademarks of Heartland Consumer Products LLC.
Definitionscautionary statement Please see the explanatory notes on the inside back cover.
Year of strong financial operational and cash performance Adjusted profit before tax on continuing operations 271m 20% Reported basic earnings per share for continuing operations Adjusted free cash flow from continuing operations Dividend for the year per share 1 Adjusted results and a number of other terms and performance measures used in this Annual Report are not directly defined within accounting standards.
For clarity we have provided descriptions of the various metrics and their reconciliations to the most directly comparable measures reported in IFRS and the calculations where relevant of any ratios in Notes 1 and 4.
2 Change in constant currency.
Year ended 31 March 2017 Change STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 1 Meeting global demand for healthier food Consumers across the world are looking for healthier foods and drinks Our wide range of ingredients and solutions helps to enrich foods with fibre to reduce sugar  calories and fat and to improve texture while never compromising taste.
1 Tate and Lyle multicountry consumer research 2015.
2 FoodMinds US 2014.
3 Nielsen and Mintel consulting US 2013.
53% 65% 90% 2 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 3 Investing in highergrowth markets Strong opportunities for growth in developing fasterpaced markets We continue to invest in highergrowth markets such as Asia Pacific and Latin America.
We have built a network of applications laboratories and added sales and technical service resources to enable us to work with our customers to help them launch new products and reformulate existing products in their local markets.
1 Euromonitor 20142016 Compound Annual Growth Rates market growth  total volume.
11% Growth in yoghurt in Asia Pacific 5% Growth in soups sauces and dressings in Asia Pacific 6% Growth in sports and energy drinks in Latin America 4 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 5 Driving innovation and new products Using leadingedge science to create food for modernday life People all over the world are looking for healthier foods and drinks which fit into their busy lifestyles  from reducedsugar drinkable yoghurts to creamy dressings with a fraction of the fat.
Our teams of food scientists and nutritionists are continuously researching and testing ingredients to create solutions which allow our customers to provide the nutritious greattasting foods people want.
1 Innova Market Insights 20132016 Compound Annual Growth Rates.
2 A granted patent means a single patent granted in one country.
Data includes patent applications where we have received a Notice of Allowance from a national patent office and the patent is in the final stages of the grant process.
13% Growth in products launched globally with a cleanlabel claim 15% Growth in products launched globally with a sugar reduction claim New patents granted globally to Tate and Lyle in the year ended 31 March 2017 6 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Driving innovation and new products site 7 Delivering highquality ingredients at scale Our ingredients are used in products consumed by millions of people every day Our Bulk Ingredients business provides highvolume food ingredients and industrial products to customers who operate on a large scale.
Maintaining the highest standards of food safety quality and traceability of our ingredients and of responsible manufacturing is of the utmost importance to us and our customers.
We process around 2% or about 1.4 million acres of the annual corn crop in the US A rating BRC Global Food Safety Initiative has rated our manufacturing plants globally A or AA 10.4% Reduction in CO emissions per tonne of production since 2008 8 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Delivering highquality ingredients at scale site 9 Innovation and Commercial Development Innovation and Commercial Development manages the innovation pipeline and is responsible for new product development.
It connects consumer needs with leadingedge science to provide innovative ingredients and solutions which our customers use to meet growing global consumer demand for healthier food and drink.
Global Operations Global Operations delivers highquality products to our customers across the world.
It is responsible for the efficient operation of our manufacturing facilities supply and demand planning raw material sourcing customer service and logistics safety sustainability and the continuous improvement of our operations.
At a Glance Our business Our business divisions are supported by two global teams Bulk Ingredients Steady earnings and cash generation Speciality Food Ingredients Growth engine Our business divisions
Develops innovative ingredients and solutions for customers globally that meet consumer demand for great tasting healthier food and drink.
Portfolio includes Texturants which provide key functionality such as thickening shelf stability and fat reduction Sweeteners which help reduce sugar and calories Health and wellness ingredients including fibres and proteins
Leading positions in attractive markets Strong expertise in categories such as dairy beverages and soups sauces and dressings Broad product portfolio and geographical diversification Strong innovation focus Growing customer base
Provides high volume food ingredients and industrial products primarily for customers in the North American market.
Main product lines are Bulk sweeteners for food and beverages Industrial starches for paper and construction industries Acidulants to enhance flavour and preserve foods beverages and pharmaceuticals
Focus on relatively more stable North American market Strong market positions Integrated scale and efficient assets
Read more on pages 16 17 and 26 to 28 Read more on pages 16 17 30 and 31 Read more on page 29 Read more on page 32 10 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 delivering strong performance Financial summary Statutory results Adjusted results Year ended 31 March 2017 continuing operations m unless stated otherwise 2017 2016 change 2017 2016 change in constant currency Sales % Profit before tax 233 126 85% 271 193 20% Diluted earnings per share 54.2p 25.9p 109% 47.1p 34.5p 16% Net debt 452 434 Dividend for the year per share 28.0p 28.0p 1 Adjusted results and a number of other terms and performance measures used in this Annual Report are not directly defined within accounting standards.
For clarity we have provided descriptions of the various metrics and their reconciliations to the most directly comparable measures reported in IFRS and the calculations where relevant of any ratios in Notes 1 and 4.
271tel 2016 2017 32.0tel 53tel 2017 12.2tel Adjusted profit before tax m
Return on capital employed % 14.3% Adjusted diluted earnings per share pence Continuing operations STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 11 Chairmans Statement I am delighted to be making my first annual statement to you following my appointment as Chairman of Tate and Lyle from 1 April 2017.
I am passionate about food having started my career as a food scientist and have remained close to the industry ever since.
My path has crossed Tate and Lyles on several occasions during my career and I am very excited to join a company that I have long admired for its strong heritage values and expertise.
I am honoured to succeed Sir Peter Gershon who retired on 31 March 2017 after serving on the Board for eight years.
I would like to thank him sincerely for his outstanding service and significant contribution to Tate and Lyle during his tenure.
Peter leaves the Company in great shape performing well with a clear strategy and strong governance.
I look forward to working with the Board and the executive team to realise Tate and Lyles potential for development growth and value creation for shareholders.
Delivering for shareholders I am pleased to report that T ate and Lyle delivered excellent performance in the year ended 31 March 2017 with profits and earnings per share both well ahead of the prior year.
Cash generation was particularly strong and the balance sheet remains robust providing flexibility to support future growth whilst maintaining dividend distribution to shareholders.
The Board recognises the importance to our shareholders not only of the dividend but also of its sustainability and the need to rebuild cash dividend cover over time.
Accordingly the Board recommends an unchanged final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 of 19.8p to make an unchanged total for the year of 28.0p.
Looking to the future as dividend cover is rebuilt we remain committed to a progressive policy of growing the dividend over time taking into account the earnings prospects and investment needs of the business.
Delivering responsibly Tate and Lyle is committed to achieving strong performance for shareholders whilst maintaining a sharp and relentless focus on the safety and sustainability of our business.
In January we launched an extensive Groupwide review of all our safety processes and procedures supported by an independent external expert consultancy with deep experience in global safety assessments.
This follows an industrial accident at one of our grain elevators in the US in September 2016 when sadly one of our employees and a local farmer died.
A number of significant management actions have already been implemented in our US grain elevator network to strengthen safety processes further explained in the Corporate Responsibility section on page 44.
We expect the external review will conclude in the first half of the current financial year.
The Board and the executive team will work together to ensure that the reviews findings are carefully considered and recommended actions implemented comprehensively and with urgency.
Our ultimate goal remains to have no accidents and no injuries and this incident has made us all the more determined to build a safer Tate and Lyle for all our employees contractors and visitors.
There is no higher priority in the Group.
A year of excellent progress Dr Gerry Murphy Chairman Tate and Lyle delivered a strong performance with impressive financial results 12 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Four years ago Tate and Lyle set itself ambitious sustainability targets to reduce the environmental impact of the business.
We achieved our targets for packaging and sustainable agriculture and at the end of March 2017 we had exceeded our 2016 CO emissions target.
We also achieved a leadership position of A in the CDP formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project.
Building on these achievements we have set ourselves new stretching targets for 2020 full details on page 48.
Our commitment to the United Nations UN Sustainable Development Goals SDG remains a key part of our sustainability agenda.
A key objective for the year ahead is the acceleration of our progress towards the UN SDG targets.
Governance and Board composition There have been a number of changes to the Board since the last AGM.
I joined the Board on 1 January 2017 succeeding Sir Peter Gershon as Chairman on 1 April 2017.
Liz Airey retired as Senior Independent Director on 31 December 2016 and after 10 years of service will retire from the Board at the AGM in July 2017.
Douglas Hurt assumed the role of Senior Independent Director from 1 January 2017 in addition to his role as chairman of the Audit Committee.
William Camp stepped down as a NonExecutive Director and chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee on 31 March 2017 having served on the Board since 2010.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank both Liz and William for their outstanding service and significant contribution both to the Board and to Tate and Lyle.
In October 2016 Jeanne Johns joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director.
Jeanne assumed chairmanship of the Corporate Responsibility Committee on 1 April 2017 and is also a member of the Nominations and Remuneration Committees.
During her 30year career in the oil industry with BP  Jeanne held numerous leadership roles in Europe the US and China and latterly served as the Head of Safety and Operational Risk for BPs global downstream business.
I look forward to working with the Board and the executive team to realise Tate and Lyles potential for development growth and value creation for shareholders.
Summary
Tate and Lyle has performed well this year and I would like to thank our management team and employees for all the hard work dedication and skill essential to this success.
Since my appointment to the Board I have already visited a number of the Groups facilities in North America and Europe and look forward to seeing some of our sites in Asia and Latin America in the coming months.
I have been impressed by the unwavering passion enthusiasm and commitment of all the colleagues I have met.
Like many global businesses we are facing an evolving and challenging geopolitical landscape but we do so with confidence as a strong and financially solid company.
I am excited about Tate and Lyles future.
With our clear strategy strong product portfolio and outstanding people we are well positioned for continuing and sustainable growth.
Gerry Murphy
24 May 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 13 Investment case Bulk Ingredients Core business to provide steady earnings through product line focus efficiency and continuous improvement Dampen volatility in Commodities We focus our business Attractive dividend with growing cash cover
A business increasingly focused on Speciality Food Ingredients Grow earnings Rigorous capital allocation to deliver results and create value for shareholders Improve cash flow Speciality Food Ingredients Grow on average modestly ahead of the market Margin expansion over time Broaden geographic sales mix US200 million sales from New Products by 2020 14 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Chief Executives Review with volume growth in all regions except North America where growth remained challenging.
SPLENDA
Sucraloses adjusted operating profit was 30 million higher as it benefited from lower costs from a single production facility and a oneoff inventory selldown.
Food Systems adjusted operating profit was 19 million lower with a significant decline in Europe where sales were constrained by a consolidation of our blending sites which took longer than expected and a credit issue which restricted access to the Russian market.
Sales of New Products which represent products in the first seven years after launch grew by 22% in the year.
Sales from New Products have grown by a compound average growth rate of 43% over the past five years.
Bulk Ingredients had a particularly strong year with adjusted operating profit increasing by 54% 32% in constant currency at 129 million.
This performance was driven by strong commercial execution good US bulk sweetener demand robust margins and solid manufacturing performance across the plant network.
The relatively well balanced North American corn wet milling industry also benefited the business.
Our jointventure businesses performed well with profits 16% higher at 32 million.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations increased by 37% 16% in constant currency to 47.1p.
Overview of Group performance Tate and Lyle delivered a strong performance in the year.
Both business divisions delivered profit growth with Bulk Ingredients delivering particularly good results driven by excellent commercial execution and solid manufacturing performance.
Adjusted profit before tax increased by 40% 20% in constant currency to 271 million.
Movements in foreign currencies especially the strength of the US dollar against sterling increased adjusted profit before tax by 40 million.
Speciality Food Ingredients performed well with adjusted profit up 21% 5% in constant currency at 181 million.
The business excluding SPLENDA Sucralose and Food Systems delivered an increase in adjusted operating profit of 8% in constant currency We continue to perform well and to build a stronger business Javed Ahmed Chief Executive Key highlights Strong Group financial and operational performance Bulk Ingredients delivered particularly good results Speciality Food Ingredients performed well with continued New Products growth but a significant decline in Food Systems Strong balance sheet and cash generation Improving dividend cover Continued progress towards 2020 Ambition Delivering on our strategic objectives STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 15 Chief Executives Review continued Cash generation during the year was excellent.
Adjusted free cash flow was more than three times higher than the prior year and more than covered the dividend.
Net debt was 18 million higher at 452 million with a 57 million adverse impact from foreign exchange translation offsetting the strong free cash flow generation.
Overall the Groups performance in the year was extremely encouraging.
With both divisions performing well higher operating margins and a robust balance sheet the Group is well positioned for the future.
Strategic progress We have a clear corporate strategy which we have executed against in a disciplined way since the 2011 financial year  to focus on growing Speciality Food Ingredients supported by steady earnings from Bulk Ingredients.
During the year we continued to make good progress against this strategy.
Consumers across the world are increasingly looking for healthier nutrition particularly given the rising incidence of obesity and diabetes worldwide.
Our Speciality Food Ingredients business is wellplaced to help our customers meet these demands as our ingredients help to reduce sugar calories and fat and also to add fibre in consumer products.
We are steadily bringing new products to market to address these consumer trends both through inhouse innovation and by establishing strategic partnerships.
During the year we expanded our range of texturants with the launch of CLARIA Bliss a cleanlabel starch which provides great taste and texture to products such as dairy desserts and chilled ready meals.
We also developed our sweetener range with a new crystalline version of DOLCIA PRIMA Allulose a rare sugar with a similar taste and texture to sucrose but only a very small fraction of the calories.
Overall we invested 37 million in research and development in the year an increase of 8 million part of which was driven by foreign currency translation.
In March 2017 we announced an exclusive partnership with Sweet Green Fields one of the largest fully integrated global stevia players to distribute their innovative stevia ingredients and bring their leading steviabased sweetening solutions to our customers worldwide.
Early customer interest in our expanded stevia offering has been encouraging.
We continue to see strong growth in emerging markets.
During the year we increased our applications and technical service resources in Latin America and Asia Pacific and our sales and applications resources in the Middle East.
Our vision and strategy Our vision is to become a leading global provider of speciality food ingredients and solutions.
Our strategy is to deliver this vision through A disciplined focus on growing our Speciality Food Ingredients business deeper customer engagement continuous innovation stronger positions in highergrowth markets Driving Bulk Ingredients for sustained cash generation to fuel this growth.
Bulk Ingredients High volume ingredients which are largely undifferentiated and compete primarily on price
The markets we operate in Speciality Food Ingredients Ingredients and solutions which add specific functionality and value to customers products c.
S51bn
Annual growth c.45% % of Bulk Ingredients profit from North America 90% The global market for speciality food ingredients is large and growing.
Bulk Ingredients primarily serves the North American market.
We focus on three areas of this market.
Sweeteners
Products include high intensity sweeteners e.
SPLENDA
Sucralose and speciality sweeteners e.
KRYSTAR
Crystalline Fructose DOLCIA PRIMA
Texturants
Products include cornbased starches e.
REZISTA cleanlabel starches e.
CLARIA and our range of stabiliser systems.
Health and wellness Products include dietary fibres e.
PROMITOR
Soluble Fibre
Beta Glucan STALITE Polydextrose and oat protein.
1 IHS 2014 Speciality Chemicals update Program Food Additives Leatherhead 2014 The Global Food Additives Market and other sources.
2 Leatherhead LMC International Company analysis data as at 2013 five year CAGR 20092013.
Driving efficient operations We manage Bulk Ingredients for steady earnings.
In the mature markets this division operates in we aim to deliver this by optimising product mix and margins maintaining capital expenditure discipline continuously driving productivity and efficiency maintaining a mix of tolling and nontolling contracts reducing exposure to commodity markets where we can by dampening volatility by using conservative hedging strategies actively managing coproduct sales and investing in the corn elevator storage network to secure raw material supply.
16 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Main product lines Bulk Ingredients main product lines largely serve mature and consolidated markets.
Bulk sweeteners Bulk sweeteners provide sweetness and mouthfeel to regular carbonated soft drinks confectionery and other foods and drinks.
Industrial starches Industrial starches strengthen and improve the surface conditions of paper and cardboard and are also used in adhesives for building products.
Acidulants
Acidulants are used mainly to enhance flavour and preserve foods beverages and pharmaceuticals.
Commodities
Commodities include coproducts such as corn gluten meal and corn gluten feed sold mainly as animal feed and corn oil.
We also produce some ethanol at our Loudon Tennessee facility as a means of optimising the production balance and efficiency.
Key market factors Industry capacity utilisation Our bulk ingredients are produced mainly at four large corn wet mills in the US and two smaller mills in Europe.
Supplydemand balance is a key driver of profitability in the US corn wet milling industry and the industry was well balanced in the year .
Corn market The US corn wet milling industry processes around 10% of the US corn crop.
Recent harvests have been strong with corn inventory high and prices relatively low and stable.
Corn is largely a passthrough cost.
Carbonated soft drinks Demand in the US for regular carbonated soft drinks the main endmarket for our bulk sweeteners declined by 0.7% in the year.
Redeploying capacity We seek to manage the longterm gradual decline in demand for our bulk ingredients by steadily redeploying primary capacity in our corn wet mills to support growth in Speciality Food Ingredients.
Global consumer trends The market for speciality food ingredients is being driven by a number of global consumer trends.
Healthier
With obesity and diabetes on the rise worldwide consumers are looking to reduce calories sugar and fat while also adding beneficial ingredients to food and drink such as fibre and protein.
Cleanlabel
Consumers want to understand the ingredients on food and drink labels.
Increasingly they are choosing products with labels with ingredients that they feel are less processed or they perceive to be simpler or natural.
Free from Intolerance to certain ingredients is leading to increased demand for allergenfree foods such as glutenfree and dairyfree.
On the go People have busy lives and sometimes convenience can come at the cost of healthy nutrition.
Consumers are demanding food and drink that offers fast grabandgo nutrition but which also makes it easier to make healthier choices.
Meeting consumer demand Our ingredients and solutions help our customers meet growing consumer demand for healthier food and drink.
We leverage our deep technical expertise and understanding of categories such as dairy and beverages to provide our customers with the solutions they need.
Sugar and calorie reduction Through our wide portfolio of speciality sweeteners and fibres we create solutions that reduce sugar and calories without compromising the sweetness and texture consumers want.
Enrichment
Our diverse portfolio of fibres offers a range of nutritional and functional benefits  from fibre enrichment to sugar and calorie reduction while delivering exceptional digestive tolerance.
Texture
Our range of starches provides key functionality for foods such as thickening shelfstability and fat reduction while still providing the texture consumers want.
Stabilisation
Through our indepth knowledge of ingredients and complex food systems we create customised stabiliser systems highly functional ingredient blends that ensure products maintain stability and appetising texture throughout their shelf life.
1 Source IRI Total US  Multi Outlet and Convenience Stores.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 17 We are also in the process of more than doubling the size of our applications laboratory in Singapore.
This facility will provide customers with access to more sophisticated analytical equipment and services including pilotplant scale food processing equipment to enable them to perform product trials on site.
Significant benefits have been realised from the realignment of the SPLENDA Sucralose business we undertook in the prior year.
The implementation of a rigorous valuebased approach to securing volume and the consolidation of production into a single facility in Alabama US has helped to increase profitability and position sucralose as a more focused lowcost and sustainable business.
During the year we also celebrated the 40 th anniversary of the discovery of sucralose.
This ingredient has helped to reshape the global sweetener landscape by enabling our customers to create a wide range of greattasting lowcalorie foods and beverages for consumers.
Since its discovery in 1976 the amount of SPLENDA Sucralose produced by Tate and Lyle has been enough to replace over 19 million tonnes of sugar in the human diet which is the equivalent of removing 77 trillion calories from consumers diets globally.
Food Systems had a challenging year as we worked through some key changes.
In Europe we consolidated our blending facilities from three sites to two to lower our cost base going forward.
We also refocused our site in Germany on applications and solutions development for customers.
In China we decided to simplify our gotomarket approach by selling our interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd. back to our partner.
Together these actions will allow Food Systems to serve its customers better and reposition the business for future growth.
Bulk Ingredients had a very strong year.
The decision and steps taken in 2015 to realign our European business and focus Bulk Ingredients predominantly on the relatively more stable North American market have served us well.
Our objective is for Bulk Ingredients to deliver steady earnings from the core business and to dampen volatility in Commodities and we continue to take the necessary actions to prosecute this strategy.
We have evolved our operating model to provide a greater focus on product mix and margin management and we remain focused on tight cost control.
We continue to invest in our plant network for longterm efficiency gains and to drive productivity across our broader supply chain network.
Progress against 2020 Ambition In November 2015 we communicated our 2020 Ambition to further strengthen our business with three key outcomes.
Our progress against this ambition is set out opposite.
By way of summary 54% of the Groups adjusted operating profit came from Speciality Food Ingredients.
While profits from Speciality Food Ingredients are growing broadly in line with our expectations profits from Bulk Ingredients are well ahead of our expectations.
The very strong performance by Bulk Ingredients in the year has resulted in the overall percentage of profits from Speciality Food Ingredients being lower than last year.
Speciality Food Ingredients sales from Asia Pacific and Latin America grew by 6% in constant currency and have increased to 23% of the core businesss sales.
We continue to see good momentum from New Products with sales of US105 million 22% higher than last year.
Chief Executives Review continued
2020 Ambition Adjusted operating profit 1 Speciality Food Ingredients SFI profit includes SFI share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates.
Group profit is before Central costs and interest but includes share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates.
Mix of Group profits 70% from Speciality Food Ingredients Mix of Group profits 54% Progress in year ended 31 March 2017 Adjusted operating profit of Speciality Food Ingredients increased by 5% in constant currency in the year .
However exceptionally strong profit growth from Bulk Ingredients 32% higher in constant currency meant that Speciality Food Ingredients profits were 54% of Group profits down from 60% last year.
30% Bulk
20% Europe Middle East and Africa 70% Speciality Food Ingredients 18 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 2020 Ambition 2 Percentage of sales excluding SPLENDA Sucralose and Food Systems.
3 New Products are products in the first seven years after launch.
Speciality Food Ingredients sales New Products sales Geographic mix of Speciality Food Ingredients sales Sales from New Products 23% US105m Increase sales from New Products to Broaden geographic mix of Speciality Food Ingredients sales 30% from Asia Pacific and Latin America
Progress in year ended 31 March 2017 Progress in year ended 31 March 2017 Sales in Asia Pacific and Latin America grew by 6% in constant currency in the year.
Sales in these two regions represented 23% of Speciality Food Ingredients core businesss sales up from 21% last year.
Sales from New Products grew by 22% in the year or by US19 million to US105 million.
Good growth was delivered across all three platforms of texturants sweeteners and health and wellness.
2020 2015 30% Asia Pacic and
America
20% Europe Middle East and Africa 50%
America
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 19 Safety As reported in our halfyear results announcement we have launched an extensive Groupwide review of our safety processes and procedures supported by an independent external expert consultancy with deep experience in global safety assessments.
This follows an industrial accident at one of our grain elevators in the US in September 2016 when sadly one of our employees and a local farmer died.
We expect the review will conclude in the first half of the 2018 financial year.
For the 2016 calendar year in relation to our two main safetyrelated key performance indicators the Recordable Incident rate remained at 0.76 and the Lostwork Case rate improved from 0.16 to 0.11.
Fatalities are recorded separately and are not included in these rates.
People
Our employees across Tate and Lyle bring a huge amount of energy and passion to work every day and I would like to thank them for their hard work and dedication.
Our strong performance this year is a testament to the talent and the commitment of our people and I look forward to working with them in the next financial year as we continue to execute our strategy.
Outlook
Turning to the outlook we are confident the Group will continue to make underlying progress in the 2018 financial year.
Summary
Overall our results for the 2017 financial year reflect strong delivery against our strategy and towards our 2020 Ambition.
I remain very encouraged by our progress as we continue to build a stronger business with higherquality earnings capable of delivering sustainable longterm growth.
Javed Ahmed Chief Executive 24 May 2017
Chief Executives Review continued
Executive Committee Responsible for delivering our strategy and achieving business results Chief Financial Officer Nick joined Tate and Lyle as Chief Financial Officer in September 2014.
He held a number of senior roles over a 20year career at PepsiCo including as PepsiCos CFO Europe President West Europe Region and Senior Vice President Commercial Europe.
Chief Executive Javed joined Tate and Lyle as Chief Executive in October 2009.
He brought extensive international experience from a wide variety of senior management roles at Reckitt Benckiser plc in North America Europe Australia and New Zealand.
He also worked for Procter and Gamble and Bain and Co.
Reckitt Benckiser.
I remain very encouraged by our progress as we continue to build a stronger business with higher quality earnings.
Javed Ahmed Nick Hampton 20 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 President Global Operations Pierre joined Tate and Lyle in 2000 from Procter and Gamble.
During his career at Tate and Lyle he has held a number of senior operational and commercial roles and was appointed President Global Operations in November 2014.
Executive Vice President General Counsel Rob joined Tate and Lyle in 1990 as a commercial lawyer having started his career in private practice.
He was appointed General Counsel in 1997 and was Company Secretary between 2001 and 2012.
Rob has global responsibility for legal regulatory affairs and quality.
President Bulk Ingredients Jim joined Tate and Lyle in 2014 from Pennsylvaniabased PPG Industries
Automotive Coatings business.
Prior to that he spent 16 years with Dow Corning Corporation in a variety of senior marketing sales and general management roles including five years working in Shanghai China.
Executive Vice President Corporate Affairs Rowan joined Tate and Lyle in 2001 from National Westminster Bank.
During his career at Tate and Lyle he has held a number of senior roles and was appointed Executive Vice President Corporate Affairs in November 2014 with global responsibility for public affairs communications and risk.
Executive Vice President Human Resources Rob joined Tate and Lyle as Executive Vice President Human Resources in 2010.
Prior to joining Tate and Lyle he was Human Resources Director for Africa Middle East and Asia for BG Group PLC.
He also spent ten years with GE Plastics in a number of senior human resources roles in both Europe and Asia.
President Speciality Food
Joan joined Tate and Lyle in 2013 as Senior Vice President and General Manager Asia Pacific.
She was then appointed President Speciality Food Ingredients from November 2014.
Prior to joining Tate and Lyle Joan spent nearly 20 years with Rohm and Haas Company in a variety of operational and general management roles in the US Europe and Asia Pacific.
Jim Stutelberg Joan Braca Pierre Schoumacher Rowan Adams Robert Gibber Rob Luijten STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 21 Business Model How our business works Our business model is evolving as we implement our strategy to grow Speciality Food Ingredients supported by steady earnings from Bulk Ingredients.
As we deliver this strategy we are becoming an increasingly customerfocused and innovationdriven business supported by a strong manufacturing base.
How we create value Our ingredients and solutions are valuable because they are highly functional.
They help to reduce sugar calories and fat as well as add taste texture and nutrition to products consumed by millions of people every day.
The revenue from the sale of our ingredients and solutions generates cash flow which after meeting our costs helps fund business investments meet our debt obligations and provide returns to shareholders through dividends.
Generating value and delivering shareholder returns
Most of our ingredients are made from agricultural crops mainly corn.
They are mainly produced at largevolume corn wet mills shared by both divisions and smaller blending facilities.
Safety quality traceability and environmental impact are all high priorities in our raw material sourcing and production process.
Local customer solutions Consumer taste and texture preferences are different across the world which is why we have a global network of application labs.
Customers come to our labs to work with our food scientists to reformulate their products using our ingredients for their local markets.
Innovation
Our team of scientists and nutritionists continuously research and test ingredients to create solutions for our customers.
We work closely with our customers to understand their needs.
Engaging with them earlier and throughout the innovation process helps drive quicker adoption cycles.
Consumer insight We use our expertise in areas such as sensory culinary and marketing to obtain a deep understanding of what the consumer wants.
This insight drives our product development programme and how we collaborate with our customers.
Delivering to customers We aim to deliver our ingredients to customers on time in full and to the right specification.
For Speciality Food Ingredients this is a complex process with multiple ingredients and formulations travelling around the world.
For Bulk Ingredients volumes are larger but products travel relatively shorter distances to customers.
22 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 What drives us Our goal is to deliver sweet taste texture fibre enrichment and stabilisation in food and drink focusing on sugar calorie and fat reduction.
To do this we focus our resources and investments on those categories which have strong growth potential where we have strong functional expertise and where we have the potential to steadily build our competitive advantage over time.
These categories include beverages dairy and soups sauces and dressings.
Our speciality food ingredients and solutions are highly relevant because they help meet growing consumer customer and societal needs for healthier food and drink in the face of growing global levels of obesity and diabetes and digestive health issues.
What makes us different We have a number of strengths which in combination differentiate us in the market.
What underpins our business
We have no higher priority than the safety of our people and have an extensive safety management programme in place.
We measure safety performance at every site monthly.
Values
Our Values define what we stand for and how we behave with our customers suppliers investors partners the communities in which we operate and each other.
Board oversight The Board of Directors oversees the activities of the Group through regular meetings its four committees and visits to our operations around the globe.
Read more on page 44 Read more on page 42 Read more on page 57 Leading functional expertise We have strong technical expertise in the crosssection of sweetness texture and fibre enrichment through our leading portfolio of sweeteners highly functional speciality starches and fibres with specific nutritional and health benefits.
Deep category understanding Through our teams of food scientists nutritionists and other experts we have an increasingly deep understanding globally and locally of the categories we focus on such as beverages dairy and soups sauces and dressings.
Delivering tailored solutions The combination of our strong innovation pipeline and the blending expertise of our Food Systems business enables us to deliver tailored solutions for our customers which meet growing consumer demand for healthier food and drink.
Talented people Our people are passionate dedicated and highly skilled.
We invest in training and developing our employees and also recruit highcalibre talent to ensure we have the right people teams and skills to grow our business.
Clear focus for bulk business A key driver of our success is our clear focus on delivering steady earnings from the large businesses within Bulk Ingredients  bulk sweeteners industrial starches and acidulants.
The cash they generate is used to fuel growth in Speciality Food Ingredients.
Global manufacturing base Our scale manufacturing base and knowhow enables us to drive operational efficiencies and a high level of product quality.
They also provide a cost effective supply of ingredients for distribution through our global supply chain.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 23 Key Performance Indicators Measuring progress Delivering our strategy We focus on a number of financial performance measures to ensure our strategy successfully delivers increased value for our shareholders.
Adjusted profit before tax 20% in constant currency Read more on pages 15 to 20 Return on capital employed 300 bps Adjusted operating cash flow 120% To ensure we are successful in growing the division.
The Group has concluded that change in volume in metric tonnes of Speciality Food Ingredients is a more effective measure of growth and will adopt this measure from the 2018 financial year.
See also Directors
Remuneration Report.
To track the underlying performance of the business and to ensure sales growth translates into increased profits.
As reported continuing operations only.
To ensure that we continue to generate a strong rate of return on the assets that we employ and have a disciplined approach to capital investment.
Performance metric for the Performance Share Plan.
To track how efficient we are in turning increased profit into cash and to ensure that working capital is managed effectively.
Sales were 3% lower overall in Speciality Food Ingredients driven by growth in the core business in the Europe Middle East and Africa and Asia Pacific and Latin America regions offset by continuing weakness in the North American core business.
Sales in Food Systems declined with volume lower.
As planned sales and volume were lower in SPLENDA was reduced.
Adjusted profit before tax was 40% higher in reported currency and 20% higher in constant currency.
Adjusted operating profit in Speciality Food Ingredients grew 5% in constant currency and in Bulk Ingredients was 32% higher in constant currency.
Central costs were flat while adjusted net finance expenses increased by 2 million.
The Groups share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates increased by 13% in constant currency.
The return generated on capital employed increased during the year driven by higher earnings.
The return on capital employed remains well ahead of our weighted average cost of capital.
Adjusted operating cash flow increased to 273 million fully covering the fullyear dividend on a cash basis.
How we calculate it Why we measure it
The percentage return of the Groups earnings from continuing operations on its invested capital.
As reported continuing operations only.
Adjusted cash flow from continuing operations excluding the impact of exceptional items pensions derivative financial instruments tax interest and acquisitions less capital expenditure.
865mtel 14.3% 11.3% 12.2%tel 184mtel Sales of Speciality Food Ingredients 3% in constant currency 1 Adjusted results and a number of other terms and performance measures used in this Annual Report are not defined within accounting standards.
For clarity we have provided descriptions of the various metrics and their reconciliations to the most directly comparable measures reported in IFRS and the calculations where relevant of any ratios in Notes 1 and 4.
2 Restated to reflect exclusion of operating postretirement benefit costs.
24 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Maintaining financial flexibility We look at measures of financial strength to ensure we have the flexibility to grow the business whilst maintaining investment grade credit ratings.
Acting safely The safety of our employees and contractors is of paramount importance which is why we have key performance indicators for safety.
Net debt to EBITDA multiple decreased 0.3x Interest cover increased 3.2x
Lostwork case rate Read more on pages 33 to 37 Read more on pages 44 to 46 To ensure that we have the appropriate level of financial gearing and that we generate sufficient profits to service our debt.
These measures are a key focus for banks and providers of both debt and equity capital.
Ensuring safe and healthy conditions at all our locations is essential to our operation as a successful business.
Safety performance is a specific consideration that the Remuneration Committee may factor into decisions on remuneration.
The net debt to EBITDA ratio reduced to 0.9 times.
Cash flow generation was strong although net debt increased with an adverse impact of foreign exchange translation offsetting strong free cash flow generation.
EBITDA increased by 36%.
Our net debt to EBITDA ratio remains comfortably ahead of our internal threshold of 2.0 times.
Interest cover increased to 13.9 times again comfortably ahead of our internal minimum threshold of 5.0 times.
For employees and contractors the combined recordable injuries decreased by 12% in the calendar year 2016 and the lostwork cases decreased by 38%.
The combined recordable incident rate remained flat in 2016.
The combined lostwork case rate decreased by 31% compared to 2015.
Fatalities are recorded separately and not included in the rates above.
The number of times the Groups net borrowing exceeds its earnings.
The number of times the Groups earnings exceed interest payments made to service its debt.
The number of injuries per 200000 hours that required more than first aid for employees and contractors.
The number of injuries that resulted in lostwork days per 200000 hours for employees and contractors.
1.3tel 10.7x 10.7xtel eltel 3 Ratios calculated under the Groups bank covenants definitions and reported on a proportionate consolidation basis.
4 Measured on a calendar year basis.
How we calculate it Why we measure it
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 25 Continuing operations Year ended 31 March
Adjusted operating profit %
Constant currency change %
Constant currency change % North America 3% 357 327 9% 3% Asia Pacific and Latin America 2% 148 119 25% 6% Europe Middle East and Africa 14% 145 109 32% 15% Total excluding SPLENDA Sucralose and Food Systems 2% 650 555 17% 2% 125 105 19% 8% Food Systems 8% 184 186 1% 13% 4 23 82% 84%
Sucralose 5% 162 156 4% 7% 52 22 134% 77% Total Speciality Food Ingredients 1% 996 897 11% 3% 181 150 21% 5% At a glance Speciality Food Ingredients Growth engine Good performance with profit growth and margin expansion in the core business
Adjusted operating profit grew 5% in constant currency as we drove better product mix and improved margins in the core business and SPLENDA Sucralose performance benefited from the consolidation of its manufacturing footprint completed at the end of the prior year and the selldown of excess inventory.
Food Systems adjusted operating profit declined sharply to 4 million with sales constrained by both lower volume in Europe following the consolidation of our blending facilities to lower our longterm cost base which took longer than expected and the management of a credit issue that restricted our access to the Russian market.
The division delivered 150bps operating margin improvement driven by good growth in the core business and strong
Sucralose performance.
The effect of currency translation was to increase sales by 122 million and adjusted operating profit by 23 million.
Key highlights Good performance overall with adjusted operating profit 5% higher in constant currency Core business performed well despite continued weaker performance in North America Food Systems had a difficult year with a significant decline in Europe
Sucralose performance was strong benefiting from actions taken to refocus the business New Product momentum continues to be strong 26 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Speciality Food Ingredients excluding
Sucralose and Food Systems Volume grew by 2% with particularly good growth in Europe Middle East and Africa which benefited from the acquisition of the Slovakian facility.
On a likeforlike basis volume was 1% lower.
Adjusted operating profit increased by 8% in constant currency to 125 million benefiting from strong commercial execution and good supply chain performance.
In North America volume was 3% lower driven by softer demand in the overall US food and beverage market which continued to be sluggish in the year.
In this region we have a relatively high concentration of larger customers and the softness these customers are experiencing in the current market environment driven by lower consumer demand for their products has more than offset new business we secured.
As a consequence we continue to pursue a longerterm shift in our business by evolving our gotomarket approach to focus more on highergrowth subcategories which benefit from our expertise in sugar and calorie reduction and fibre enrichment.
In the health and nutrition category for example we have selectively targeted subcategories including energy and nutrition bars where we grew volume by 9% in the year.
In those areas where we believe we can accelerate progress we are investing in sales applications technical service and nutrition resources.
The new business we are securing gives us confidence in our ability over time to grow ahead of the US market and we expect to make progress against this goal as we move through the 2018 financial year.
In Asia Pacific and Latin America volume was 2% higher reflecting strong performance in the wider Asia Pacific region and doubledigit growth in Latin America somewhat offset by lower sweetener sales in Japan.
Sales were 6% higher in constant currency.
In Asia Pacific excluding Japan our We are wellplaced to benefit from increasing global consumer trends for healthier food and drink.
Joan Braca President Speciality Food Ingredients business continued to grow strongly especially in China benefiting from the investment in local commercial and technical capability over recent years.
In Brazil weak economic conditions and weak consumer offtake resulted in volume softness but this was more than offset by broadbased growth across the rest of the Latin American region.
Our Latin American business is well positioned for further growth despite the continued weak macroeconomic conditions in Brazil.
In Europe Middle East and Africa EMEA volume increased by 14% benefiting from good growth in the speciality sweetener business largely driven by the full ownership of the Slovakian facility from November 2015.
Excluding the impact of this acquisition EMEA delivered low singledigit volume growth with particular strength in our fibres portfolio.
Food Systems In our global blending business volumes were 8% lower largely reflecting weakness in Europe where performance was impacted by two issues.
Firstly the continued management of a credit exposure to a large customer materially restricted our access to the Russian market.
This credit issue is now closed and we are starting to sell product in Russia again.
Secondly the consolidation of our European blending sites which took longer than anticipated held back production and constrained sales.
The consolidation is now complete and will reduce our cost base in Europe going forward.
These European issues affected performance with adjusted operating profit 82% lower 84% lower in constant currency at 4 million.
Included in the profit for the year is a oneoff charge of 5 million in respect of the provision against receivables related to the European credit issue.
In the first half we executed a change to our Food Systems gotomarket approach in China to allow us to better serve customers and maximise our potential in that market.
As a result we agreed to sell our interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd. back to our partner.
We have recognised an exceptional charge of 7 million in respect of this investment.
We also recognised a net 13 million exceptional charge in respect of our Brazilian Food Systems business Tate and Lyle Gemacom Gemacom.
The charge comprises an impairment of goodwill reflecting lower growth expectations against the backdrop of a significantly weakened macroeconomic outlook in Brazil partially offset by a reduction in contingent consideration payable.
Gemacom remains an important part of our global Food Systems business with highquality assets and a strong market position.
Looking forward with the benefits of our restructuring we expect performance to improve over the course of the 2018 financial year.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 27 Speciality Food Ingredients continued Case study A customer in Asia wanted to launch a drink product that would appeal to a younger market.
Our application scientists got to work and developed a new concept  a jelly drink.
The drink contained a customised stabiliser system which provided unique functionality it starts as a liquid when served at an ambient temperature and gels as it is chilled.
This enabled our customer to launch a new line of drinks into the kids beverage category and position its brand as youthful and contemporary.
SPLENDA
Sucralose
Adjusted operating profit increased by 77% in constant currency to 52 million benefiting from better than expected pricing and the sale of excess inventory in the first half following the successful transition to a single manufacturing facility in McIntosh Alabama.
The second half saw the full benefit from significantly lower production costs at our single facility.
As anticipated after a strong start to the year volume declined by 12% in the second half in line with our lower production capacity.
As a result volume for the full year was lower by 5%.
The rate of decline of selling prices for SPLENDA contracting in the second half.
We continued to pursue a rigorous valuebased approach by focusing on those customers who fully value the benefits of our quality and customer service offering.
In our 2018 financial year with our business largely contracted we expect the fullyear benefit of lower costs to offset lower volumes.
Looking further ahead while the market for sucralose is expected to continue to grow industry capacity remains in excess of demand and therefore we expect further pricing pressure in the market.
New Products New Products representing products in the first seven years after launch continued to perform strongly.
Volume of New Products grew by 37% with sales increasing by 22%.
Sales of New Products exceeded US100 million for the first time reaching US105 million or 81 million with sales growth across all three platforms of sweeteners texturants where nonGMO starches grew strongly and health and wellness.
Since we opened our global Commercial and Food Innovation Centre in Chicago in 2012 New Product sales have delivered a 43% compound annual growth rate demonstrating the quality of our innovation pipeline.
Innovation is a key enabler of longterm growth and our focus continues to be on delivering innovative new products and solutions which meet customer and consumer needs in areas such as sugar and calorie reduction cleanlabel texturants and fibre enrichment.
These can be breakthrough innovations or incremental extensions to existing product families.
For example during the year we further expanded our sweetener range with MULTIVANTAGE Syrup a lowsugar lowviscosity sweetener as well as adding a crystalline format of DOLCIA PRIMA
We also extended our range of cleanlabel texturants with the launch of CLARIA
Our focus continues to be on delivering innovative new products and solutions which meet customer and consumer needs in areas such as sugar and calorie reduction texture and fibre enrichment.
In March 2017 we entered into an exclusive partnership with Sweet Green Fields SGF one of the largest fully integrated global stevia players to distribute their innovative stevia ingredients and bring their leading steviabased sweetening solutions to our customers around the world alongside our existing TASTEVA Stevia offering.
The partnership combines our sweetener expertise and global sales and distribution network with SGFs leading portfolio of steviabased ingredients and integrated stevia supply chain.
Sales of SGFs stevia ingredients and steviabased sweetening solutions will be reported in New Products sales.
1 CLARIA Bliss was previously called CLARIA Delight outside the European Union.
28 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Innovation and Commercial Development Innovation and Commercial Development ICD is a key enabler of our growth strategy.
ICD connects deep consumer and category understanding with leadingedge science to create solutions for customers which address growing consumer demand for healthier food and drink.
ICD is based at our global Commercial and Food Innovation Centre in Chicago USA.
At the Centre we offer a full range of facilities and services including sensory evaluation culinary development human nutrition and regulatory expertise stateoftheart research and application laboratories and a pilot plant.
Through the Centre and our global network of applications and technical services laboratories we work closely with our customers to drive new product validation and bring new products to market quickly.
ICD supports both business divisions but its resources are largely focused on three broad platforms within the global speciality food ingredients market  sweeteners texturants and health and wellness.
The innovation pipeline is managed through a disciplined process with clear milestones.
A rigorous multistep Stage Gate process is used to assess the size and viability of a potential idea through to final launch into the market.
ICD brings together scientific and commercial functions into one team to provide an integrated approach to developing and commercialising new products and technologies.
Global Marketing operates a market research programme designed to build deep consumer and category understanding of our three platforms.
It carries out primary research supplemented by insights from syndicated research services such as Euromonitor.
Platform Management takes consumer and category understanding and translates it into focused strategies for our three platforms aligned to large market opportunities.
Research and Development uses leadingedge science to deliver innovative new products which target large market opportunities.
Open Innovation complements inhouse science by developing relationships with universities and research institutions specialising in food science and technologies.
For earlier stage opportunities Tate and Lyle Ventures invests in companies in the food ingredient and technology space.
Connecting consumers and science Translating innovation into a commercial portfolio Soluble Fibre Lowcalorie sugar that offers a superior new taste experience Greattasting natural zero calorie stevia sweetener with no bitter aftertaste
Fibre enrichment solution with excellent digestive tolerance Natural heart healthy soluble oat fibre that supports healthy blood cholesterol levels Information about our New Products can be found on site Each platform has a clear strategic focus aligned to large market opportunities
Focused on driving sugar substitution by developing a range of lowcalorie and nocalorie alternatives to sugar.
Reducing calories from sugar consumption is an increasingly important priority not only for consumers but also for governments.
Texturants
Focused on delivering highly functional and cleanlabel starches.
In the food industry starches play a key functional role in providing texture and shelf stability replacing fat and calories as well as managing costs.
Health and wellness Focused on delivering wellness through enrichment by developing soluble fibres and expanding our range of oatbased ingredients.
Fibres support healthy digestion and have other functional benefits such as fat sugar and calorie reduction.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 29 2017
Constant currency change %
Total Bulk Ingredients % 4% Adjusted operating profit Core Bulk Ingredients 121 93 31% 13% Commodities 8 9 183% 166% Total Bulk Ingredients 129 84 54% 32% Continuing operations Year ended 31 March 2017
Volume
North American Sweeteners % North American Industrial Starches 3% Total Bulk Ingredients 3% At a glance Bulk Ingredients Steady earnings and cash generation Key highlights Strong performance with adjusted operating profit 32% higher in constant currency Solid demand across the portfolio Strong commercial execution Robust margins with industry well balanced Performance underpinned by good manufacturing performance
Volume increased by 3% driven by industrial starch growth and the acquisition of 100% of the Slovakian facility in the prior year.
North American bulk sweetener volume was flat.
Overall
Sales for the division increased by 4% in constant currency to 1757 million.
Adjusted operating profit was 32% higher in constant currency at 129 million benefiting from good commercial and operational execution across the business and robust margins.
Commodities contributed profits of 8 million an increase of 17 million in the year.
Operating margin for the division strengthened by 150bps.
The effect of exchange translation was to increase sales by 239 million and adjusted operating profit by 18 million.
The US corn wet milling industry remains well balanced reflecting capacity reductions in the industry at the beginning of 2015 and more robust industry exports to Mexico where demand for regular carbonated soft drinks remained firm and sugar prices are relatively high at present.
Strong profit performance driven by commercial and operational execution good demand and robust margins 30 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 We continue to position our Bulk Ingredients business in North America to deliver steady earnings over the longer term.
We have adopted a product line approach to further increase our focus on product mix management and lower costs across the supply chain.
We have also established a dedicated team to generate continuous process improvements within the plant network.
We continue to look for ways to further improve the longerterm efficiency of our plants with the new combined heat and power facility in Loudon Tennessee which was brought into use in the third quarter of the financial year being an example.
Commercial execution continues to strengthen with stronger customer service driven from improved demand forecasting and supply chain decisionmaking which has been supported by the implementation of our global SAP system.
Corn prices For the third consecutive year the corn harvest was strong with the autumn 2016 harvest setting a production record at 15.1 billion bushels and US corn inventories increasing to their highest levels in the past 30 years.
Three consecutive strong harvests have led to a period of sustained lower US corn prices with market prices trading below 4.00 per bushel for the majority of the financial year.
The stockstouse ratio for the US market for 20162017 is estimated at 16% reflecting inventories around one third higher being carried into the 20172018 corn year.
North American Sweeteners North American bulk sweetener volume was flat despite a modest decline in consumption driven by strong commercial execution and the benefit of strong demand in Mexico.
Consumption of regular carbonated soft drinks is the main driver of high fructose corn syrup demand in the US.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 US regular carbonated soft drinks consumption declined by only 0.7% a slightly slower decline than the historical trend.
Unit margins for contracts renewed for the 2016 calendar year increased benefiting from continued good industry supply demand balance following capacity reductions.
Our unit margins further benefited from mix improvements from our product line focus and manufacturing and supply chain efficiencies.
Contracts renewed for the 2017 calendar year contracting round delivered modestly higher unit margins benefiting the fourth quarter of the 2017 financial year.
North American Industrial Starches North American industrial starches volume was 3% higher somewhat ahead of underlying market growth.
Demand for paper and board remained steady  as continued higher packaging and tissue demand offset a decline in demand for printing and writing paper .
Demand for starches used in building materials has been robust in a relatively stable US housing market.
Commodities
Coproduct values in the US have stabilised towards the low end of historical price levels.
Strong recent production of corn and soybeans has sustained large yeartoyear inventory carryover of both products and kept prices for both grains and coproducts relatively stable.
US ethanol margins remained relatively steady at the low end of the historical range during the year.
Commodities overall reported a profit of 8 million an increase of 17 million from the 2016 financial year.
The higher profits from Commodities were driven by better market demand for proteins including corn gluten meal.
Ethanol performance was largely flat.
US political environment The new US Administration is seeking to reform the North American Free Trade Agreement NAFTA.
NAFTA is very important to the US food and agricultural sector and Mexico in particular is a key export market for the corn wet milling industry particularly for high fructose corn syrup.
Until we have clarity on the nature of any proposed changes it is difficult to estimate what the impact if any will be.
1 USDA the US Department of Agriculture data.
2 Source IRI Total US  Multi Outlet  Convenience Stores.
We continue to position our Bulk Ingredients business in North America to deliver steady earnings over the longer term.
Jim Stutelberg President Bulk Ingredients STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 31 Global Operations Global Operations is responsible for the delivery of highquality products to our customers across the world.
It ensures the efficient and cost effective operation of our manufacturing assets and that our ingredients reach customers on time in full and to a high quality.
Through the application of process technologies and continuous improvement programmes Global Operations drives cost and production efficiencies to ensure we remain cost competitive in the markets in which we operate.
Safety
Global Operations is responsible for the global safety programme details of which can be found on pages 44 to 46.
Global manufacturing Global Operations manages our principal manufacturing assets.
In the US these include four major corn wet mills three of which are in the midwest and one in Tennessee.
In Europe we operate two corn wet mills in the Netherlands and in
All our corn wet mills make both speciality food ingredients and bulk ingredients.
Other key sites include our SPLENDA Sucralose facility in the US and our citric acid plants in the US and Brazil.
Smaller manufacturing sites include an oatbased fibres facility in Sweden and a polydextrose fibre facility in China.
As well as serving domestic US markets our US corn wet mills are also the main source of products sold in Latin America and Asia Pacific.
Global supply chain Global Operations manages the storage transportation and delivery of products from our plants to our customers.
Global supply and demand planning processes are in place supported by demand data from our global ISIT system including a common process for gathering a robust demand signal from the global business.
Demand planning resources are based in each region in which Speciality Food Ingredients operates.
The regional output provided in a common format is assessed against our supply capabilities allowing us to make faster betterquality decisions.
Customer service raw material sourcing and sustainability Global Operations provides customer service operations for both business divisions.
It operates regional customer service functions with dedicated teams managing customer communications from order receipt to delivery.
Corn is our largest raw material input.
Global Operations manages corn procurement and the elevator network of storage facilities in the US to manage the cost effectiveness and security of our corn supply.
While operating the production facilities as efficiently as we can Global Operations is also focused on managing our impact on the environment and the communities in which we operate.
Continuous Improvement A dedicated Continuous Improvement team is in place to lead productivity and efficiency projects across our manufacturing and broader supply chain network.
Delivering operational excellence Two examples of projects completed by Global Operations during the year Loudon cogeneration In the third quarter of the 2017 financial year a new natural gasfired combined heat and power system was commissioned at our corn wet mill in Loudon Tennessee.
This new system a US60 million investment will significantly improve energy and operational efficiency at the facility and also substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions at the site.
SPLENDA
Sucralose production In the first half of the year following completion of the project to consolidate production of SPLENDA than originally planned.
The new cogeneration plant a natural gasfired combined heat and power system at our corn wet milling facility in Loudon Tennessee.
32 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Nick Hampton Chief Financial Officer
Key headlines 20% increase in Group adjusted PBT with good performance and increased margins in both business divisions 5% increase in Speciality Food Ingredients adjusted operating profit to 181m 8% profit growth in core business despite North America volume growth remaining challenging 30m increase in SPLENDA Sucralose profit following actions taken to refocus the business 19m decrease in Food Systems profit with significant decline in Europe 22% increase in sales from New Products to US105m 32% increase in Bulk Ingredients adjusted operating profit to 129m Strong commercial and operational execution good demand and robust margins 17m higher profit from
40m benefit from currency translation in adjusted profit before tax 121m increase in adjusted free cash flow from higher earnings lower capital expenditure and currency translation Exceptional impairment charges of 1 Adjusted results and a number of other terms and performance measures used in this Annual Report are not directly defined within accounting standards.
For clarity we have provided descriptions of the various metrics and their reconciliations to the most directly comparable measures reported in IFRS and the calculations where relevant of any ratios in Notes 1 and 4.
2 Percentage changes in constant currency.
Summary of financial results for the year ended 31 March 2017 audited Year ended 31 March
Constant currency change % Continuing operations Sales % 2% Adjusted operating profit Speciality Food Ingredients 181 150 21% 5% Bulk Ingredients 129 84 54% 32% Central 46 46  1% Adjusted operating profit 264 188 40% 18% Adjusted net finance expense 25 23 9% 2% Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 32 28 Adjusted profit before tax 271 193 40% 20% Exceptional items 19 50 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 12 11 Net retirement benefit interest 7 6 Profit before tax 233 126 Income tax creditexpense 22 5 Profit for the year  continuing operations 255 121 Profit for the year  discontinued operations 1 42 Profit for the year  total operations 256 163 Earnings per share  continuing operations pence Basic 55.0p 26.1p 111% Diluted 54.2p 25.9p 109% Adjusted earnings per share continuing operations pence Basic 47.8p 34.7p 38% 17% Diluted 47.1p 34.5p 37% 16% Dividends per share pence Interim paid 8.2p 8.2p Final proposed 19.8p 19.8p Cash flow and net debt Adjusted free cash flow 174 53 Net debt  at 31 March 452 434 Group Financial Results STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 33 Group Financial Results continued Sales from continuing operations of 2753 million were 17% higher than the prior year 2% higher at constant currency.
Adjusted operating profit from continuing operations increased by 40% 18% at constant currency to 264 million with profits ahead in both divisions.
Adjusted profit before tax from continuing operations was 40% higher than last year 20% at constant currency increasing to 271 million.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations increased by 12.6p to 47.1p.
On a statutory basis profit before tax from continuing operations increased by 107 million to 233 million.
Statutory diluted earnings per share from continuing operations increased by 28.3p to 54.2p reflecting improved operating performance lower operating exceptional items and a tax credit in the year driven by exceptional tax items 2016  tax charge.
Profit for the year from total operations increased to 256 million 2016  163 million with the prior year benefiting from a 42 million profit for the year from discontinued operations which included 62 million of profit after tax in respect of disposed elements of the Eaststarch joint venture and the Moroccan subsidiary.
Central costs Central costs which include head office costs treasury and reinsurance activities of 46 million were in line with the prior year.
Net finance expense Adjusted net finance expense from continuing operations which excludes net retirement benefit interest was 2 million higher at 25 million principally reflecting steps taken to extend the weighted average maturity of debt as proceeds from the drawdown of the Groups US400 million private debt with a blended fixed rate notes coupon of around 4% were used to repay shortterm commercial paper in October 2015.
The Group repaid a US250 million bond on its maturity in June 2016.
Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates The Groups share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates of 32 million was 4 million higher than in the prior year reflecting strong underlying performance at both Almex in Mexico due to strong demand for bulk sweeteners and our BioPDO joint venture in the US.
Exceptional items from continuing operations During the year the Group recognised a net exceptional charge of 19 million within continuing operations.
Included in exceptional costs were net impairment charges totalling 26 million.
The Group incurred a net 13 million charge in respect of the Groups Brazilian Food Systems business Gemacom reflecting lower growth expectations against the backdrop of a weaker macroeconomic outlook in Brazil.
The
Group also incurred a 7 million charge in respect of exiting our interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd. in China together with a 6 million charge in respect of the impairment of certain redundant assets at our Decatur facility in the US.
Also included in exceptional charges was a 9 million noncash gain in respect of the settlement of certain elements of our US retirement benefit plan obligations a 5 million net business realignment charge in respect of sucralose and the Groups European operations and a 3 million gain from disposals by Tate and Lyle Ventures.
A full summary of exceptional items can be found in Note 7.
There was no tax credit on exceptional items 2016 21 million credit although the Group did recognise exceptional deferred tax credits totalling 65 million 2016 nil following recent changes to the Groups internal financing structure and a transfer of intellectual property assets related to SPLENDA Sucralose to align ownership with the underlying manufacturing base.
Net exceptional costs from continuing operations in the prior year totalled 50 million predominantly reflecting business realignment costs.
Taxation
The Groups tax rate is sensitive to the geographic mix of profits and reflects a combination of higher rates in certain jurisdictions such as the US nil effective rates in the UK due to available tax losses and rates that lie somewhere in between.
The adjusted effective tax rate on earnings for continuing operations for the year ended 31 March 2017 increased to 18.2% 2016  16.5%.
The reported effective tax rate on statutory earnings for the year was a credit of 9.6% 2016  a charge of 4.0% lower as a result of the recognition of two significant exceptional deferred tax credits totalling 65 million.
Firstly as a result of recent changes in UK legislation arising from the OECDs Base Erosion and Profit Shifting BEPS project and changes to the internal financing arrangements we use to fund our international businesses we have recognised an exceptional deferred tax credit of 34 million arising from previously unrecognised tax losses in the UK which based on enacted legislation are now expected to be utilised against future UK taxable profits.
Secondly the Group transferred at fair value its sucralose intellectual property assets from the UK to align ownership with its corresponding manufacturing base in the US following the move to consolidate all sucralose production into our US facility in the 2016 financial year.
This transfer led to the recognition of an exceptional deferred tax credit of 31 million.
The recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities is dependent on a number of key judgements and estimates.
The deferred tax asset of 34 million arising from the utilisation of UK tax losses following changes to the internal financing arrangements reflects judgements related principally to the size and duration of future internal financing arrangements the interest coupon payable on these arrangements the future level of deductible expenses incurred in the UK and foreign currency exchange rates.
Changes in these assumptions along with future changes in legislation for example impacting the utilisation of UK tax losses could have a material impact on the amount of deferred tax recognised in future accounting periods.
34 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Assets Gross assets of 2771 million at 31 March 2017 were 217 million higher than the prior year on a statutory basis reflecting profit for the year and the positive impact of the strengthening US dollar with significant exchange gains on translation of foreign operations recognised in other comprehensive income.
Net assets increased by 303 million to 1332 million.
Retirement benefits The Group maintains pension plans for our employees in a number of countries.
Some of these arrangements are defined benefit pension schemes and although we have closed the main UK scheme and the US salaried and hourly paid schemes to future accrual certain obligations remain.
In the US we also provide medical benefits as part of retirement packages.
The net deficit on the Groups retirement benefits plans decreased by 69 million to 139 million.
The deficit improvement was driven primarily by an increase in the surplus of the main UK scheme reflecting an increase in the value of all asset classes and lower retirement benefit obligations driven by changes in mortality assumptions partially offset by a reduction in the discount rate used to discount future pension obligations.
Under funding arrangements in connection with the 2013 actuarial valuation the Group committed to make core funding contributions for the main UK scheme of 12 million per year and supplementary contributions for six years of 6 million per year into a secured funding account payable to the Trustee on certain triggering events.
The main UK scheme triennial valuation as at 31 March 2016 was concluded during the year with core funding contributions maintained at 12 million per year with the Group also committing to extend the supplementary contributions payable into the secured funding account of 6 million per year until 31 March 2023.
We estimate that with an increasing mix of US profits the impact of changes to our internal financing structure and under currently enacted legislation the adjusted effective tax rate for the 2018 financial year will be between 21% and 24%.
We expect the rate of cash tax being the amount of tax paid as a percentage of adjusted profit before tax to align to the adjusted effective tax rate over time.
Discontinued operations In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group recognised a 1 million exceptional gain resulting from the recycling of cumulative foreign exchange translation gains from reserves to the income statement upon completion of the disposal of its corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco on 1 June 2016.
The discontinued profit for the year ended 31 March 2016 principally comprised a net exceptional profit before tax on disposal from Eaststarch and Morocco of 64 million as the Group disposed of the predominantly bulk ingredients plants in Bulgaria Turkey Hungary and Morocco as part of the overall realignment and an exceptional legal charge of 18 million relating to the sale of the Groups former EU Sugars business in September 2010.
Earnings per share Adjusted basic earnings per share from continuing operations increased by 38% to 47.8p and adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations at 47.1p were 37% higher.
Total diluted earnings per share increased to 54.4p 2016  34.8p.
Dividend
The Board proposes an unchanged final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 of 19.8p to make an unchanged total for the year of 28.0p.
Subject to shareholder approval at the Companys AGM on 27 July 2017 the proposed final dividend will be paid on 1 August 2017 to all shareholders on the Register of Members on 30 June 2017.
In addition to the cash dividend option shareholders will continue to be offered a Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP alternative.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 35 Group Financial Results continued Adjusted free cash flow representing cash generated from continuing operations excluding the impact of exceptional items less net interest paid income tax paid and capital expenditure was 174 million 121 million higher than the prior year principally reflecting higher earnings after adjusting for noncash items and lower capital expenditure.
Net interest paid increased by 8 million mostly owing to timing of interest payments.
Taxation paid was 19 million higher reflecting higher taxable profits in the US.
Capital expenditure of 153 million which included a 26 million investment in intangible assets was 1.1 times the depreciation and adjusted amortisation charge of 137 million and reflects continued investment in capacity as well as efficiency and maintenance investments.
We expect capital expenditure for the 2018 financial year to be around the same level.
Other significant cash flows in arriving at net debt included 29 million of dividends received from joint ventures external dividend payments of 130 million exceptional cash outflows of 24 million and the 18 million payment for the purchase of shares to satisfy share option commitments.
Overall on a constant currency basis net debt decreased by 39 million in the year reflecting strong free cash generation in the year which exceeded dividend payments.
However net debt at 31 March 2017 of 452 million increased by 18 million due to the adverse impact of exchange rates of 57 million mainly as a result of the impact of the stronger US dollar on the Groups US dollar denominated debt.
Financial risk factors Our key financial risk factors are market risks such as foreign exchange transaction and translation exposures and credit and liquidity risks as explained in Note 29.
Off balance sheet arrangements In the ordinary course of business to manage our operations and financing we enter into certain performance guarantees and commitments for capital and other expenditure.
We aim to optimise financing costs in respect of all financing transactions.
Where it is economically beneficial we choose to lease rather than purchase assets.
Leases for property plant and equipment where the lessee does not assume substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are treated as operating leases with annual rentals charged to the income statement over the term of the lease.
Commitments under operating leases to pay rentals in future years totalled 318 million 2016  303 million and related primarily to railcar leases in the US and our commitment for a gas pipeline to supply our Loudon facility.
Rental charges for the year ended 31 March 2017 in respect of continuing operations were 32 million 2016  24 million.
FY16
Adjusted free cash ow
EBITDA and stable working capital
Interest
Pensions FY17
Adjusted free cash ow For the year ended 31 March 1 Adjusted results and a number of other terms and performance measures used in this Annual Report are not directly defined within accounting standards.
We have provided descriptions of the various metrics and their reconciliation to the most directly comparable measures reported in accordance with IFRS and the calculation where relevant of any ratios in Notes 1 and 4.
Cash flow and net debt Year ended 31 March Adjusted operating profit from continuing operations 264 188 Adjusted for Noncash items in adjusted operating profit and working capital 162 137 Net interest and tax paid 63 36 Net retirement benefit obligations 36 38 Capital expenditure 153 198 Adjusted free cash flow 174 53 At 31 March Net debt 452 434 36 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Use and fair value of financial instruments In the normal course of business we use both derivative and nonderivative financial instruments.
The fair value of Group net debt at the year end was 472 million against a book value of 452 million 2016  fair value 453 million book value 434 million.
Derivative financial instruments used to manage the interest rate and currency of borrowings had a fair value of 21 million liability 2016  5 million asset.
The main types of instrument used are interest rate swaps and crosscurrency interest rate swaps.
The fair value of other derivative financial instruments hedging future currency and commodity transactions was 2 million asset 2016  4 million liability.
When managing currency exposure we use spot and forward purchases and sales and options.
The fair value of other derivative financial instruments accounted for as held for trading was an 11 million asset 2016  22 million asset.
Fair value estimation The fair value of derivative financial instruments is based on the market price of comparable instruments at the balance sheet date if they are publicly traded.
The fair value of the forward currency contracts was determined based on market forward exchange rates at the balance sheet date.
The fair values of shortterm deposits receivables payables loans and overdrafts with a maturity of less than one year are assumed to approximate their book values.
The fair values of bonds bank and other loans including finance lease liabilities due in more than one year are estimated by discounting the future contractual cash flows at the current market interest rate available to the Group for similar financial instruments adjusted for the fair valuation effects of currency and interest rate risk exposures where those instruments form part of related hedging relationship agreements financial and commodity forward contracts and options and commodity futures.
The values of certain items of merchandisable agricultural commodities that are included in inventories are based on market prices.
Going concern The Directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue to operate for a period not less than 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements and that there are no material uncertainties around their assessment.
Accordingly the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting.
Basis of preparation The Groups principal accounting policies are unchanged compared with the year ended 31 March 2016.
A number of minor changes to accounting policies have been adopted during the year although they have had no material effect on the Groups financial statements.
Details of the basis of preparation including information in respect of the methodology used to calculate the Groups adjusted performance metrics can be found in Notes 1 and 4.
Impact of changes in exchange rates The Groups reported financial performance at average rates of exchange for the year ended 31 March 2017 was favourably impacted by currency translation.
The effect of exchange translation was to increase adjusted profit before tax by 40 million compared with the comparative year principally as a result of a weakening of sterling against most other currencies following the UKs vote to leave the EU.
The average and closing US dollar and euro exchange rates used to translate reported results were as follows Average rates Closing ratestel 2016 US dollar sterling 1.30 1.51 1.25 1.44 Euro sterling 1.19 1.37 1.17 1.26 Foreign currency impacts and the UKs referendum on EU membership Sterling has weakened significantly since the UKs referendum on EU membership in June 2016.
Average rates for the financial year were US dollar1  1.30 Euro1  1.19 Mexican peso1  25.11 peso and Brazilian real1  4.32 real.
For the year ended 31 March 2017 foreign exchange translation increased Speciality Food Ingredients adjusted operating profit by 23 million and increased Bulk Ingredients adjusted operating profit by 18 million with adjusted profit before tax for the Group increasing by 40 million.
We have assessed the impact of the UK referendum result on our business.
The Group generates less than 2% of its revenues in the United Kingdom.
The outcome of this referendum is not expected to have a material nearterm impact on our business.
Nick Hampton Chief Financial Officer 24 May 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 37 Risks Managing our risks effectively Risk framework The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of risk management and internal control and for setting the Groups risk appetite.
The schedule of matters reserved to the Board ensures that the Board makes a robust assessment of among other matters the principal risks facing the Group and determines the nature and extent of risk it is willing to take for the Group to achieve its strategic objectives.
Approach
Process to identify risks The Groupwide risk management and reporting process helps to identify assess prioritise and mitigate risk.
Principal risks are considered over a time period of three years.
This annual process is both bottomup and topdown.
The topdown aspect involves the Board assessing what it believes to be the principal risks facing Tate and Lyle.
The bottomup aspect of the process involves a rolling programme of workshops facilitated by the risk management team held around the Group.
During these workshops current and forwardlooking risks are identified which are collated and reported through functional and divisional levels to the Executive Committee.
Areas and behaviours which could potentially trigger risk combinations are also considered.
We combine the results of these processes to identify the Groups key business strategic financial operational and compliance risks and then develop action plans and controls to mitigate them as far as possible to the extent deemed appropriate taking account of the Groups risk appetite.
These risks are then reviewed again by the Board which also reviews emerging and black swan risks.
The Group faces a number of risks which could have a material adverse effect on our strategy performance results financial condition and reputation How we manage risks Tate and Lyles enterprise risk management ERM programme facilitates a common Groupwide approach to the identification analysis and assessment of risks and the way risks are managed controlled and monitored.
Assess risks and interactions
Review and monitor risks Respond to and mitigate risks
38 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Viability statement In accordance with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code issued in September 2014 the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group taking into account our current position and the potential impact of the principal risks we face.
Although the Groups strategic plan which the Board reviews annually forecasts beyond three years the current planning process provides for the preparation of a detailed financial plan over a threeyear period built bottomup on a divisional basis including anticipated capital and funding requirements.
For this reason the Directors have determined that a threeyear period to 31 March 2020 is an appropriate period over which to assess viability.
To assess viability we stresstested the strategic plan under four downside scenarios.
These were seen as key outcomes that would stress the potential viability of the Group if one or more of the principal risks set out in this Annual Report occurred.
The potential impact of these scenarios was assessed individually and in combinations on both a gross before mitigation and a net after mitigation basis.
The four downside scenarios modelled were a major operational failure causing the shutdown of a large manufacturing facility for an extended period of time a sharp decline in sales in one or more of our major product lines the loss of one or more of our key global customers and government actions or policies restricting or preventing our ability to operate in key markets.
In each case it was assumed that our ability to acquire financing or refinancing in the capital markets remained available in all plausible market conditions.
The impact of these risks occurring was measured by quantifying their financial impact on the strategic plan and on the Groups viability when set against measures including liquidity credit rating and financial covenant requirements.
We also considered operational and commercial impacts.
The results of this stress testing showed that the Group would over the threeyear period be able to withstand the impact of the most severe combination of the risks modelled by making adjustments to our strategic plan and capital allocation priorities and other available mitigating actions.
Based on this assessment the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to 31 March 2020.
Risk appetite As part of the annual risk assessment process the Board and Executive Committee undertake an exercise to consider the nature and extent of the Groups risk appetite.
This exercise was refreshed during the year with the help of an external risk expert facilitator.
The results of this exercise are used as part of strategic planning activities and in setting ongoing mitigating actions.
Managing risks Individual executives in each division are assigned responsibility for managing risks and their associated mitigating controls.
As part of the process senior executive management formally confirms once a year that risks are being managed appropriately within their operations and that controls have been examined and are effective.
The confirmations and any exceptions are discussed at the Audit Committee and Corporate Responsibility Committee and where appropriate reported to the Board.
The Executive Committee reviews the principal risks regularly and formally on a quarterly basis and reports any changes in the level or velocity of the risks and associated mitigating actions to the
The Board reviews the principal risks at least every six months.
Principal risks The Board has carefully considered the type and extent of the principal risks to the Group achieving its objectives.
While the Group seeks to manage risk carefully at the same time the Board recognises that some risk needs to be taken for the Group to achieve its strategic goals.
Over time the risk profile of the Group evolves and the Boards view of the principal risks is updated accordingly.
This year shareholder expectations has been removed as a principal risk following the stabilisation and then improvement in the Groups financial performance over the last two years.
Conversely given increasing geopolitical uncertainty over the last year in some of the markets we operate in the Board has decided to add government regulations and trade policies as a principal risk this year.
The Board confirms that a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those that would threaten its business model performance solvency and liquidity has been carried out.
The principal risks identified as part of the process undertaken during the year together with examples of the mitigating actions being taken are set out on pages 40 and 41.
It is not possible to identify or anticipate every risk that may affect the Group.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 39 Risks continued Principal risks Examples of how we manage the risk
Act safely and maintain the safe operation of our facilities The safety of our employees contractors suppliers and the communities in which we operate is paramount.
We must operate within local laws regulations rules and ordinances relating to health safety and the environment including emissions.
Failure to act safely which could lead to loss of life or serious injury may give rise to fines or penalties for breach of safety laws interruptions in operations or loss of our licence to operate liability payments and costs arising from injuries or damage and damage to our reputation.
Health and safety policies and procedures at all facilities with dedicated staff to ensure they are embedded and measured Regular review of performance and policies by the Corporate Responsibility Committee Maintenance of suitable insurance programme Programme of global compliance audits senior executives also undertake annual executive audits at most sites Process safety management system in place to manage use of hazardous chemicals
Comprehensive review of Groupwide safety protocols procedures and culture being undertaken with the support of an independent external expert consultancy
Growth in speciality food ingredients Tate and Lyles strategy is to become a leading global provider of speciality food ingredients and solutions.
Our ability to deliver that strategy may be affected by a number of factors such as delivering growth in emerging markets acquisitions customers readiness to adopt new ingredients and incorporate them in new product launches competitor actions and growing key product or product families.
Failure to deliver our strategy over the longer term would negatively affect our credibility reputation and profitability.
Investments to increase sales and technical resources and infrastructure particularly in emerging markets New staff recruited and existing staff developed to upgrade skill sets in customerfacing areas and innovation Enhancement of internal capabilities to promote growth through acquisition and partnerships for example the new distribution agreement with Sweet Green Fields for stevia ingredients announced during the year Global programme to increase customer focus in key areas such as customer account management planning and execution
Innovate and commercialise new products Failure to identify important consumer trends and provide innovative solutions and the inability to successfully commercialise new products could impact the delivery of our strategy.
This would affect our performance and reputation.
Innovation and Commercial Development team conducts research and works closely with customers and other external organisations to identify emerging consumer trends Open innovation team actively scouts for breakthrough technologies and opportunities across industries and universities Global marketing organisation provides support for new product launches and consumer and category insight Prioritisation of partnership opportunities with customers to accelerate development cycles and time to market for new ingredients Tate and Lyle Ventures invests in earlystage companies in the areas of food science and technology by partnering with research institutions entrepreneurs and other venture funds
Attract develop engage and retain key personnel Performance knowledge and skills of employees are central to our success.
We must attract integrate engage and retain the talent required to deliver our strategy and have the appropriate processes and culture in place.
Being unable to retain key people and adequately plan for succession could have a negative impact on our performance.
Remuneration policies designed to attract retain and reward employees with ability and experience to execute Group strategy Talent development strategy to provide opportunities for employees as well as training to close skills gaps Single global performance management system and talent planning processes in place Greater focus by the Board on succession planning for business critical roles Measurement of progress against cultural objectives for example global employee surveys Legal and compliance Comply with legal or regulatory requirements and our Code of Ethics We operate in a variety of markets and are therefore exposed to a wide range of legal and regulatory frameworks.
We must understand and comply with all applicable legislation.
Any breach could have a financial impact and damage our reputation.
Regular monitoring and review of changes in law and regulation in areas such as health and safety environment quality food safety corporate governance and data protection Legal teams maintain compliance policies in areas such as antitrust and anticorruption law and provide ongoing training to employees Ethics training provided to employees Whistleblowing process in place Speak Up programme Cyber security Maintain the security of our information systems and data A cyber security breach whether as a result of human error deliberate action or the failure of technology systems could result in unauthorised access to or misuse of information systems technology or data.
This could cause harm to our assets loss of data business disruption legal liabilities and damage to our reputation.
Cyber security enhancement programme in place focused on strengthening people process and technology defences Compulsory cyber security training Cyber security breach scenario exercises Advanced perimeter defences in place Continuous vulnerability detection and defences Separation of systems within plant network Thirdparty Security Operations Centre providing 247 security monitoring security event correlation and threat counter measures 40 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Key new principal risk this year Principal risks Examples of how we manage the risk Operations and supply chain Maintain the continuous operation of our plant network and supply chain including high standards of customer service Operating plants involves many risks which could cause temporary or permanent breaks in production.
We must have a robust sales and operations planning process to avoid disruption to the supply chain and maintain high standards of customer service.
Failure to do any of these things could have a material adverse effect on our performance and reputation.
Preventive maintenance programme across the plant network Ongoing programme to improve global supply chain processes Business continuity capabilities in place to enable supply as quickly as practicable of product to customers from alternative sources in the event of a natural disaster or major equipment or plant failure Dedicated internal resources allocated to key projects in conjunction with business teams to ensure business continuity is not compromised Customer service managed by Global Operations as part of integrated endtoend supply chain process Raw materials Fluctuations in prices and availability of raw materials energy freight and other operating inputs Our margins may be affected by fluctuations in crop prices due to factors such as alternative crops coproduct values and the variability of local or regional harvests caused by for example weather conditions crop disease climate change or crop yields.
In some cases due to the basis for pricing in sales contracts or due to competitive markets we may not be able to pass on to customers the full increase in raw material prices or higher energy freight or other operating costs.
Additionally margins may be affected by customers not taking expected volumes.
Strategic relationships with suppliers and trading companies including multiyear agreements Balanced portfolio of supply and tolling contracts in operation with customers to manage balance of raw material prices and product sales prices and volume risks Raw material and energy purchasing policies to provide security of supply Network of corn elevators to enhance security of supply New or backup supply sources in place in case primary suppliers face localised challenges Use of derivatives and forward contracts where practical to hedge and manage our exposure to raw material and coproduct prices
Maintain the quality and safety of our products The safety of the consumers of our products is critical.
Poor quality or substandard products could have a negative impact on consumer safety and on our reputation and relationships with customers.
Strict quality control and product testing procedures to ensure products are released only with full quality control clearance Quality policies procedures and performance reviewed regularly by the Corporate Responsibility Committee Immediate response Recall Committee meets promptly if a recall event occurs Thirdparty audit programme supplemented by internal global compliance audits Regular recall simulation exercises Consumer concerns and food regulation Changes in consumer  customer or government attitudes to our products Our freedom or ability to operate may be affected by changes in consumer or customer attitudes food law and regulatory changes political campaigns targeted at specific ingredients or technologies or other factors that may impact the regulatory status or perception of our products or of their functionality efficacy or use.
We must ensure that the science behind our ingredients for example health claims nutritional impact is supported by credible sources clearly communicated and understood by relevant regulatory authorities.
Failure to do so may restrict the markets for our products.
Global regulatory team supported by external consultants monitors local regulatory requirements affecting our products Global nutrition team initiates and monitors research and publications concerning the use and functionality of our ingredients and maintains global network of health and nutrition clinicians academics and experts Membership of trade organisations provides access to broader sources of information and ensures where appropriate a single voice for the industry on regulatory and public interest issues affecting our ingredients Maintenance of relations with regulatory authorities Provision of clear information on ingredients provenance and traceability Research Advisory Group chaired by a nonexecutive director and comprising leading scientific experts reviews critical aspects of the Groups innovation activities and provides guidance Government regulations and trade policies Changes in government regulations andor trade policies Government actions or policies causing changes in quotas tariffs or customs duties or imposing importexport limitations or other barriers may lead to our business incurring additional costs or may restrict opportunities for growth or prevent our ability to operate in certain markets.
Programme in place to ensure that we actively engage in discussions with political parties influencers and regulatory authorities in the main countries we operate in Active member of relevant industry trade associations Model in place enabling production across the plant network to be adapted or optimised in the event of market restrictions in certain countries Operation of a global plant network means customers can be served from different countries if products from certain markets are restricted or become economically less attractive Continue to invest in resources and infrastructure across different markets and geographies to diversify business mix Financial controls Maintain an effective system of internal financial controls Without effective internal financial controls we could be exposed to financial irregularities and losses from acts which could have a significant impact on the ability of the business to operate.
We must safeguard business assets and ensure the accuracy and reliability of our records and financial reporting.
Financial policies and standards are in place supported by procedures for key financial processes for example capital expenditure Financial risks are monitored and managed through a number of forums for example the regional Control Environment Councils Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer undertake detailed quarterly business and financial reviews Process controls were reviewed during the year for existence and effectiveness Automated controls are built into systems where possible STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 41 Governance The governance of Corporate Responsibility CR is overseen by the Boards Corporate Responsibility Committee see page 72.
The Chief Executive is the Board Director with specific responsibility for CR and issues relating to CR are considered within the Groups risk management and reporting processes see page 38.
Public reporting We explain the scope principles and methodologies we use to report our CR performance in CR Reporting Criteria Annual Report 2017 at siteaboutuscorporateresponsibility
Bureau Veritas UK Ltd have independently verified selected environmental data on page 47.
Their assurance statement is at siteaboutuscorporateresponsibility Our employees are the key to delivering our strategy.
In line with our Values we believe that everyone should be safe at work and be treated fairly and with respect.
Our policies covering ethical conduct and human rights include Our Code of Ethics and related internal and external communication and training The Groups global human resources policies and our position and practices on equal opportunities and diversity Our Speak Up programme system that supports whistleblowing Our controls for managing standards in the supply chain see page 50.
Employee profile At 31 March 2017 Tate and Lyle employed 4146 people 2016 4326.
During the year we have closed the Singapore sucralose plant sold our interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co Ltd in China back to our partner and restructured our Food Systems blending sites in Europe.
At the same time we continued to expand our commercial teams in Asia Pacific and Latin America and added staff at our Global Shared Service Centre in Poland.
Corporate Responsibility Building a sustainable business Our approach to corporate responsibility focuses on our workplace the safety of our people the environment our marketplace and the communities of which we are a part Our Values Our Values define what we stand for and how we behave with our customers suppliers investors the communities we operate in and with each other.
Workplace
Employees by division as at 31 March 2017 1 Speciality Food Ingredients 46% 2 Bulk Ingredients  42% 3 Central functions 12%
Respect Integrity
Values
Accountability
Performance Values
Creativity
Speed
Teamwork
42 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Relationship with employees We believe in equal opportunities for all regardless of gender sexual orientation age marital status disability race religion or other beliefs and ethnic or national origin.
Our policies practices and procedures for recruitment training and career development are designed to promote equality of opportunity.
We are committed to treating people with disabilities fairly in all respects including job applications training promotion and career development.
If an employee became disabled we would where appropriate aim to retrain them for a more suitable role.
Employee engagement We believe that employees who are committed to Tate and Lyles goals Values and strategy are happier and ultimately deliver better results.
Good internal communication is the key to creating real employee engagement.
We communicate with our employees across the world in a number of ways using channels such as our intranet our Yammer internal social network our global employee magazine published every four months in English and summarised in nine languages team meetings and facetoface dialogue.
We invest in helping employees and managers stay up to date with the latest requirements of their roles.
During the year this included a supervisors development programme and a people management development programme.
We also trained managers in the latest techniques for conducting performance reviews and engaging in active dialogue with their people throughout the year.
In June 2016 we conducted a Groupwide pulse survey to measure our progress in those areas identified for action in the 2015 global employee survey.
77% of our employees participated in the survey which showed that we had made good progress in the areas identified with further improvements planned to be made during the year.
Diversity and inclusion We believe that all employees contribute to the performance of the Group and should have the opportunity to develop fully according to their individual abilities.
We aim to attract a diverse workforce that reflects the communities in which we operate.
Through our Employee Resource Groups company magazine internal website and various other communication channels we work to create awareness of diversity and inclusion issues and to promote equal opportunities.
Employees by geography as at 31 March 2017 1 North America 52% 2 Europe Middle East and Africa 33% 3 Latin America10% 4 Asia Pacic 5% Board of Directors 1 Men 69% 9 2 Women 31% 4 Senior managers and statutory directors 1 Men 81% 113 2 Women 19% 27 All employees 1 Men 73% 3022 2 Women 27% 1124 Board of Directors 1 Men 69% 9 2 Women 31% 4 Senior managers and statutory directors 1 Men 81% 113 2 Women 19% 27 All employees 1 Men 73% 3022 2 Women 27% 1124 Gender diversity as at 31 March 2017 1 Gender diversity for senior managers excluding statutory directors is 73% 47 men and 27% 17 women.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 43 Our ultimate goal is to have no accidents and no injuries.
Our
Executive Safety Steering Committee chaired by our Chief Executive meets throughout the year to review our safety performance and safety improvement programmes.
In addition our senior executives personally undertake executive safety audits at all major sites around the world every year.
Performance
For employees and contractors the combined recordable injuries decreased by 12% in the calendar year 2016 and the lostwork cases decreased by 38% as shown on page 45.
The combined recordable incident rate remained flat in 2016.
The combined lostwork case rate decreased by 31% compared to 2015 as indicated in the table below.
The majority of incidents requiring treatment beyond first aid were the result of being struck by or struck against an object.
Despite the overall improvement in our safety performance the year was overshadowed by an industrial accident in which an employee and a local farmer tragically lost their lives at one of our grain elevators in the US.
The incident is still under investigation.
Following the accident we instructed our grain elevator insurer to conduct safety assessments at every grain elevator and revised our safety policies and the technical standards for bucket elevators as well as making a number of targeted safetyrelated investments.
Finally we conducted safety training for all grain elevator operators and staff.
In early 2017 we launched a comprehensive Groupwide safety review supported by an independent external expert consultancy experienced in heavy processing industries.
The objective was to assess our facilities safety performance in terms of processes organisation and culture and to highlight improvement opportunities.
As part of the Groupwide safety assessment our global safety management systems were also reviewed and an allemployee Groupwide safety culture survey was carried out.
The learnings from this review will make a critical contribution to ensure that all our employees contractors and visitors are kept safe at all times.
External benchmarking To put our safety performance in context and to reflect the fact that the majority of our employees are located in the US we compare our results with US industry averages as shown in the graphs on page 45.
Safety improvements We work hard to continuously improve our safety programmes controls and performance.
During 2016 we put in place the following initiatives Reducing contractor accidents We set out to improve our contractor safety culture to reduce the number and severity of contractor accidents.
As part of this we introduced a teamwork approach combining safety statistics milestone achievements and celebrations with those of our employees and invited contractors to our safety committee meetings.
In the US Brazil and Mexico we also invited contractors to monthly incident calls and conducted monthly calls with contractor safety directors and our insurer to discuss safety audit trends and action plans.
We also required our manufacturing sites to put in place a contractor hazard recognition and reporting programme if they did not already have one.
Machine guarding We conducted training on machine guarding and required all sites to continue making improvements in this area.
Annual global safety week This annual event saw many employees and their families as well as contractors taking part in activities across our sites worldwide.
Our annual childrens safety calendar drawing contest for employees families encourages the next generation to be aware of safety.
Ergonomics
In 2016 we asked all sites to make at least one ergonomic improvement at their facility to improve material handling and work posture.
Examples included sites buying pallet lifts so employees no longer have to lift from floor level as well as changing the seats used by security guards to make them more comfortable and supportive during long periods of sitting.
We hope to see the benefit from these improvements in 2017.
Corporate Responsibility continued 1 All safety statistics are measured on a calendar year basis.
Safety
Safety performance by calendar year Recordable incident rate Lostwork case rate 2016 Change versus 2015 2016 Change versus 2015 Employee 0.74 61% 0.12 0% Contractor 0.80 46% 0.10 62% Combined 0.76 0% 0.11 31% 44 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 1 We report safety performance by calendar year and for all employees at both Tate and Lyle owned operations and joint ventures.
2 Tate and Lyle employees and contractors combined.
3 Source U.
Bureau of Labor Statistics U.
Department of Labor October 2016.
Safety performance charts Recordable incident rate Number of injuries requiring treatment beyond first aid per 200000 hours Lostwork case rate Number of injuries that resulted in lostwork days per 200000 hours Number of incidents combined 2015 60 US industry sector employee recordable incident case rate 2015 and Tate and Lyle combined 2016 Number of lostwork cases combined 2015 13 US industry sector employee lostwork case rate 2015 and Tate and Lyle combined 2016 eltel eltel
Food manufacturing
Chemical manufacturing
Wet corn milling Tate and Lyle
Beverage and tobacco
Private industry
Energy manufacturing Wet corn milling Tate and Lyle
Tate and Lyle employees Tate and Lyle employees Contractors Contractors STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 45 We aim to reduce our environmental impact and we continuously work to reduce energy water and waste throughout our global operations.
We address environmental considerations across the lifecycle of our products from our agricultural supply chain processing and through to how our products are packaged and transported.
Policy and standards Our environmental policy and standards apply to all our activities around the world and we aim to integrate environmental considerations in all major decisions.
We promote environmental communication and awareness across the Group including during induction sessions and other training opportunities at our manufacturing facilities.
Our environmental policy is available on the Companys website site All our facilities are subject to local environmental authorisations and permits and we do our best to comply with these at all times.
If a site breaches an operating limit we aim to immediately resolve the issue.
Our internal environmental audit programmes reinforce adherence to our management standards.
Within our own operations and joint ventures we focus our attention on activities that have the greatest potential impact on the environment.
We aim to reduce energy use our carbon footprint waste to landfill and water use.
In 2016 we achieved a leadership position of A in the CDP .
Outside our own operations we focus on our agricultural raw material and ingredient supply chain the transportation of our products to our customers and our product packaging.
Performance
As set out in last years Annual Report this year we have restated all our environmental performance measures for all years back to 2008 for the effect of the disposed Eaststarch plants.
Performance between 2015 and 2016 based on the revised baseline shows underlying improvement across all environmental metrics as shown in the environmental performance charts on page 47.
Corporate Responsibility continued Hand safety In July we launched our hand safety campaign that included monthly communications posters and safety meetings that looked at everything from rotating machinery and electrical safety to gloves.
This campaign ran for 10 months.
Safe design and condition of tall structures and process storage Further to our progress in 2015 we continued our programme of structural integrity checks carried out by external engineers.
Our aim was to make sure all our tall buildings and process storage structures and equipment were safely designed and in good condition.
In 2016 we carried out structural integrity assessments at our grain elevators and bulk syrup stations.
Behavioural safety In 2016 we continued to roll out SafeStart behavioural safety training at our global manufacturing facilities together with safety intervention and feedback training for management at our US corn plants.
We also provided SafeStart training for employees in our offices and labs.
Lets Stay Safe booklet In 2016 we continued to roll out our Lets Stay Safe booklet which was first launched in 2015 and is designed to increase awareness and promote programmes that prevent serious injuries and fatalities.
Occupational health and wellbeing We use external occupational health professionals to monitor and safeguard the health of employees at work.
These experts also provide information advice and support for general health and wellbeing.
We aim to promote an active lifestyle across the Group.
A good example is our participation in the Global Corporate Challenge a workplace engagement programme undertaken by companies around the world every year.
In 2016 924 employees across all areas and levels of Tate and Lyle took part in this 100day challenge working in teams of seven to take more than 10000 steps every day.
We are proud to say our employees achieved an average of 12855 steps each day beating the global benchmark of 12700.
Learn more at httpsglobalchallenge. ite.
Teams of Tate and Lyle employees also took part in events such as the JP Morgan Corporate Challenge in Chicago and London and other local sports events.
Environment
46 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Energy use and carbon emissions In calendar year 2016 we decreased our energy use per tonne of production by 1% compared with 2015 and since 2008 we have reduced energy use per tonne of production by 5.5%.
Since 2008 we have achieved a 10.4% reduction in CO emissions per tonne of production a decrease of 1.5% per tonne of production in 2016.
The number for CO e emissions in last years Annual Report was prior to restatement and is not reflective of the underlying trend.
Group greenhouse gas GHG emissions for the period 1 January to 31 December 2016 in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents tCO e were From combustion of fuel and operation of facilities Scope 1 1975058 tCO 2015  1908004 tCO From electricity heat steam and cooling purchased Scope 2  1001033 tCO 2015  1106766 tCO In total Scope 1 and 2  2976091 tCO which equates to an intensity of 0.395 tCO per metric tonne of production 2015  3014770 tCO e and intensity 0.401 tCO e.
Water use We reduced our water use per tonne of production by 2.6% in 2016 due to water efficiency projects and programmes we implemented during the year.
Since 2008 we have reduced water use per tonne of production by 1.5%.
Waste to landfill We reduced waste to landfill by 15.8% per tonne of production in 2016 and since 2008 waste to landfill per tonne of production has reduced by 14.8%.
Water use Cubic metres per tonne of production 1 We report environmental performance by calendar year and for all sites  both Tate and Lyle owned and joint ventures.
In line with our established methodology for separating the data of disposed sites and incorporating the data of new sites as set out at siteCR2016 the Eaststarch manufacturing sites in Bulgaria Hungary Morocco and Turkey that we disposed of during 2015 are excluded from the data in this Annual Report and data for the manufacturing site we acquired in Sweden in 2013 is included.
2 Refers to 2015 and 2016 data that has been externally assured by Bureau Veritas UK Ltd.
Their assurance statement is at siteaboutuscorporate responsibility.
Energy use Gigajoules GJ per tonne of production Waste to landfill Tonnes per 1000 tonnes of production Primary carbon footprint Tonnes CO e per tonne of production Environmental performance by calendar year el el el el STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 47 Corporate Responsibility continued Environment targets  2016 performance progress This table summarises our performance against our 2016 yearend targets for CO e reduction packaging transport and sustainable agriculture.
Target by end of 2016 2016 yearend performance Commentary Reduce CO e emissions from energy use by 12.5% per tonne of production baseline year 2008 Achieved 10.4% reduction in CO e emissions per tonne of production since 2008 Whilst we did not achieve the CO e emissions target at the end of the calendar year 2016 we exceeded the 12.5% target at the end of March 2017.
Our new US60 million 50 megawatt cogeneration facility in Loudon Tennessee will further reduce our global CO e emissions.
Implement packaging reduction programmes with customers representing 50% of sales Programmes initiated with customers representing 50% of sales Our focus on industrial pallets achieved 100% recycling of waste wood that is reused in recycled pallets or made into landscape mulch.
Introduced 100% recyclable industrial bags.
Implement transport efficiency programmes with customers representing 50% of sales Programmes initiated with customers representing 49% of sales We expanded the Reciprocal Wash Program.
By optimising producttype shipments we are reducing the volume of hot wash water used.
Partnering with key customers we are reducing water use wastewater energy and costs.
Implement sustainable agricultural sourcing programmes for our top 20 agricultural raw materials and ingredients by volume We have programmes in place for 25 agricultural raw materialsingredients Building on the five stages of our Sustainable Agriculture Programme our focus has been to assess risk to understand the social and environmental impacts associated with each ingredient.
Going forward we will strengthen our programme based on risk analysis and deepen our engagement with customers and suppliers.
New environment targets  2017 to 2020 Building on the progress of our 2016 yearend targets we have set three new mediumterm targets out to 2020.
Reduce CO e emissions by 19% per tonne of production baseline 2008 Reduce waste to landfill by 30% per tonne of production baseline 2008 Implement sustainable sourcing for top 35 agricultural raw materials and ingredients by risk and spend 48 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 The food and beverage industry is our largest market sector.
Other industry sectors we sell into include industrial animal feed and personal care.
Increasingly investors recognise that a proactive approach to corporate responsibility is important for business success.
Our customers expect us to understand and respond to the key sustainability challenges affecting their industry.
Climate change water use packaging waste sustainable agriculture and labour standards in the supply chain are among the most critical issues for customers and investors.
We are actively putting in place programmes to address these issues.
During 2016 our customers have increasingly looked beyond their own operations to set ambitious objectives and targets to reduce the impact of their supply chain.
We continue to work with our customers and our suppliers to find new ways to help them meet these objectives.
Product safety quality and sustainability Our products are produced to the highest quality traceability and food safety standards.
Our manufacturing facilities are externally certified to make sure they meet the Global Food Safety Initiative.
Our control arrangements include inprocess testing our global compliance audit programme annual product traceability and recall testing scheme globally and locally at each facility and independent food safety audits of every manufacturing site.
We consider sustainability criteria in the development of new products.
We use a sustainability evaluation tool as part of our innovation pipeline to identify any potential sustainability concerns early in the product development process.
This tool also helps us assess sustainability issues during product development helping us avoid or reduce the use of energy and nonrenewable resources and to increase positive impacts such as health and wellness benefits.
We help our customers offer their consumers healthy nutritious food and beverages that form an important part of a balanced diet.
We aim to ensure that our ingredients and any claims we make about their benefits are supported by clear authoritative evidence.
Sustainable agriculture The majority of our products are derived from agricultural raw materials.
The biggest of these by volume is corn but we also buy a large number of other ingredients for specific applications.
In 2012 we announced our plans to introduce sustainable agricultural sourcing programmes for our top 20 agricultural raw materials by volume by the end of 2016.
We have established criteria for priority ingredients including corn sugar cane palm oil and soyderived ingredients.
Building on the five stages of our Sustainable Agriculture Programme our focus has been to assess risk to understand the social and environmental impacts associated with each ingredient.
Going forward we will strengthen our programme to deepen our engagement with customers and suppliers.
Building on this progress we are now extending our Sustainable Agriculture Programme with a target to cover a total of 35 ingredients by 2020.
We continue to work closely with key customers to help them meet their targets and realise their ambitions for sustainable agriculture.
In 2014 we joined Field to Market www. ieldtomarket.
US alliance for sustainable agriculture in order to help define measure and advance sustainability in US agriculture particularly with regard to corn.
We have been developing a farmlevel sustainable agriculture project for US corn through the Field to Market programme.
Marketplace
The five stages of our Sustainable Agriculture Programme Risk Assessment checking the social and environmental impacts risks and opportunities associated with each ingredient.
Supply Chain Investigation gathering information from suppliers on current sustainability standards and programmes in the supply chain.
Standard Setting establishing Sustainable Sourcing Criteria for each ingredient including mandatory and desired criteria.
Engagement explaining criteria to suppliers and discussing how to implement them.
Monitoring to encourage continuous improvement in the supply chain as well as checking compliance against mandatory criteria.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 49 Corporate Responsibility continued Conduct of commercial relationships Our Code of Ethics Code commits us to ensuring a safe open and responsible business culture wherever we operate.
We expect the same high standards from our business partners and suppliers as we do of our own employees.
Our Code is available in 13 languages it is accessible via the Companys website our local Ethics and Values Ambassadors and our various training programmes.
We support our Code with a set of Group Standards including the Group Competition Antitrust Standard the Group Gifts and Hospitality Standard the AntiMoney Laundering and AntiCorruptionBribery Standard and the Agents and Commissions Standard.
In 2016 our legal team provided Code training helping colleagues uphold the Code both internally and externally.
Standards in our supply chain Our Code is part of our terms and conditions contracts and other supplier engagements.
We expect suppliers to comply with the standards set out in our Code and that in turn they should expect the same from their suppliers.
Our antislavery and human trafficking statement can be seen at the link below siteantislaverystatement.
Reporting concerns We encourage our employees and business partners to come forward with any information concerning actual or alleged breaches of our Code.
We provide an independent anonymous thirdparty reporting service in 47 countries via a free phone number and by email.
We promote this Speak Up service both across the Group and externally through the Companys website.
Any issues reported are investigated by members of our Speak Up Committee.
We have a long and proud history of community involvement that has continued during the year.
Approach
For Tate and Lyle community involvement is about having a positive and lasting relationship with the communities we operate in improving lives for the better.
Together with our partners employees across the world share their time talent and resources to make a real difference to the communities they live in.
Globally we focus our efforts in three broad areas Wellbeing We support health and wellness projects within our communities such as food accessibility schemes nutrition education and physical activity programmes designed to help develop healthy bodies and active minds.
Education We foster passion and creativity in young people by supporting STEMbased grants science technology engineering and mathematics for classroom teachers and student bursaries inspiring the next generation of big thinkers.
Environment We promote environmental sustainability and good stewardship of natural resources through education and research programmes and conservation work encouraging community connection awareness and participation.
Employees from our Global Shared Service Centre in dz Poland helping local children to create a small garden in the city centre.
Community
50 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Overview of the year In the year ended 31 March 2017 cash charitable donations were 660000 2016  529000.
Programmes and partnerships We seek to engage with local communities where our principal facilities are located.
Within the broader global framework employees at each location can make their own decisions as to the specific projects they support and the partnerships that they develop.
As a result we support a range of initiatives and organisations in our local communities worldwide.
Wellbeing
Making sure that members of the communities in which we operate have enough to eat remains a global priority for us.
During the year we provided donations and support working with local groups to fund collect and distribute food to those in need working with charities such as the Northern Illinois Food Bank www. olvehungertoday. charity Crisis www. risis. ite in the UK.
We also helped support local and regional agencies who work in our communities to provide nutrition and wellness education and programming.
1 Wellbeing 35% 2 Education 36% 3 Environment 23% 4 Other 6% Community spend by area Year ended 31 March 2017 Our STEM grants support schools in the communities close to our US sites encouraging local students to create explore and connect with challenging science and maths concepts.
Volunteers from our Asia Pacific team helped to build bicycles for a school for orphans and abandoned children in Vietnam.
The Strategic Report from pages 1 to 51 of this Annual Report was approved by the Board on 24 May 2017.
By order of the Board ClaireMarie OGrady Company Secretary 24 May 2017
During the year in the US we supported STEMfocused grants and student challenges in schools close to our plants in Loudon Decatur Lafayette and McIntosh.
We continued to provide a number of scholarships to students in the US and abroad helping them to advance their education and provided fellowships to university leaders in Vietnam building capacity in higher education by increasing skills in educational leadership and governance.
Environment
Our environmental outreach work continues to focus on supporting research educational programming and partnerships that celebrate the environment and aim to conserve resources for the future.
During the year employees participated in various projects including a community cleanup programme in Mold UK and community gardening and planting campaigns in dz  Poland.
We continued to work with the environmental research and engagement charity Earthwatch www. arthwatch. of seaweed in Asia.
We use ingredients derived from seaweed in our Food Systems business.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 51 Chief Executive Date appointed to Board October 2009 Independent No Aged 57.
Nationality Pakistani
Board Committees Skills and expertise Javed has extensive experience of global consumer goods markets.
The depth and breadth of his experience as a global business leader in multinational companies and tenure with a major strategy consulting group provides the skillset required to drive and transform an organisation inspire its workforce and show leadership in the Companys culture and values.
Current external commitments
Previous roles Joined Benckiser later Reckitt Benckiser plc in 1992 held positions including Senior Vice President Northern Europe President North America Executive Vice President North America Australia and New Zealand and Executive Vice President Europe.
Chief Financial Officer Date appointed to Board September 2014 Independent No Aged 50.
Nationality British Skills and expertise Nick brings a wealth of food industry insights to the Board leveraging his general management financial and operational experience in senior management roles in a major multinational food and beverage business making him a versatile operational CFO.
His experience in leading transformational projects is particularly important as the Group continues its transformation.
Current external commitments Nonexecutive director and Chairman of the Audit Committee of Great Portland Estates plc Previous roles Held a number of senior roles over a 20year career at PepsiCo including Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer Europe and President West Europe Region and Senior Vice President Commercial Europe.
Board of Directors Chairman and Chairman of Nominations Committee Date appointed to Board 1 January 2017 Appointed Chairman 1 April 2017 Independent Yes on appointment Aged 61.
Nationality Irish Board Committees C N Skills and expertise Gerry started his career in the food and drinks sector and received his PhD in food technology.
He has held a number of chief executive roles and has also been an investor and independent director in a number of international listed companies.
His significant business and board level experience and a detailed understanding of UK corporate governance requirements enables him to provide the Board with valuable leadership.
Current external commitments Chairman of The Blackstone Groups principal European entity Chairman of Invest Europe until 20 June 2017 Nonexecutive director of Intertrust N.
Previous roles Senior Managing Director in Blackstones Private Equity group 2008 to 2017.
CEO of Greencore Group plc Exel plc Carlton Communications plc and most recently Kingfisher plc 2003 to 2008.
Held nonexecutive directorships in British American Tobacco plc Merlin Entertainments plc Reckitt Benckiser plc Abbey National plc and Novar plc.
Javed Ahmed Nick Hampton Dr Gerry Murphy Board Committees Certain responsibilities are delegated to four Board Committees details of which are provided on pages 66 to 73 and on page 87.
A Audit Committee R Remuneration Committee N Nominations Committee Corporate Responsibility
52 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Nonexecutive director Date appointed to Board January 2007 Independent Yes Aged 58.
Nationality British Board Committees N A Skills and expertise Lizs experience of the London investment community is of immense value to the Board especially when considering market communications strategy and longterm financial planning and pensions.
As Chairman and nonexecutive director of another Londonlisted company she also brings a detailed understanding of UK corporate governance and the investment markets.
Her longer tenure has provided invaluable continuity and a historical perspective throughout a period of change.
Current external commitments Chairman of Jupiter Fund Management PLC Previous roles Finance Director of Monument Oil and Gas plc.
Nonexecutive director Date appointed to Board January 2015 Independent Yes Aged 52.
Nationality British Board Committees N R A Skills and expertise Paul has wide experience in global manufacturing commercial as well as strategy consultancy and MandA advisory services.
He brings insight to the commercialisation of innovation pipelines and the implementation of businesstobusiness customer and marketled strategies in a large multinational businesstobusiness context.
His experience as a CEO of a number of global companies enables him to provide valuable insights to the Board.
Current external commitments Chief Executive of Essentra plc Previous roles Group Chief Executive of Coats plc and Low and Bonar PLC.
Served as a non executive director at Brammer PLC.
Liz Airey Paul Forman Nonexecutive director Date appointed to Board April 2016 Independent Yes Aged 58.
Nationality Danish Board Committees N R C Skills and expertise As the former CEO of a global speciality food ingredients business Lars led a successful business transformation and his insights will be invaluable to the Board as Tate and Lyle continues to evolve.
He brings operational expertise and insights and an understanding of how to attract and retain talent in a global business.
Current external commitments Chairman of Matas AS Nonexecutive director of Falck AS Chairman of the Danish Committee for Good Corporate Governance Chairman of the Hedorf Foundation Previous roles CEO of Chr.
Hansen Holding AS from 2005 until retirement in March 2013 leading a transformation of the business and a successful listing on the Copenhagen stock exchange during that period.
Prior to CEO held various management positions at Chr.
Hansen.
Lars Frederiksen site 53 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Board of Directors continued Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit
Date appointed to Board March 2010 Independent Yes Aged 60.
Nationality British Board Committees C N A Skills and expertise Douglas has extensive experience as a former finance director of a global manufacturing and businessto business engineering group and also in senior management roles in the US and Europe which provides the Board with valuable perspectives and insights into financial and operational issues.
In addition his understanding of the London investment community and pension matters supports the Board in its oversight and decisionmaking roles.
Current external commitments Senior Independent Director and chairman of the Audit Committee of Vesuvius plc Nonexecutive director of BSI Group Previous roles Finance Director of IMI plc and held a number of financial and operational roles including US and European senior management positions at GlaxoSmithKline plc.
Nonexecutive director and Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee Date appointed to Board 26 October 2016 Independent Yes Aged 54.
Nationality American Board Committees C N R Skills and expertise Jeannes significant experience of building organisational cultures with the highest standards in safety and ethics together with her experience in a range of global leadership roles managing multinational businesses and global strategic business development will be of significant benefit to the Board.
She most recently served as the Head of Safety and Operational Risk for BPs global downstream business from 2011 to 2015 and was responsible for overhauling the safety and operational risk organisation.
This experience will be invaluable in her role as Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee.
Current external commitments Nonexecutive director of Parsons Corporation a US engineering construction technical and management services organisation Previous roles Head of Safety and Operational Risk for BPs global downstream business from 2011 to 2015.
Prior to this role held numerous leadership roles in Europe the US and China managing multinational businesses and global strategic business development.
Nonexecutive director and Chairman of the Remuneration
Date appointed to Board December 2012 Independent Yes Aged 63.
Nationality British Board Committees N R A Skills and expertise Annes extensive career in general management and human resources is particularly useful to the Board when considering succession planning talent management executive remuneration and other employeerelated activities.
She has a detailed understanding of how to attract and retain global talent and her roles on the boards of companies listed in both London and New York provide her with a detailed understanding of global executive remuneration practices and UK and US remuneration governance requirements.
Current external commitments Nonexecutive director and chairman of the Remuneration Committee of Shire PLC Nonexecutive director of ExlService Holdings Inc.
Vice Chairman of the University of Aberdeen Development Trust Nonexecutive director of the Court of the University of Aberdeen Previous roles Group Director of Human Resources at Centrica plc from 2002 until retirement in 2011.
Prior to that held senior management roles at Shell UK and Smiths Group plc and was Deputy DirectorGeneral of the Engineering Employers Federation.
Douglas Hurt Jeanne Johns Anne Minto OBE A Audit Committee R Remuneration Committee N Nominations Committee Corporate Responsibility
54 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Nonexecutive director and Chairman of the Research Advisory Group Date appointed to Board April 2012 Independent Yes Aged 63.
Nationality IndianAmerican Board Committees C N R Skills and expertise Ajais food science background and career in research and development in global food and beverage companies provides the Board with detailed technical knowledge and insights into market perceptions nutrition and food and regulatory trends relevant to the speciality food ingredients business.
His experience in the Asia Pacific region is of particular benefit as we continue to focus on growth in emerging markets.
His work with regulatory bodies and knowledge of nutrition science and food regulation provides him with the skillset required to chair the Research Advisory Group and to support the Board and Tate and Lyle with valuable insights into how leadingedge science and technology can be successfully deployed as part of the Groups Speciality Food Ingredients portfolio.
Current external commitments Nonexecutive director of Britannia Industries Limited Nonexecutive director of Firmenich SA Previous roles President  Research Development and Product Integrity and a member of the Executive Board of Koninklijke Numico from 2003 to 2007.
Prior to this held various management positions with The CocaCola Company culminating in Senior Vice President Technical The Minute Maid Company.
Nonexecutive director Date appointed to Board April 2016 Independent Yes Aged 55.
Nationality British Board Committees N A Skills and expertise Sybella has extensive commercial and financial experience and brings a wealth of knowledge about the London investment community and substantial experience of communicating with this and other investment communities outside the UK.
Her long career in corporate finance and MandA will be invaluable to the Boards consideration of strategic opportunities.
Current external commitments Director of Corporate Finance at RELX Group plc Nonexecutive director of The Merchants Trust PLC Member of the Department of Business Energy and Industrial Strategys Industrial Development Advisory Board Member of the Somerville College Oxford Development Board Previous roles Originally qualified as a barrister and before joining RELX Group in 1997 was a member of the MandA advisory teams at Citigroup and later Barings.
Dr Ajai Puri Sybella Stanley Tenure of nonexecutive directors At 24 May 2017 1 Less than 3 years 4 directors 2 4 to 6 years 2 directors 3 Over 7 years 2 directors Directors nationalities At 24 May 2017 1 British 6 directors 2 American 3 directors 3 Irish 1 director Danish 1 director Gender diversity of Directors At 24 May 2017 1 Male 7 2 Female 4 site 55 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Chairmans introduction to Corporate Governance Focus for the 2018 financial year The Board continues to devote significant time to the drivers of growth in the business and the challenges and opportunities the Group faces in its markets.
As such the areas of emphasis in the coming year will include Performance of the Speciality Food Ingredients business Programmes to strengthen further our commercial focus and execution Strategic initiatives including acquisition opportunities Innovation pipeline Reviewing talent management and succession planning.
Notwithstanding our commercial priorities operating our business responsibly and safely continues to be an overriding imperative.
Shareholder engagement As part of my induction I met with a number of our larger shareholders to understand their views of the business its performance and strategic direction and I very much appreciate the insights from those conversations.
The Board is committed to maintaining an open dialogue with shareholders and I and my fellow Directors welcome the opportunity to meet with those of you who are able to attend our Annual General Meeting on 27 July 2017.
Gerry Murphy
Dear shareholder Since joining Tate and Lyle on 1 January I have had the opportunity to experience the strong governance culture of our Board and the seriousness with which it takes its responsibility for setting strategy monitoring its execution and managing the Groups risks.
Board effectiveness As Chairman it is my responsibility to lead the Board and to ensure its effectiveness in all aspects of its remit.
The Board last undertook an externally moderated evaluation of its effectiveness in 2014.
The UK Corporate Governance Code recommends such an external evaluation every three years but in view of the succession of both Chairman and Senior Independent Director the Board decided to proceed instead with an internal effectiveness review in the year ended 31 March 2017.
I am grateful to our new Senior Independent Director Douglas Hurt for conducting this review and to him and the other Committee Chairs Anne Minto and Jeanne Johns for reviewing the work of their respective Committees.
Following the changes in Board composition last year we will undertake an external evaluation of the Boards effectiveness in the current financial year.
As part of this review we will look at the alignment of our Board processes and deliberations with the strategic needs of the business in the years ahead.
Inheriting
Dr Gerry Murphy Chairman 56 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Corporate Governance Our governance structure The Groups primary decisionmaking body is the Board.
It is accountable to shareholders for the Groups financial and operational performance and is responsible for setting the strategy and ensuring that risk is managed effectively.
The Board maintains a schedule of items which it is required to consider and approve.
We review this schedule regularly and update it to reflect developments in corporate governance and emerging practice.
As shown in the diagram below the Board has delegated certain responsibilities to a number of Committees.
The Board retains overall accountability and the Committee Chairmen are responsible for reporting back to the Board on the Committees activities.
Minutes of the Committees meetings are made available to all Directors on the webbased Board portal.
The Executive Committee is supported by a number of operational committees including the Executive Safety Steering Committee Operations Committee Capital Expenditure Committee Cyber Security Committee Business Continuity Committee ISIT Portfolio Review Committee and the Group Intellectual Property Committee.
Committees may also be established for a finite period to oversee key strategic or operational priorities.
Audit
Committee
Chaired by Douglas Hurt Oversees financial reporting internal financial controls and risk management systems the risk management process the internal audit function and the Groups relationship with the external auditors.
Nominations
Committee
Dr Gerry Murphy appointed Chairman on 1 April 2017 Chaired by the Chairman Sir Peter Gershon up to 31 March 2017.
Makes recommendations to the Board regarding the structure size composition and succession needs of the Board and its
Reviews the performance of the executive directors and the members of the Executive Committee.
Oversees succession planning for Directors and senior management.
Corporate
Responsibility
Committee
Jeanne Johns appointed Chairman of this Committee on 1 April 2017 Chaired by William Camp up to 31 March 2017.
Oversees a range of operational controls and risk management systems focusing on safety product quality cyber security environmental performance and the implementation of the Code of Ethics.
Chief
Executive
The Board Dr Gerry Murphy appointed Chairman on 1 April 2017.
Chaired by Sir Peter Gershon until 31 March 2017.
Accountable to shareholders for the Groups financial and operational performance Sets the Groups strategy Oversees managements implementation of the strategy Monitors the operational and financial performance of the Group Sets the Groups risk appetite Ensures that appropriate risk management systems and internal controls are in place Sets the Groups ethical culture and agrees the Groups Values Ensures good corporate governance practices are in place More on page 66
Committee
Chaired by Anne Minto Recommends the Groups Remuneration Policy for executive directors.
Sets and monitors the level and structure of remuneration for the executive directors and other senior executives Sets the Chairmans fee.
More on page 74 More on page 69 More on page 72 Research Advisory Group Chaired by Dr Ajai Puri Comprises external experts and senior Tate and Lyle managers Reviews the innovation pipeline Provides insights into how leadingedge science and technology could enhance the portfolio of the Groups Speciality Food Ingredients business division.
Executive Committee Chaired by Javed Ahmed Recommends strategic and operating plans to the Board Assists the Chief Executive in implementing the strategy agreed by the Board Monitors the performance of the two business divisions and global support functions Identifies evaluates manages and monitors risks facing the Group.
Leadership site 57 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Chairman Responsible for the effective operation leadership and governance of the Board Chairs Board meetings Nominations Committee meetings and the Annual General Meeting Sets the Board agenda with the Chief Executive and Company Secretary Facilitates active engagement by all Directors Sets the style and tone of Board discussions Ensures the Directors receive accurate timely and clear information Chief Executive Responsible for proposing strategy to the Board and delivering it Runs the business Communicates within the organisation the Boards expectations with regard to culture Values and behaviours Ensures the Board is aware of current business issues Chief Financial Officer Responsible for the Groups financial affairs Contributes to the management of the Groups business Supports the Chief Executive with the development and implementation of the strategy Key responsibilities of the Board At the date of this Annual Report the Board comprises the Chairman two executive directors and eight nonexecutive directors.
Their responsibilities are summarised below.
There is a clear division of responsibilities the Chairman leads the Board and the Chief Executive leads the business.
Compliance with the Code The UK Corporate Governance Code the Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council in September 2014 is the standard against which we are required to measure ourselves for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Throughout the year the Company has complied fully with the Code except for provision B.6.2 to do with Board evaluation.
With respect to this provision we did not use an external facilitator this year for the reason set out in the Chairmans letter on page 56.
The Code can be found at www. rc.
Nonexecutive directors Responsible for overseeing the delivery of the strategy within the risk appetite set by the Board Advise and constructively challenge the executive directors Senior Independent Director Responsible for ensuring that the Chairmans performance is evaluated Acts as a sounding board for the Chairman and supports him in the delivery of his objectives Serves as an intermediary with the Chairman for other Directors if necessary Maintains a comprehensive understanding of the major issues of shareholders and is available if shareholders have any concerns that they have been unable to resolve through the normal channels Company Secretary Responsible for maintaining the governance and listing rules compliance framework Supports the Chairman Chief Executive and Committee Chairmen in setting agenda items for Board and Committee meetings Advises the Board on developments in corporate governance legislation and regulation Assists the Chairman and the Chief Executive in ensuring that the Directors are provided with relevant information in a timely manner Organises inductions for new Directors and ongoing training for all directors Corporate Governance continued 58 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Board activity during the year ended 31 March 2017 The Board holds six scheduled meetings each year at Group locations and an offsite meeting to discuss strategy.
In the few instances where a Director is unable to attend a meeting he or she provides comments in advance to the Chairman.
This years scheduled meetings were held in London at the Groups headquarters and at our Commercial and Food Innovation Centre in Chicago USA.
Board activity during the year ended 31 March Internal control and
risk management
Considered and agreed the Groups risk appetite and principal risks Assessed the effectiveness of our internal controls and risk management systems Agreed the Modern Slavery Act statement available on the Companys website Agreed the Viability statement as disclosed in the Annual Report 2016
Approved the payment of the interim dividend and recommended payment of the final dividend Considered and agreed treasury and tax matters Approved the Annual Operating Plan for the year ending 31 March 2018 Approved the Annual Report 2016 the half and fullyear results and associated announcements Leadership and employees Approved the appointment of Jeanne Johns as nonexecutive director Dr Gerry Murphy as non executive director and Chairmandesignate and Douglas Hurt as the Senior Independent Director Discussed the Groups safety performance Convened an additional Board meeting to focus on safety after the accident at one of our US sites including a review of the status of the investigation into the root cause of the accident consideration of an internal review of safety in the grain network and a proposal for an external review of safety across the Group Reviewed the results of the Groupwide employee engagement survey and proposed follow up actions Governance and stakeholders Considered the output and recommendations from the Board effectiveness review Reviewed and approved Directors conflicts of interest Discussed feedback from institutional shareholders and analysts Received updates on developments in corporate governance and the impact of regulatory changes on the Group in particular the Market Abuse Regulations
One session focused on our operating model and capabilities plus the execution of key growth drivers in Speciality Food Ingredients and new market trends Another session focused on the strategic framework and the fiveyear plan A session looked at our network optimisation strategy
Reviewed the performance of the two business divisions Approved capital expenditure projects.
Considered postinvestment reviews and lessons learnt Reviewed the development of the innovation pipeline Met with a customer of our Speciality Food Ingredients business in North America to understand the customers perspective on the innovation process and scope for further collaboration in the future site 59 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION The Board reviews the balance of experience skills gender and diversity of thinking styles around the boardroom table regularly to ensure that the composition of the Board and its Committees is appropriate for the Group as it continues to evolve and implement the strategy.
The Board and its Committees carry out a formal effectiveness review process once a year which provides new insights into the operation of the Board and areas for development or particular focus.
Board composition At the date of this Annual Report the Board comprised 11 directors with deep knowledge and experience in diverse business sectors within global markets the Chairman who has no executive responsibilities two executive directors and eight nonexecutive directors.
The names skills and experience of the Directors are set out on pages 52 to 55.
Appointments to the Board The Nominations Committee has responsibility for the appointment of nonexecutive and executive directors and recommends new appointments to the Board.
During the year the Nominations Committee carried out a search exercise for two additional nonexecutive directors including the
The Board approved the Nominations Committees recommendations and Jeanne Johns and Dr Gerry Murphy joined the Board on 26 October 2016 and 1 January 2017 respectively.
Further details about the appointment process are set out in the Nominations Committee report on pages 70 and 71.
Reelection of Directors The Code provides that all Directors should seek reelection on an annual basis and all Directors with the exception of Liz Airey will seek reelection at the forthcoming AGM.
The Directors standing for reelection with the exception of Javed Ahmed and Nick Hampton do not have service contracts.
Each Director goes through a formal performance review process as part of the annual Board effectiveness review.
All Directors completed this process during the year and in line with the Code Douglas Hurt who has served for over six years has been subject to a particularly rigorous review.
Independence
The Code provides that the Board should state its reasons if it determines that a Director is independent notwithstanding the existence of relationships or circumstances which may appear relevant to its determination including if the Director has served on the Board for more than nine years from the date of his or her first election.
With the exception of Dr Gerry Murphy who as Chairman is presumed under the Code not to be independent the Board considers all the nonexecutive directors who are seeking reelection to be independent.
Directors interests During the year no Directors had a material interest in any contract with the Group being a contract of significance in relation to the Groups business.
A statement of Directors interests in Company shares is set out on page 97.
Director Aim of induction programme Details of programme to date Jeanne Johns To increase Jeannes knowledge of the Groups processes and people and the UKlisted company environment Jeanne visited our global Commercial and Food Innovation Centre in Chicago USA our corn wet milling plants in Decatur Lafayette South and Sagamore grain elevators and the London head office.
At these sites she met a number of senior operational managers and key functional heads.
Dr Gerry Murphy To increase Gerrys knowledge of the Groups strategy business processes people and financial control environment Gerry has visited eight sites including our global Commercial and Food Innovation Centre in Chicago USA where he met with senior operational managers and key functional heads to gain a detailed understanding of the Group.
He also met key shareholders and external advisors while he was
Directors induction programme On appointment Jeanne Johns and Dr Gerry Murphy received background reading about the Group and details of Board procedures and other governance matters.
The Company Secretary then worked with each Director to tailor the induction programme which covers strategy operations including safety and environmental performance risk management and internal control.
An overview of their programmes to date is set out below.
Corporate Governance continued
60 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 2017 Board effectiveness review In the ordinary course of business the Board would have carried out an externally facilitated review of its effectiveness this year.
However in view of the number of changes to the Board in particular the appointment of the Chairman designate and the change in Senior Independent Director the Directors agreed to defer the externally facilitated review until after the appointment of the new Chairman.
This review will take place in the 2018 financial year instead.
This year Douglas Hurt the Senior Independent Director from 1 January 2017 led the internal review of Board effectiveness with support from the Company Secretary.
The process involved the preparation of two questionnaires.
The first focused on the strategic framework progress and priorities and the other on Board mechanics agenda and general effectiveness.
The output from the questionnaires was summarised in a report that was discussed by the Board.
From this the Directors concluded that they are satisfied that the Board and its Committees continued to operate effectively and agreed a number of action points including Reviewing the remits of the Audit Committee and Corporate Responsibility Committee to address any areas of potential overlap Considering opportunities to align management and Board information reporting to minimise multiple reporting formats Identifying more time in the Board calendar to focus on the strategy to deliver progression towards the 2020 Ambition.
Review of the Committees In addition to the Board effectiveness review the chairman of each of the Committees facilitated a review of his or her own Committees effectiveness.
These reviews confirmed that all Committees continue to provide effective support to the Board.
Areas for further focus are noted in the individual Committee reports.
Review of individual Directors Dr Gerry Murphy led performance reviews of the nonexecutive directors while the Nominations Committee reviewed the performance of the Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer and the other members of the Executive Committee in line with its terms of reference.
These reviews confirmed that each Director continues to make an effective contribution to the Boards work and is wellprepared and informed about issues they needed to consider.
In each case their commitment remains strong.
Professional development and independent site visit programme Directors receive ongoing training and updates on relevant issues as appropriate taking into account their individual qualifications and experience.
The Company Secretary helps Directors undertake any other professional development they consider necessary to assist them in carrying out their duties.
During the year in addition to the Boards visits to the Commercial and Food Innovation Centre in Chicago USA the Chairman andor various of the nonexecutive directors visited five of the Groups sites in Europe and four of the Groups sites in the US as part of their independent site visit or induction programmes.
These visits provide Directors with the opportunity to interact with local management and to gain indepth knowledge about the opportunities and challenges for the Groups operations across the world.
Advice and support All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring that the Board follows due process and that the Company complies with applicable rules and regulations.
There is also a formal procedure whereby Directors can obtain independent professional advice if necessary at the Companys expense.
Directors attendance at Board meetings during the year Directors as at 31 March 2017
Number of meetings eligible to attend Sir Peter Gershon 7 7 Dr Gerry Murphy Javed Ahmed 7 7 Nick Hampton 7 7 Liz Airey 7 7 William Camp 7 7 Paul Forman 7 7 Lars Frederiksen Douglas Hurt 7 7 Jeanne Johns Anne Minto 7 7 Dr Ajai Puri 7 7 Sybella Stanley 7 7 1 Appointed as a Director with effect from 1 January 2017.
2 Unable to attend one meeting due to a preexisting commitment.
3 Appointed as a Director with effect from 26 October 2016.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors conflicts of interest Directors have a statutory duty to avoid situations in which they may have interests that conflict with those of the Company unless that conflict is first authorised by the Board.
As permitted under the Companies Act 2006 the Companys Articles of Association allow Directors to authorise conflicts of interest and the Board has an established policy and set of procedures for managing and where appropriate authorising actual or potential conflicts of interest.
The key elements of those procedures are as follows Directors are required to disclose proposed new appointments to the Chairman before taking them on to ensure that any potential conflicts of interest can be identified and addressed appropriately for instance through the agreement and implementation of guidelines and protective measures regarding the ongoing management of any situational conflict Directors are required to declare other situations which could result in a potential conflict of interest Any potential conflicts of interest in relation to proposed Directors are considered by the Board prior to their appointment The Board reviews Directors actual or potential conflicts of interest at least annually.
During the year the Board assessed and approved potential conflicts together with guidelines and protective measures as appropriate.
Directors indemnities and insurance cover As at the date of this Annual Report the Company has agreed to indemnify the Directors to the extent permitted by the Companies Act 2006 against claims from third parties in respect of certain liabilities arising out of or in connection with the execution of their powers duties and responsibilities as Directors of the Company and any of its subsidiaries.
The
Directors are also indemnified against the cost of defending a criminal prosecution or a claim by the Company its subsidiaries or a regulator provided that where the defence is unsuccessful the Director must repay those defence costs.
These indemnities are qualifying indemnity provisions for the purposes of Sections 232 to 234 of the Companies Act 2006 and copies are available for inspection at our registered office during business hours on any weekday except UK public holidays.
Equivalent indemnities remain in force for Sir Peter Gershon and William Camp who ceased to be Directors on 31 March 2017.
The Company also maintains Directors and officers liability insurance cover and reviews the level of cover each year.
Corporate Governance continued The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the principal risks it is willing to take in achieving the Groups strategic objectives and for maintaining sound risk management and internal control systems.
Risk management and internal control A formal process is in place which aims to identify and evaluate risks and how they are managed further details of which are set out on pages 38 and 39.
The objective of the internal control system is to protect the Groups assets and reputation and to ensure the reliability of financial information for both internal use and external publication.
The systems of internal control and risk management cannot eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
An overview of the Groups internal control system is set out on page 63 with details of those people or functions responsible for managing or monitoring risks set out on page 64.
2017 review of the effectiveness of the system of internal control The Board monitors the effectiveness of the Groups systems of internal control and risk management throughout the year.
Once a year the Board supported by the Audit and Corporate Responsibility Committees conducts its own review of the effectiveness of the systems of risk management and internal control.
As last year the 2017 review was facilitated by Group Audit and Assurance and covered the period from the start of the financial year to the date of this Annual Report.
The process included a twostage review to facilitate discussion with the Audit and Corporate Responsibility Committees discussing the results of the review at their meetings in March and May 2017.
The Board then discussed the output at its meeting in May 2017.
The 2017 review covered financial operational and compliance controls Values and behaviours and the risk management process and included questionnaires and representation letters completed by management.
Group Audit and Assurance monitored and selectively checked the results of the review ensuring that the responses from management were consistent with the results of its work during the year.
As part of this process areas for enhancements to internal controls and associated action plans to deliver them were identified.
Delivery of these enhancements is being monitored by the Audit Committee or Corporate Responsibility Committee as appropriate.
The Board considers that none of the areas identified for improvement constituted a significant weakness.
Accountability
62 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Monitoring controls Controls monitoring by dedicated teams covering for instance finance safety product quality intellectual property and cyber security Framework of reviews by appropriately qualified people Information and communication controls Board and Executive Committee reporting framework Communication protocols for external communications Whistleblowing process Tone from the top and business environment controls The Values framework see page 42 The Group policies framework Business performance management processes covering planning budgeting and performance Schedule of matters reserved to the Board and terms of reference for Board Committees A clear organisational structure with responsibility accountability and limits of authority clearly defined for employees Segregation of duties of employees Risk assessment Risk assessments are undertaken as part of business as usual as well as through a more formalised
Enterprise Risk Management
The system has four broad areas Key features of the internal control system Speak Up whistleblowing Speak Up the Groups whistleblowing programme has been in place for a number of years in all operations controlled by the
This programme which is monitored by the Audit and Corporate Responsibility Committees is designed to enable employees contractors customers suppliers and other stakeholders to raise concerns confidentially about conduct they consider contrary to the Groups Values.
It may include for example unsafe or unethical practices or criminal offences.
The Speak Up programme provides a number of ways to raise concerns including a telephone reporting line email and a webbased reporting facility.
These multilingual communication channels are operated by independent service providers who submit reports to the Speak Up Committee for investigation as necessary.
Reports received during the year were kept strictly confidential and the concerns identified were referred to appropriate managers within the Group for resolution.
Where appropriate action was taken to address the issues raised.
The reports were analysed and monitored to ensure the process continued to be effective.
The Audit and Corporate Responsibility Committees received analysis of all reports submitted via the Speak Up programme during the year.
Financial reporting internal control system This system covers the financial reporting process and the Groups process for preparing consolidated accounts.
It includes policies and procedures which require The maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect transactions including the acquisition and disposal of assets Reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards Reasonable assurance regarding the prevention or timely detection of unauthorised use of the Groups assets.
We also have specific disclosure controls and procedures around the approval of the Groups financial statements.
Twice a year representatives from the business units certify that they have complied with the minimum control standards and that their reported information provides a true and fair view of the state of the financial affairs of their division and its results for the period.
The results of this financial disclosure process are reported to the Audit Committee.
System of internal control site 63 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Internal control system Body Responsibilities The Board  Determines the level of risk that it is prepared to accept in the business risk appetite Agrees the Groups principal risks for disclosure in the Annual Report Oversees the strategies for managing principal risks Audit and Corporate
Committees
Review aspects of the risk management and internal control systems and report to the Board Discuss regular reports from the VP  Group Audit and Assurance internal audit Carry out a formal review of the effectiveness of the internal control and risk management systems and report to the Board on the output of that review at least once a year
Works within the risk appetite and develops the mechanisms and processes to direct the organisation through setting the tone and expectations from the top delegating authority and monitoring compliance Line management  Manages risk and ensures that mitigation is operated across the business which is appropriate and in accordance with the accountability framework Has primary responsibility for compliance with Group policies our Values and legal requirements Within certain functions notably safety and product quality separate assurance teams oversee the effective operation of controls Employees  Manage risks within their predefined accountabilities Are trained on for example safety cyber security competition law and antibribery and corruption to increase their awareness of risks training may be tailored andor mandatory Group risk manager  Works with executive and line management to help identify measure mitigate monitor and report principal risks
Risk management
Review certain risks and controls and monitor initiatives to strengthen controls Comprise senior management and functional specialists Examples include the Cyber Security Steering Committee which considers cyber security risks and the Treasury Risk Committee which focuses on financial risks Global Audit and Assurance internal audit Provides objective assessment of the appropriateness and effectiveness of the Groups internal control systems to the Audit and Corporate Responsibility Committees and to the Board Has the authority to review any relevant aspect of the business and a duty to report on any material weaknesses Develops and works to a riskbased internal audit plan which is approved by the Audit and Corporate Responsibility Committees and which is regularly updated External specialists  Commissioned by the Board from time to time to supplement internal processes as appropriate Corporate Governance continued 64 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 April 2016 Trading update issued Remuneration Committee Chairman consultation programme June 2016 Investor roadshow meetings in the UK Annual Report published September 2016 Investor meetings in Switzerland and Ireland Investor conference in London December 2016 Investor meetings in the US North American investor group meeting in London Investor group meeting in London February 2017 Trading statement issued Investor meetings in London
May 2016 Fullyear results issued July 2016 Trading statement issued Annual General Meeting in London Investor group meeting in London November 2016 Halfyear results issued Investor roadshow meetings in the UK and US Investor conferences in New York and London January 2017 UK Shareholders Association arranged group investor meeting
March 2017
Investor meetings in the US Investor calendar We are committed to maintaining an open dialogue with shareholders debt investors and potential investors and recognise the importance of that relationship in the governance process.
We have a focused investor relations programme that aims to help existing and potential investors understand the Group.
We provide feedback from the investment community to all Directors regularly to ensure they understand the views expressed by major investors.
Institutional investors The Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer and VP  Investor and Media Relations maintain a regular programme of meetings with institutional shareholders in the UK Europe and North America.
After joining the Board on 1 January 2017 Dr Murphy held meetings with a number of institutional shareholders.
The
Chief Financial Officer and VP  Investor and Media Relations attended a group meeting arranged by the UK Shareholders Association during the year.
Anne Minto Chairman of the Remuneration Committee met with governance representatives of a number of the Companys principal investors and discussed remuneration matters see page 84 for more information.
All Directors received periodic updates on investor activity and meetings.
Analysts
As well as the fullyear and halfyear results presentations to investors and analysts we host conference calls after each trading update.
We publish any presentations together with the associated announcements on the Companys website and we also make any audio recordings available for a short period after each event.
The Chief Financial Officer and VP  Investor and Media Relations also meet regularly with analysts.
Independent feedback on our investor relations programme Each year an external investor relations advisor undertakes a comprehensive review of investor perceptions of the Group management strategy and communications.
The output from this review was presented to the Board in November 2016 and actions taken forward by management.
Recommendations included a refocusing of the Groups investor targeting programme in North America and increasing the time the Chief Financial Officer spends with analysts.
Other capital providers The Chief Financial Officer and Group Treasurer regularly meet with our committed lending banks and bond holders and ratings agencies Standard and Poors and Moodys.
Engagement with shareholders and others Private retail shareholders We encourage private shareholders to provide feedback to the Board via the Company Secretary.
We also include a questions card with the AGM documentation sent to shareholders so that those who cannot attend the meeting have the opportunity to ask questions.
Annual General Meeting The AGM provides all shareholders with the opportunity to question the Board on matters put to the meeting including this Annual Report.
Shareholders who attended last years AGM received a presentation from the Chief Executive on the Groups activities and performance and also had the opportunity to sample some of our ingredients after the meeting.
The 2017 AGM will be held at The QEII Centre in London on Thursday 27 July 2017 at 11.00 am.
Full details are set out in the Notice of AGM.
Resolutions are decided by means of a poll and the votes received in respect of each resolution together with the number of abstentions are announced through a regulatory information service and published on the Companys website.
Shareholders can choose to receive shareholder documentation including the Annual Report electronically or in paper format and may submit proxy votes and any questions either electronically or by post.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Corporate Governance continued This year  we continued our practice of looking in depth at certain aspects of the control environment.
Dear shareholder This report aims to provide an insight into the work of the Audit Committee and how we fulfilled our responsibilities during the year.
In addition to our usual matters including the financial results for the full year and half year applicable accounting policies and going concern assumptions we continued with our practice of looking in depth at certain aspects of the control environment.
These included commodities risk management an impact assessment of new accounting standards in particular IFRSs 15 and 9 and a review of our Global Shared Services Centre in dz  Poland.
Finance and operational leaders attended the meeting for these detailed reviews.
As disclosed previously we aim to appoint new external auditors for the financial year ending 31 March 2019 to coincide with the rotation of the incumbent audit engagement partner.
We have started the tender process and I will report the outcome to you when we have completed it.
During the year I held separate onetoone meetings with the Chief Financial Officer the VP  Group Audit and Assurance and PwC our external auditors.
These meetings enabled me to probe any issues and areas of concern to ensure that my fellow Committee members had an appropriate level of information and that we had enough time to devote to the issues in our formal meetings.
Looking ahead we will continue to focus on the impact of the evolving nature of the Group on our accounting policies and practices and associated disclosure.
In addition we will maintain our programme of indepth reviews of the control environment.
I look forward to meeting you at our forthcoming AGM on 27 July 2017.
Douglas Hurt Chairman of the Audit Committee Committee governance
The Committee assists the Board by overseeing financial reporting internal controls the risk management process the internal audit function Group Audit and Assurance and our relationship with the external auditors.
Further details of its responsibilities are in the Committees terms of reference on the Companys website site
During the year the Committee comprised five independent
All members have extensive management experience in large international organisations and bring a wide range of financial and commercial experience from various industries.
The Code stipulates that at least one Committee member should have recent and relevant financial experience.
Two members met this requirement Douglas Hurt was Finance Director at IMI plc and is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and Liz Airey was an investment banker and former finance director of Monument Oil and Gas plc.
The Company Secretary is the secretary to the Committee.
Meetings during the year Meetings are generally scheduled in line with key times in the Groups financial reporting calendar.
The Committee held five scheduled meetings during the year.
Attendance during the year was as follows Directors as at 31 March 2017 Date of appointment to the Committee
Number of meetings eligible to attend Douglas Hurt Chr 9 March 2010 5 5 Liz Airey 1 January 2007 5 5 Paul Forman 1 January 2015 5 5 Anne Minto 1 December 2012 5 5 Sybella Stanley 1 April 2016 5 5 The Committee has also met once since the end of the financial year and prior to the signing of this Annual Report.
The Chief Financial Officer VP  Group Audit and Assurance Group VP  Finance and Control Executive VP  General Counsel and representatives of the external auditors are normally invited to and attend each meeting.
The Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive are also invited to and attend Committee meetings.
In addition senior finance and operational leaders attend and present to the Committee on an ad hoc basis depending on the issues being discussed.
Effectiveness
The Committee Chairman and Company Secretary led a review of the Committees effectiveness and the output was discussed by the Committee.
This concluded that the Committee continued to operate effectively and identified a number of areas to focus on during next years deep dive programme including treasury business performance management the finance function of the Speciality Food Ingredients division and further aspects of our Commodities operations.
Douglas Hurt Chairman of the Audit Committee Audit Committee Report 66 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Work undertaken during the year The Committee maintains a calendar of items for consideration at each meeting and reviews and updates it regularly.
As well as the work referred to above the Committee focused on four main areas financial reporting oversight of the external auditors oversight of the internal audit function and internal control and risk management.
Financial reporting At each of its meetings the Audit Committee reviewed and constructively challenged the accounting judgements and disclosures set out in the papers prepared by management and determined with the help of the external auditors the appropriateness of these.
The significant issues considered by the Committee in relation to this years financial statements are listed on page 68.
The Committee also considered managements review of reported and adjusted earnings and satisfied itself that significant oneoff items of income and expense had been correctly classified and appropriately disclosed.
Papers on the Groups existing and emerging litigation risks were also considered.
External auditors PwC or its predecessor firms have been the Groups auditors since 1989.
The lead audit partner is rotated every five years.
The current lead audit partner John Waters has been in post since the audit for the year ended 31 March 2014.
Accordingly he is due to rotate off at the conclusion of the audit for the year ending 31 March 2018.
In accordance with the Competition and Markets Authority Order and the Committees terms of reference the Committee Chairman on behalf of the Committee negotiated and agreed the fee and scope of the statutory audit for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Safeguarding the auditors independence The Committee operates a policy to safeguard the objectivity and independence of the external auditors.
This policy sets out certain disclosure requirements by the external auditors to the Committee restrictions on the employment of the external auditors former employees and partner rotation.
During the year the Committee reviewed the processes that the external auditors have in place to safeguard their independence and received a letter from the external auditors confirming that in their opinion they remained independent.
Provision of nonaudit services The policy also sets out the circumstances in which the external auditors may be permitted to undertake nonaudit services and the services which are not permitted under any circumstances such as the provision of remuneration advice and internal audit outsourcing.
The Committee reviews the policy each year and considers quarterly reports which set out the ongoing nonaudit services provided by the auditors and the fees incurred.
During the year we reviewed and updated the policy on nonaudit services in accordance with the Revised Ethical Standard 2016 published by the Financial Reporting Council.
Under our new policy the Chief Financial Officer has authority to approve the permitted services up to 10000 and the Chairman of the Committee has authority to approve up to 100000.
In all other cases the Committee must approve any proposed permitted nonaudit services.
A breakdown of the fees paid to the external auditors in respect of audit and nonaudit related work is included in Note 9.
The total amount paid in respect of the Group audit and audit of subsidiaries was 2.4 million and 0.1 million was paid in respect of nonauditrelated services.
Fees paid in respect of nonauditrelated services therefore comprised 4% of the total fees paid to PwC.
Effectiveness of the external auditors Following the conclusion of the audit for the year ended 31 March 2016 the Committee conducted an internal review of the effectiveness of the external auditors.
As part of the process the Committee reviewed the auditors performance against criteria set at the start of the audit together with feedback from management at Group and divisional levels.
It also considered The most recent report by the Financial Reporting Council FRC in May 2016 on the audit quality inspection of PwC.
The priority sectors for inspection in this report included the sector the Group operated in i.
The FRCs guidance on evaluating audit quality which suggested reviewing the external auditors competence in the following areas making appropriate judgements about materiality identifying and focusing on the areas of greatest risk designing and carrying out effective audit procedures understanding and interpreting the evidence they obtain making reliable evaluations of that evidence reporting clearly and honestly.
The Committee concluded that the external audit process was operating effectively and that PwC continued to provide effective and independent challenge to management.
The review identified a number of recommendations where we could improve processes including planning and communication for the US component audit and these were implemented and incorporated into the criteria set for the audit for the current year.
The Committee discussed progress against these criteria regularly.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Corporate Governance continued Significant accounting matters considered by the Committee Issues Background Committees activities and conclusion
We use commodity contracts to manage and hedge our corn positions in the US.
The valuations of the corn book and the coproducts produced as part of the corn wet milling process which are both underpinned by a number of judgements have a material impact on the reported results of the Group.
The Committee received regular updates on the key commodity risks and the risk management framework in place to mitigate these risks.
The Committee also considered the work performed by the external auditors before concluding that the judgements made in determining the valuations of the corn and coproducts positions were appropriate.
This will continue to be a key area of focus for the Committee in the coming year.
Taxation We operate and pay taxes in a number of jurisdictions which requires the interpretation of complex tax law.
As such we make provision for potential direct tax exposures with local tax authorities and reassess this as necessary at the halfyear and yearend.
Our assessment is underpinned by a range of judgements from tax professionals and external advisors.
The Committee reviewed the Groups principles and processes for managing tax risks during the year and reviewed the key judgements made in estimating the Groups tax charge along with the key disclosures including a statement of tax principles set out on page 34 and in Note 12.
The Committee was satisfied that the judgements made in estimating the Groups tax charge were reasonable and that the disclosures were appropriate.
The key factors likely to affect the future tax charge as well as the key risks and uncertainties were considered and the Committee agreed the disclosure of these factors in this Annual Report.
The Committee considered the treatment of material tax transactions undertaken during the year and concluded that the measurement and disclosure of these including the transfer of certain sucralose intellectual property assets to the US and the UK deferred tax asset recognised following changes to our internal financing structure were appropriate.
Retirement obligations We have significant retirement benefit obligations in the UK and the US including unfunded retirement medical plans in the US.
A number of judgements have to be made when calculating the fair value of the Groups legacy retirement obligations.
The Committee discussed and constructively challenged the assumptions proposed and methodologies used by management and considered reports from the external auditors before agreeing that the assumptions were reasonable.
Impairments We test all goodwill for impairment annually and additionally test all assets where there has been a previous impairment or where an indicator of potential impairment is considered to exist.
The Committee reviewed the annual goodwill impairment assessment.
The future performance of the underlying businesses including the discount rates used and forecast assumptions and sensitivities were discussed and constructively challenged.
The Committee concluded that the assumptions were acceptable and the conclusions including the net 13 million impairment in respect of Tate and Lyle Gemacom Tech Indstria e Comrcio S. were appropriate.
Viability statement The Code provides that the Directors should explain in the Annual Report how they have assessed the prospects of the Group including the appropriateness of the period used in this assessment.
The Committee discussed the appropriateness of the assessment period and the scenarios to stresstest the business model ahead of the full assessment by the Board.
The Directors subsequently concluded that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period of their detailed assessment.
Tenure of the external auditors The Competition and Markets Authoritys order issued in October 2014 requires FTSE 350 companies to tender their statutory audit engagement at least every ten years.
In addition to this EU regulations require that audit firms of all EU companies listed on a regulated market rotate off after 20 years.
Under the transitional provisions attached to the EU rules we would be required to change auditors for the next audit appointment after 17 June 2020.
As set out in the introduction from the Committee Chairman the process for an external audit tender has begun and our intention is to have the new auditors in place for the financial year ending 31 March 2019.
68 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 The Committee has recommended to the Board that PwC continues to act as auditors to the Group for the year to 31 March 2018.
PwC has indicated its willingness to continue in office resolutions on the reappointment of PwC and authorising the Audit Committee on behalf of the Board to determine PwCs remuneration will be proposed at the AGM.
The Audit Committee considers that the Company has complied with the Competition and Markets Authoritys Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 for the financial year under review.
Internal audit  Group Audit and Assurance Group Audit and Assurance is an internal review function that services the Board and all levels of management.
It provides objective assurance to add value and improve the organisations operations.
Its responsibilities include assessing the principal risks of the organisation and examining evaluating and reporting on the adequacy and effectiveness of the systems of risk management and internal control as operated by management.
Management remains responsible for identifying risks and for the design and operation of controls to manage risk.
During the year the Committee reviewed the remit organisation annual plan resources and effectiveness of Group Audit and Assurance and concluded that the function continued to operate effectively.
It is the intention to assess the effectiveness of the Group Audit and Assurance function using an external party in the 2018 financial year as the last third party review was undertaken in the 2014 financial year.
Internal control and risk management The Committee continued to receive and consider regular reports from management and the VP  Group Audit and Assurance on the effectiveness of the Groups risk management system during the year.
The reports from the latter included the findings from reviews of internal financial controls and actions to address any weaknesses in those controls.
The Committee also reviewed the operation of our independent confidential reporting line Speak Up.
Throughout the year the Committee focused in particular on strengthening the financial control environment and the impact of this on the financial reporting processes.
The Committee reviewed controls to mitigate fraud risk and the Group assurance map a tool which sets out the assurance processes and the three lines of defence model.
It also considered the results of the annual review of the effectiveness of internal financial reporting controls which took into account the Group Risk Managers support to the risk management process and then reported to the Board.
Further details about this review are on page 62.
Dr Gerry Murphy Chairman of the Nominations Committee This year we will further strengthen our processes and planning for succession at and below the Board.
Dear shareholder I am pleased to take on the role of Chairman of the Nominations Committee and to work with my fellow Committee members over the coming years to ensure that the Board continues to have the appropriate structure size and composition to progress the delivery of the Groups strategy.
After a year in which the Committee focused on Chairman succession and the appointment of a new nonexecutive director Jeanne Johns our focus this year will be on further strengthening our processes and planning for talent management and succession at and below the Board.
I feel privileged to have joined a Board which is well balanced in terms of ethnic and gender diversity and clearly recognises the benefits that such diversity brings.
The Board has considered the recent HamptonAlexander Review into gender diversity and the Parker Review into ethnic diversity and will pay careful attention to these important reports when considering the effectiveness of our succession planning and talent management processes throughout the organisation.
Gerry Murphy
Nominations Committee Report site 69 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Committee governance
The Committee assists the Board by reviewing the size and composition of the Board including succession planning and the leadership needs of the Group generally recommending candidates for appointment as directors and as Company Secretary and reviewing annually the performance of each member of the Executive Committee.
Further details on its responsibilities are in the Committees terms of reference on the Companys website site
During the financial year under review the Committee comprised the Chairman of the Company the Chief Executive and all independent Directors.
The Company Secretary is the secretary to the Committee.
Meetings during the year Meetings are generally held around the time of scheduled Board meetings.
The Committee held four scheduled meetings during the year and also met on four additional occasions to discuss the progress of the search for an additional non executive director and a new Chairman.
Attendance during the year was as follows Directors as at 31 March 2017 Date of appointment to the Committee
Number of meetings eligible to attend Sir Peter Gershon Chr 1 February 2009 5 5 Dr Gerry Murphy 1 January 2017 2 2 Javed Ahmed 1 October 2009 8 8 Liz Airey 1 January 2007 8 8 William Camp 1 May 2010 8 8 Paul Forman 1 January 2015 8 8 Lars Frederiksen 1 April 2016 6 8 Douglas Hurt 9 March 2010 8 8 Jeanne Johns 26 October 2016 4 4 Anne Minto 1 December 2012 8 8 Dr Ajai Puri 1 April 2012 8 8 Sybella Stanley 1 April Unable to attend due to a preexisting commitment.
The Executive VP  Human Resources and the VP  Global Talent are invited to attend and present to the Committee on an ad hoc basis depending on the issues being discussed.
Effectiveness
Sir Peter Gershon the Committee Chairman up to 31 March 2017 led a review of the Committees effectiveness and the output was discussed by the Committee.
This concluded that the Committee continued to operate effectively.
Work undertaken during the year The Committee maintains a calendar of items for consideration at each meeting and reviews and updates it regularly.
Board succession planning Appointment of Dr Gerry Murphy After seven years as the Chairman of the Company Sir Peter Gershon indicated his desire to begin the process to identify his successor.
Liz Airey the Senior Independent Director at the time led the search.
The Committee retained Spencer Stuart to assist it with the search.
Spencer Stuart is a signatory to the Voluntary Code of Conduct for Executive Search Firms and has a good understanding of the Groups business as it has previously assisted in the identification of individuals to fill nonexecutive director roles and other senior executive roles.
The Committee identified in particular the following attributes of potential candidates as highly desirable City experience and competence international track record strong strategic and communication skills industry sector experience together with the ability to devote the time necessary to the role.
Spencer Stuart prepared a long list comprising a diverse range of potential candidates meeting the specifications.
The search consultants and Liz Airey then identified a subset of this long list to meet facetoface with a working party of the Nominations Committee.
This working party then recommended the candidates who went through to a second round of meetings with other members of the Board and who were also given the opportunity to hold a due diligence meeting with Sir Peter Gershon and to meet members of the Executive
The Committee reviewed the output of the discussions held with the potential candidates and recommended the appointment of Dr Gerry Murphy to the Board from 1 January 2017.
Dr Murphy became the Chairman on 1 April 2017.
Corporate Governance continued 70 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Appointment of Jeanne Johns The Committee reviewed the succession needs of the Board and determined that it would be appropriate to seek an additional USbased nonexecutive director.
The Committee retained Korn Ferry to assist it with the search.
Korn Ferry is a signatory to the Voluntary Code of Conduct for Executive Search Firms.
Korn Ferry prepared a long list comprising a diverse range of potential candidates meeting the specification.
The search consultants and the Chairman Sir Peter Gershon then identified a subset of this long list to meet facetoface with the
Following these initial interviews Sir Peter Gershon recommended a shortlist of candidates and the Committee set up a working party to interview the candidates.
The Committee subsequently discussed the results of these interviews and also reviewed the candidates anticipated ability to provide the necessary time commitment to Tate and Lyle.
The
Committee recommended that Jeanne Johns be appointed as an additional nonexecutive director.
This recommendation together with the proposed membership and chairmanship of the Corporate Responsibility Committee were approved by the Board and Jeanne joined the Board on 26 October 2016.
Senior Independent Director In addition the Committee recommended that Douglas Hurt with over six years of Board service and having very good experience of the UK market and institutional shareholders should be appointed as Senior Independent Director with effect from 1 January 2017.
Company Secretary Following the resignation of Lucie Gilbert the Committee commenced a process to appoint a successor using independent executive search firm Hedley May.
ClaireMarie
OGrady was appointed on 1 February 2017.
Director independence The Committee is responsible for making recommendations to the Board concerning the independence of nonexecutive directors.
The Code provides that the Board should determine whether there are relationships or circumstances which are likely to affect or could appear to affect a Directors judgement and lists tenures in excess of nine years as a circumstance which may appear relevant to its determination.
Liz Airey joined the Board in January 2007 and as the Senior Independent Director led the process to identify the successor for the
As previously announced Ms Airey will be stepping down from the Board at the 2017 AGM and therefore will not be seeking reelection as a Director.
Board diversity The Board believes that a diverse and inclusive culture is a driver of superior business performance growth and innovation.
The Board has a clear policy on diversity that acknowledges that the Boards perspective and approach can be greatly enhanced through gender age and cultural diversity notwithstanding the overriding principle that each member and potential member of the Board must be able to demonstrate the skills experience and knowledge required to contribute to the effectiveness of the Board.
Wherever feasible the Committee uses search firms who are signatories to the Voluntary Code of Conduct for Executive Search Firms which seeks to address gender diversity on boards and best practice for the related search processes.
As set out elsewhere in this report when considering the candidates for nonexecutive directors the Committee looked at a number of different criteria including gender age and cultural diversity and personal attributes such as thinking style.
This was reflected in the long lists and shortlists of possible candidates.
With regard to the specific issue of gender diversity the Board welcomes the decision not to impose in the UK quotas regarding gender balance.
As at the date of this report the Board comprises the Chairman two executive directors and eight nonexecutive directors.
Female representation four Directors equates to 36% of the Board.
Succession planning The Committee reviewed succession plans for senior executive roles and the progress of action plans to address any gaps.
The
Committee continues to review progress on a regular basis.
Performance evaluation The Committee evaluated the performance of each member of the Executive Committee and reported its conclusions to the Remuneration Committee.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Corporate Governance continued Safety is the primary focus of the Corporate Responsibility
Dear shareholder This is my first report as the chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee.
On behalf of the Committee I would like to thank William Camp for his significant contribution to the work of the Committee during his tenure and for the time he has taken to share his knowledge and experience of the Company with me during this period of transition.
As we move forward we will continue to focus on the key areas of responsibility  safety product quality cyber security and sustainability.
The Group has no higher priority than safety and safety is the primary focus of the Corporate Responsibility Committee.
Sadly our safety performance during the year was over shadowed by an industrial accident at one of our grain elevators in the US in which one of our employees and a local farmer died.
As well as investigating the root causes of this tragic incident the executive management team with the full support of the Board and the Corporate Responsibility Committee instigated a comprehensive endtoend review of the Groups safety programme and safety culture.
This ongoing review started in January and is being supported by leading external experts in safety.
As part of their review these experts will visit over 30 manufacturing and other locations.
The review will be completed in the summer with a full report to management and the Board.
Throughout the review process the Committee will have regular updates on key themes emerging from it and will review the actions taken by management to address the reviews findings.
As part of my induction as a new Board member I visited the Mattoon and Coles grain elevators after the industrial accident to observe the revised processes and targeted investments being implemented there.
I also visited the Decatur Lafayette South and Sagamore plants and was able to see firsthand how committed the teams there are to safety and how receptive they are to safety risk management improvements.
Implementation
Before taking over as Chair of the Corporate Responsibility Committee I held meetings with the President Global Operations VP  Safety the Group VP and CIO VP  Group Audit and Assurance and VP  Sustainability to discuss items on the Committees agenda.
I propose to hold meetings of this nature with regular management attendees of the Committee and other senior operational leaders in advance of future Committee meetings.
I believe that these meetings will provide me with an invaluable opportunity to discuss risk areas and help me to ensure that the Committee has the appropriate information to discharge its responsibilities effectively.
Looking ahead the Committees priority for the 2018 financial year will be safety focusing on the effective implementation of the recommendations from the Groupwide safety review including the external experts report.
We will also continue to devote significant time to product quality cyber security and sustainability.
Jeanne Johns Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility
Committee governance
The Committee assists the Board by overseeing the Groups approach to corporate responsibility including the effectiveness of policies and procedures relating to a safe working environment product quality environmental performance employee relations equal opportunities legal and ethical matters and cyber security.
Further details on its responsibilities are in the Committees terms of reference on the Companys website site
Typically the Committee comprises four Directors.
Jeanne
Johns was appointed to the Board and the Committee with effect from 26 October 2016.
The Company Secretary is the secretary to the Committee.
Corporate Responsibility Committee Report Jeanne Johns Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee 72 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Meetings during the year Meetings generally take place around the time of scheduled Board meetings.
The Committee held four scheduled meetings during the year and attendance during the year was as follows Directors as at 31 March 2017 Date of appointment to the Committee
Number of meetings eligible to attend William Camp Chr 1 July 2011 4 4 Jeanne Johns 26 October 2016 2 2 Lars Frederiksen 1 April 2016 3 4 Sir Peter Gershon 1 July 2011 4 4 Douglas Hurt 1 March 2015 4 4 Dr Gerry Murphy 1 January 2017 2 2 Dr Ajai Puri 1 April Unable to attend one meeting due to a preexisting commitment.
The Committee has also met once since the end of the financial year and prior to the signing of this Annual Report.
The Chief Executive VP  Group Audit and Assurance and VP Group Safety are normally invited and attend each meeting.
The
President Global Operations the VP  Sustainability the Group VP and CIO and the VP  Global Quality attend and present to the Committee on an ad hoc basis depending on the issues being discussed.
Effectiveness
The Committee Chairman and Company Secretary led a review of the Committees effectiveness and the output was discussed by the Committee.
This concluded that the Committee continued to operate effectively and identified a number of areas for increased focus during the forthcoming financial year.
Work undertaken during the year The Committee maintains a calendar of items for consideration at each meeting.
This is regularly reviewed and updated.
The work undertaken by the Committee in the 2017 financial year fell under the following main areas
At each of its meetings the Committee discussed an update from the VP  Safety covering matters such as the development and implementation of initiatives to refresh the Groups approach to personal safety.
In addition to the updates into the incident at one of our US grain elevators in 2016 during the course of the year the Committee identified areas for additional safety reporting to be produced by management for review at routine Committee meetings.
Product quality The VP  Global Quality updated the Committee on the status of global quality key performance indicators regulatory priorities for the quality organisation and the result of certain recall simulation activities in the business.
Cyber security The Committee is responsible for overseeing the policies and systems to address cyber security threats.
Updates on cyber security matters were provided to the Committee twice during the year in addition to regular updates to the Board.
Diversity and inclusion The Committee received an update on the actions taken to embed the Groups diversity and inclusion initiatives and the priorities of management for the next 12 months.
Business practices The Committee considered the effectiveness of the independent confidential reporting line.
Further information on this is on page 63.
The Committee also reviewed the Companys Modern Slavery Statement which was subsequently approved by the Board.
Environment
The VP  Sustainability provided the Committee with updates on the Groups environmental performance and initiatives and the Committee approved new targets for 2020 see page 48.
Community
The Committee discussed the delivery of the annual charitable and community involvement programme and the proposed programme for the year ending 31 March 2018.
Internal control and risk management In September the Committee reviewed progress made in the Companys business continuity management programme and those areas of focus for continued improvement over the following 12 months.
During the year the Committee received regular reports from management and the VP  Group Audit and Assurance in respect of the policies systems and controls in place in respect of the risks falling within the Committees remit.
In addition the Committee reviewed the output from the annual review of the effectiveness of controls falling within its terms of reference and then reported to the Board on this review.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report At a glance Our Remuneration Policy and approach are aligned with longterm business objectives and received strong shareholder support  no changes are proposed at the 2017 AGM.
The Groups strong financial performance against stretching targets is reflected in incentive outcomes for the year.
Overall remuneration outcomes are between target and maximum policy levels.
Base salary and employment benefits Market competitive elements to attract the right calibre of executives including health cover car and defined contribution retirement benefits Annual bonus Group financial performance 20162017 metrics
Sales
Cash flow Rewards achievement against annual performance objectives Max cash bonus is 100% of salary Max opportunity is 175% of salary Any award over 100% is paid in shares deferred for two years Chief Executive target 75% of salary Chief Financial Officer target 50% of salary Performance Share Plan Group profit growth 25% SFI profit growth ex SPLENDA Sucralose 25% Group ROCE 50% Pre 2016 EPS 50% ROCE 50% Supports the Groups strategy and 2020 Ambition to create shareholder value from profitable SFIled growth and to motivate and retain senior talent Max award is 300% of salary 15% vesting at threshold Awards since 2016 subject to a twoyear post vesting holding period Shareholding requirements Chief Executive  4x salary Chief Financial Officer  3x salary Claw back and malus provisions Apply for two years after a bonus award or vesting of PSP awards Number of years Performance period Deferralholding period Ongoing requirements Dear shareholder As Chairman of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present our Remuneration Report for the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
This introduction explains how we made decisions during the year and summarises key points from the Report including performance and incentive plan outcomes and Committee activities.
Business performance context As you will read in the introductory statements in this Annual Report we are pleased to report a year of strong performance with overall results reflecting delivery against our strategy and progress towards our 2020 Ambition.
Both business divisions delivered profit growth in constant currency with Bulk Ingredients BI delivering particularly strong results driven by good commercial and manufacturing performance.
Speciality Food Ingredients SFI performed well delivering profit growth and margin expansion and continues to take the necessary actions to strengthen its focus on customer service and commercial execution.
The innovation pipeline Overview of our remuneration framework no changes proposed in 2017 Policy Anne Minto Chairman of the Remuneration
This year  the Committee considered the renewal of our Remuneration Policy and approach.
74 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Performance highlights and incentive outcomes for 2017
Share Plan 2014 Award
Actual
EPS 50% 6%  15% compound annual growth over three years 5% below threshold ROCE 50% 12.6%  15.6% at the end of the performance period 16% above stretch 50% of the award made in 2014 will vest based on the combination of EPS and ROCE performance Annual bonus
Actual vs target Metric Group adjusted profit before tax PBTEA 13% Net sales less cost of raw materials 4% Operating cash flow 97m 114m 17m 18% Bonus award to Chief Executive 80% of maximum Bonus award to Chief Financial Officer 90% of maximum 2 Bonus targets and actual performance is assessed at constant budget exchange rates.
US100 million for the first time.
Some of the key financial highlights include Group adjusted profit before tax increased by 20% 5% increase in SFI adjusted operating profit to 181m 32% increase in BI adjusted operating profit to 129m 22% increase in sales from New Products to US105m ROCE increase by 300bps to 14.3% 121m increase in adjusted free cash flow enabling net debtEBITDA to reduce to 0.9x 2016  1.2x.
1 Percentage changes are in constant currency.
Incentive outcomes for the year As set out in this Report headline incentive outcomes for the year were as follows Annual bonus plan awards for the year reflect strong financial performance with Group profit and cash performance ahead of stretching targets set at the start of the year.
Actual awards at below maximum levels reflect an assessment of safety performance Performance Share Plan PSP awards made in 2014 reached the end of their threeyear performance period.
Our adjusted return on capital employed in the year to 31 March 2017 exceeded the maximum vesting requirement and is in excess of our cost of capital.
EPS targets for the threeyear period have not been achieved.
Accordingly a vesting level of 50% of maximum was achieved.
Total remuneration outcomes are above target but below maximum policy levels which the Committee considers to be consistent with the underlying financial health and performance of the business.
Remuneration Policy and shareholder approval Following a careful review we believe that our current Remuneration Policy and approach with the changes made last year to the operation of the PSP remain appropriate in the context of our business strategy and our shareholders expectations.
Accordingly we are not proposing to make any material changes to the Policy which was formally approved by shareholders in 2014.
The Policy presented in this Report is therefore essentially the same although we have taken the opportunity to simplify some elements.
Chief Executive 000s Chief Financial Officer 000s Base and benefits Annual bonus Performance Share Plan Remuneration Policy scenarios and actual outcome for the year 3 Does not include the value from compensatory share awards made on employment see page 96.
Below threshold Threshold Target Stretch Actual 5m
4m 3m 2m 1m 0m 100% 76% 36% 23% 31% 19% 28% 31% 24% 45% 49% 38%
Threshold Target Stretch Actual 5m
4m 3m 2m 1m 0m 100% 74% 36% 50% 14% 21% 50% 29% 45% 55% 26% See page 91 for more detail includes ROCE definition See page 89 for more detail site 75 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION The Committee formed this view thoughtfully taking a number of factors into account as described below.
Since the 2014 Policy was adopted we have continued to engage proactively with shareholders We have engaged proactively with shareholders over successive years and I am pleased to report that the level of shareholder support for our core remuneration framework remains strong most recent policy and report resolutions enjoying support of 97.9% and 93.0% respectively We made specific changes to the longterm incentive PSP framework last year which were the subject of detailed consultation with shareholders and which align well with our business strategy and longterm ambition for growth We consulted ahead of the publication of this report with a broad group including many of our largest 30 shareholders offering meetings with me to explain our intended approach in reviewing the Policy and to capture any feedback.
We have been responsive to prevailing investor and governance themes Since the current policy was adopted the Committee has been attentive to governance developments and changes in shareholders expectations and our practice has evolved over that time to adopt several governancefriendly features for example We were early adopters of claw back and malus provisions Our personal shareholding requirements continue to be more demanding than typical four times salary for the Chief Executive three times salary for other executive directors and Executive Committee members We have introduced a holding period for PSP awards so a combination of a threeyear vesting period and twoyear holding period means that awards made since 2016 have a fiveyear time horizon A dividend underpin supplements the existing financial performance underpin providing the Committee discretion to reduce the vesting outcome in certain circumstances and providing shareholders with additional comfort that PSP awards will only vest if dividends over the period conform with our Policy We also remain committed to maintaining the quality of our remunerationrelated disclosure for example disclosing bonus targets in full.
We intentionally operate a simple overall remuneration framework While the regulatory disclosures are detailed our remuneration framework remains simple The components of remuneration salary and benefits an annual bonus and a single longterm incentive plan each have a clear purpose and incentive plan metrics are aligned with our business strategy and with the successful delivery of longterm financial growth and returns to shareholders and are consistent with our 2020 Ambition We maintain a strong alignment with shareholders interests by requiring executive directors to maintain significant personal shareholdings through the postvesting holding period applicable to PSP awards and through safeguards such as malus and claw back provisions which apply to incentive awards following their release.
No material changes to Policy retaining flexibility to reflect the needs of the business There are no material changes to the Policy although we have simplified the wording in some areas for example the description of how leavers are treated and tidied up a few housekeeping matters with input from our external advisors for example to ensure that incidental benefits are appropriately captured within the Policy.
Remuneration Report and Remuneration
Policy for the year ahead Our Remuneration Policy was approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM with 97.9% of votes in favour.
Changes to the operations of the PSP in existing Policy were endorsed by shareholders through a 93.0% vote in favour of the Remuneration Report in 2016.
The Committee is satisfied that this Policy and approach provide strong alignment between Group performance and the remuneration of executive directors.
The information regarding Directors remuneration is presented in two Reports the first relates to our Remuneration Policy and the second relates to the way in which our Policy has been implemented during the year.
Resolutions to approve each of these Reports will be proposed at the AGM on 27 July 2017.
Our intention is that the Policy approved by shareholders will apply for a period of three years from the date of the AGM and will not be put to an annual shareholder vote.
Anne Minto OBE Chairman of the Remuneration Committee
Directors Remuneration Report continued
76 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 About these Reports These Reports have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 the Act and Schedule 8 of the Large and Medium Sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the Regulations the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority and the UK Corporate Governance Code.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have audited such content as required by the Act the information on pages 94 to 97 marked as audited.
Key sections of this Report are as follows
Directors Remuneration Policy Report
78 Remuneration strategy and context 80 Remuneration Policy for executive directors 82 Remuneration Policy for the Chairman and nonexecutive directors 82 Other Policy items 85 Application of Remuneration Policy
Annual Report on Remuneration
86 The Remuneration Committee 88 Directors salaries and fees 89 Annual bonus 91 Longterm incentive  Performance Share Plan 94 Single figure table and other audited disclosures 97 Directors shareholdings and share interests Key Committee activities during the year In addition to the responsibilities of the Committee summarised on page 87 during the year the Committee Completed our consultation with shareholders regarding the changes to PSP metrics which were endorsed by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
The Committee specifically deferred the grant of 2016 PSP awards until after the AGM to ensure shareholder support for the new arrangements.
We were pleased to note that the Directors Remuneration Report resolution was strongly supported with 93% of shareholders voting in favour Scheduled additional time for Committee meetings and the annual agenda incorporates a programme of regular updates on market investor and governance regulatory topics Continued to engage with other stakeholders on director remuneration topics including the Investment Association Working Group and BEIS consultations on remuneration Reviewed the effectiveness of changes previously made to the Annual Bonus Plan to ensure stronger links between our annual planning process and the establishment of bonus targets and adopted SFI volume growth as a quantitative strategic top line metric in place of net sales less cost of raw materials for the year ahead to place a greater focus on the necessary actions to grow the SFI business in pursuit of our 2020 Ambition.
In January 2017 the Committee Chairman led the annual review of the Committees effectiveness.
The review concluded that the Committee appropriately fulfilled its role and carried out its duties against the responsibilities described in its terms of reference noting also the additional time the Committee had spent during the year considering external updates on market and governance developments.
We were pleased to note that our Remuneration Report published last year was awarded the Building Public Trust in Corporate Reporting Award for executive remuneration reporting in the FTSE 250 and this year we have sought to preserve our standard of disclosure for the benefit of our stakeholders.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Remuneration strategy and key principles The Groups remuneration strategy and supporting principles which apply consistently to employees managers and executives are summarised in the table below.
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Directors Remuneration Policy Report
Introduction
This Report sets out the Companys policy in relation to Directors remuneration.
Following a careful review as described in the Committee Chairmans letter see page 74 the Committee believes that our current Remuneration Policy and approach with the changes made last year to the operation of the PSP  within the scope of our existing policy remains appropriate in the context of our business strategy and our shareholders expectations.
Accordingly we are not proposing to make any material changes to the Policy which was formally approved by shareholders in 2014.
The Policy presented in this report is therefore essentially the same although we have taken the opportunity to simplify some elements.
Subject to shareholder approval at the AGM on 27 July 2017 the Committee will operate within this Policy from that date.
The Committee retains discretion on specific aspects of policy and implementation as described in the Remuneration Policy along with an overriding discretion to determine bonus outcomes and judge the level at which share awards vest to ensure that payments are consistent with the underlying financial health and performance of the business within the maximum opportunity stated in the Policy tables.
The Committee may make minor changes to the Policy without seeking shareholder approval for example to benefit the administration of arrangements or to take account of changes in legislation.
Any such changes would be disclosed in the relevant Annual Report.
Remuneration strategy Key principles The Groups remuneration strategy is to provide packages that enable the Group to recruit retain and motivate highcalibre individuals in the markets in which we operate so that we may deliver superior operational performance and outstanding financial results Base pay and benefits are referenced to the comparative local market taking account of company size and operations For all employees our pay for performance framework provides for meaningful differentiation in salary progression and opportunities for career progression based on each individuals contribution The total package opportunity should provide meaningful rewards for superior performance and encourage the achievement of genuinely stretching shortterm and longterm objectives Below executive level key individuals who have a specific accountability for driving annual and longerterm performance may be selected to participate variously in our sales incentive plan the annual bonus plan and the Performance Share Plan Alignment with shareholders longterm interests is carefully preserved for example through a significant proportion of pay being based on performance effective governance around remuneration decisions a considered approach to setting performance targets the adoption of shareholding guidelines at senior executive levels and malus and claw back provisions on incentive awards All aspects of remuneration are designed to encourage a focus on longterm sustained performance and risk management Our approach is intended to be equitable and transparent and operate across the Group recognising that we recruit talented individuals and operate in an international market Outcomes must be achieved in a way that is consistent with the Groups Values and Code of Ethics and that fosters sustainable profitable growth 78 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 1 Sales by destination from continuing operations as per Note 5.
2 Analysis of shareholder register as at 3 April 2017.
Our sales 1 UK 1% 2 US 75% 3 Other European countries 11% Rest of world 13% Our shareholders 1 UK 45% 2 US 29% 3 Other European countries 22% Rest of world 4% Our employees 1 UK 6% 2 US 52% 3 Europe excluding UK Middle East and Africa 27% 4 Latin America 10% 5 Asia Pacic 5% A clear link between our longterm business strategy and executive directors remuneration The Groups remuneration arrangements place a clear emphasis on driving Group performance through incentives that are directly linked to key performance indicators KPIs which are aligned with our business strategy.
In this way we maintain a keen focus on delivering longterm growth and value for shareholders.
The table below summarises the performance metrics that we use to measure the Groups progress against our strategy and describes how these link to remuneration arrangements.
Informs the sales targets in the Annual Bonus Plan.
Awards under the Performance Share Plan depend on this metric This is a performance metric in the Annual Bonus Plan Safety and broader corporate responsibility matters may be factored into the Committees decisions on pay and annual incentive plan outcomes Adjusted profit before tax 20% 271m Adjusted diluted EPS growth 16% 47.1p Net debt to EBITDA multiple decreased 0.3x 0.9x Interest cover increased 3.2x 13.9x Sales of Speciality Food Ingredients 3% 996m Return on capital employed 300bps 14.3% Adjusted operating cash flow 120% 273m Underlying profit performance is a key determinant of awards under the Annual Bonus Plan and for awards under the Performance Share Plan from 2016 Awards under the Performance Share Plan up to 2015 depend on this metric These objectives are reflected in incentive plan target setting and the corresponding impact on remuneration is primarily through the cash and profit metrics in the annual bonus Safety and corporate responsibility See our Key Performance Indicators on page 24 We operate in an international context The charts below illustrate the international nature of our business.
Although we are UKlisted and headquartered in London UK a very significant proportion of our sales employees and shareholders are based outside the UK.
Accordingly it is important that our remuneration arrangements are competitive in that international context.
Link to directors remuneration Link to directors remuneration 1 Changes in constant currency.
2 Continuing operations.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Element Purpose Policy Maximum opportunity Operationperformance framework Changes to policy Base salary Providing competitive fixed remuneration to attract executives of the required calibre Salaries are referenced to the comparative local market taking account of company size and operations the individuals skills experience personal performance and circumstances for example following promotion into a new or expanded role.
Increases are typically limited to the general increase for Group employees in the same location.
Base salary reviews take into account increases awarded to employees below executive level and the impact on pension and other consequences of increases.
They reflect personal performance consistent with the approach applicable to employees generally.
No changes to the policy have been made.
The reference to incidental benefits clarifies that directors may participate in benefits that are generally available to local employees and provides for the settlement of expenses incurred in the normal course of business.
Benefits
Benefits are provided in line with comparative local market practice and may include for example car or allowance health insurance life cover and retirement benefits.
Incidental situationdependent benefits may include Reimbursement of outofpocket expenses incurred in the course of business and settlement of taxes in accordance with HMRC rules Participation in benefits generally available to the local employee population including for example HMRC approved sharesave plans Relocation benefits including healthcare Payment in lieu of dividends on specific awards.
Retirement andor cash benefits in lieu of pension are referenced to external market practice.
The value of noncash benefits is determined by the cost of provision e. insurance premiums.
Receipt of any benefits would be in accordance with policies applicable more generally to employees in the same location.
Retirement benefits are provided by way of defined contribution or equivalent cash arrangements.
Contribution levels are 35% of salary for the Chief Executive and 25% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer reflecting contractual commitments on appointment.
Employment and incidental benefits are not performancerelated.
Payment in lieu of dividends may apply to specific awards where any applicable conditions have been satisfied at vesting.
Accordingly no additional performance conditions apply.
No performance conditions are attached to sharesave awards because the sharesave plan is an allemployee scheme.
Annual bonus Key drivers
Sales
Cash flow Max opportunity 175% of salary
The Annual Bonus Plan rewards achievement of financial and other objectives established by the Committee for the relevant financial year.
The bonus award may comprise cash and deferred shares depending on the level of award.
The final bonus award is made at the Committees discretion.
Subject to the overall maximum the Committee may make appropriate adjustments to ensure that the bonus outcomes are a fair reflection of the underlying performance of the Company and may also take into account factors such as the Groups safety performance operational performance and personal performance.
Target is 50% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer and 75% for the Chief Executive Maximum cash bonus is 100% of salary.
Maximum total bonus opportunity is 175% of salary with any award over 100% paid in shares which are deferred for two years.
Deferred shares carry the right to receive a cash payment in lieu of the dividend during the deferral period.
Key financial performance metrics are selected by the Committee.
Additionally the Committee may select quantifiable metrics aligned with strategic andor operational objectives on a personal or collective basis.
Targets for each metric are set at the start of each financial year taking account of the business strategy performance in previous years market expectations and the prevailing economic climate.
Financial performance has the greatest weighting.
A minimum profit hurdle applies before any bonus is payable against any of the metrics.
Malus and claw back provisions apply bonus payments and shares may be recouped in specific circumstances during the twoyear period following the end of the financial year to which the bonus relates.
No changes to the policy have been made.
Performance
Share Plan Key drivers SFI operating profit excluding
Sucralose
Group operating profit Group ROCE Max opportunity 300% of salary Supporting the Groups strategy by incentivising sustained profit growth and capital efficiency over successive threeyear performance periods and retaining talent Awards over Tate and Lyle PLC shares may be made each year at the Committees discretion taking an individual executives contribution and performance into account.
Awards will only vest to participants if demanding financial performance requirements have been achieved over a performance period of at least three financial years commencing with the financial year in which the award is made.
A twoyear postvesting holding period follows the threeyear performance period so awards to executive directors have a fiveyear horizon.
Flexibility to make awards of up to 300% of base salary at the time of award to ensure market competitiveness and taking account of the Groups performance.
The award will lapse entirely if threshold performance targets are not achieved.
Only 15% of any award made to executive directors vests for achieving threshold performance.
The following performance metrics were adopted for awards from 2016 25% SFI adjusted operating profit excluding SPLENDA
25% Group adjusted profit before tax 50% adjusted return on capital employed ROCE.
These metrics are key determinants of shareholder value creation because they reflect the effectiveness of strategic investment decisions the focus on growing our SFI business and the growth in financial value of the whole Group.
If material changes to the metrics are proposed the Committee would consult with key shareholders in advance of making a new award.
Targets are reviewed by the Committee ahead of each annual grant to ensure they remain appropriately stretching over the performance period.
The Committee must be satisfied that the level of vesting is justified by the broader underlying financial performance of the Company.
A dividend underpin gives the Committee discretion to reduce PSP vesting if dividends over the performance period do not conform to the dividend policy.
Malusclaw back provisions awards may be recouped in specific circumstances during the twoyear period after the performance period.
No changes to the policy have been made.
Revised metrics were adopted in 2016 within the scope of the Remuneration Policy following detailed consultation with shareholders and shareholders approval of the Directors Remuneration Report at the 2016 AGM.
The postvesting holding period and dividend underpin were adopted as part of this review.
Personal share ownership Alignment of longterm interests with shareholders Minimum shareholding requirements must be built over a fiveyear period following appointment Similar requirements apply to other senior roles Chief Executive four times base salary Chief Financial Officer three times base salary The value of an executives interests in shares is directly affected by share price performance over time.
No changes to the requirements have been made.
1 Included here as a key feature but does not form part of formal policy.
Number of years Performance period Deferralholding period Ongoing requirements
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Remuneration Policy for executive directors 80 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Element Purpose Policy Maximum opportunity Operationperformance framework Changes to policy Base salary Providing competitive fixed remuneration to attract executives of the required calibre Salaries are referenced to the comparative local market taking account of company size and operations the individuals skills experience personal performance and circumstances for example following promotion into a new or expanded role.
Increases are typically limited to the general increase for Group employees in the same location.
Base salary reviews take into account increases awarded to employees below executive level and the impact on pension and other consequences of increases.
They reflect personal performance consistent with the approach applicable to employees generally.
No changes to the policy have been made.
The reference to incidental benefits clarifies that directors may participate in benefits that are generally available to local employees and provides for the settlement of expenses incurred in the normal course of business.
Benefits
Benefits are provided in line with comparative local market practice and may include for example car or allowance health insurance life cover and retirement benefits.
Incidental situationdependent benefits may include Reimbursement of outofpocket expenses incurred in the course of business and settlement of taxes in accordance with HMRC rules Participation in benefits generally available to the local employee population including for example HMRC approved sharesave plans Relocation benefits including healthcare Payment in lieu of dividends on specific awards.
Retirement andor cash benefits in lieu of pension are referenced to external market practice.
The value of noncash benefits is determined by the cost of provision e. insurance premiums.
Receipt of any benefits would be in accordance with policies applicable more generally to employees in the same location.
Retirement benefits are provided by way of defined contribution or equivalent cash arrangements.
Contribution levels are 35% of salary for the Chief Executive and 25% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer reflecting contractual commitments on appointment.
Employment and incidental benefits are not performancerelated.
Payment in lieu of dividends may apply to specific awards where any applicable conditions have been satisfied at vesting.
Accordingly no additional performance conditions apply.
No performance conditions are attached to sharesave awards because the sharesave plan is an allemployee scheme.
Annual bonus Key drivers
Sales
Cash flow Max opportunity 175% of salary
The Annual Bonus Plan rewards achievement of financial and other objectives established by the Committee for the relevant financial year.
The bonus award may comprise cash and deferred shares depending on the level of award.
The final bonus award is made at the Committees discretion.
Subject to the overall maximum the Committee may make appropriate adjustments to ensure that the bonus outcomes are a fair reflection of the underlying performance of the Company and may also take into account factors such as the Groups safety performance operational performance and personal performance.
Target is 50% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer and 75% for the Chief Executive Maximum cash bonus is 100% of salary.
Maximum total bonus opportunity is 175% of salary with any award over 100% paid in shares which are deferred for two years.
Deferred shares carry the right to receive a cash payment in lieu of the dividend during the deferral period.
Key financial performance metrics are selected by the Committee.
Additionally the Committee may select quantifiable metrics aligned with strategic andor operational objectives on a personal or collective basis.
Targets for each metric are set at the start of each financial year taking account of the business strategy performance in previous years market expectations and the prevailing economic climate.
Financial performance has the greatest weighting.
A minimum profit hurdle applies before any bonus is payable against any of the metrics.
Malus and claw back provisions apply bonus payments and shares may be recouped in specific circumstances during the twoyear period following the end of the financial year to which the bonus relates.
No changes to the policy have been made.
Performance
Share Plan Key drivers SFI operating profit excluding
Sucralose
Group operating profit Group ROCE Max opportunity 300% of salary Supporting the Groups strategy by incentivising sustained profit growth and capital efficiency over successive threeyear performance periods and retaining talent Awards over Tate and Lyle PLC shares may be made each year at the Committees discretion taking an individual executives contribution and performance into account.
Awards will only vest to participants if demanding financial performance requirements have been achieved over a performance period of at least three financial years commencing with the financial year in which the award is made.
A twoyear postvesting holding period follows the threeyear performance period so awards to executive directors have a fiveyear horizon.
Flexibility to make awards of up to 300% of base salary at the time of award to ensure market competitiveness and taking account of the Groups performance.
The award will lapse entirely if threshold performance targets are not achieved.
Only 15% of any award made to executive directors vests for achieving threshold performance.
The following performance metrics were adopted for awards from 2016 25% SFI adjusted operating profit excluding SPLENDA
25% Group adjusted profit before tax 50% adjusted return on capital employed ROCE.
These metrics are key determinants of shareholder value creation because they reflect the effectiveness of strategic investment decisions the focus on growing our SFI business and the growth in financial value of the whole Group.
If material changes to the metrics are proposed the Committee would consult with key shareholders in advance of making a new award.
Targets are reviewed by the Committee ahead of each annual grant to ensure they remain appropriately stretching over the performance period.
The Committee must be satisfied that the level of vesting is justified by the broader underlying financial performance of the Company.
A dividend underpin gives the Committee discretion to reduce PSP vesting if dividends over the performance period do not conform to the dividend policy.
Malusclaw back provisions awards may be recouped in specific circumstances during the twoyear period after the performance period.
No changes to the policy have been made.
Revised metrics were adopted in 2016 within the scope of the Remuneration Policy following detailed consultation with shareholders and shareholders approval of the Directors Remuneration Report at the 2016 AGM.
The postvesting holding period and dividend underpin were adopted as part of this review.
Personal share ownership Alignment of longterm interests with shareholders Minimum shareholding requirements must be built over a fiveyear period following appointment Similar requirements apply to other senior roles Chief Executive four times base salary Chief Financial Officer three times base salary The value of an executives interests in shares is directly affected by share price performance over time.
No changes to the requirements have been made.
1 Included here as a key feature but does not form part of formal policy.
Number of years Performance period Deferralholding period Ongoing requirements site 81 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Incorporation of previously approved remuneration policy statements We intend that provisions consistent with previously disclosed directors remuneration policies andor incentive plans previously approved by shareholders will continue to apply after shareholders have approved the resolution to adopt the Remuneration Policy set out in this report.
Such provisions will allow without limitation The honouring of contractual commitments entered into before the Policy takes effect or before an individual was subject to this Policy The satisfaction of awards andor commitments made in relation to incentive plan awards providing they were consistent with the Policy in effect at the time the original awardcommitment was made.
Executive directors external appointments The Board believes that the Group can benefit from executive directors holding external nonexecutive directorships.
Such appointments are subject to approval by the Board and are normally restricted to one position for each executive director.
Fees may be retained by the executive director concerned.
Other incentive plan provisions Potential impact of mergers and acquisitions or other corporate activity in the context of a merger or acquisition or other relevant corporate activity any potential impact on the incentive plans would be specifically considered by the
In such circumstances the Committee retains the authority to vary the performance target or the vesting outcome to ensure that outcomes are equitable for both the participant and shareholders.
Change of control and voting all the Companys share plans contain provisions relating to a change of control.
Outstanding awards would normally vest and become exercisable on a change of control subject to the satisfaction of any performance conditions at that time and in proportion to the time served during the performance period.
Service contracts The Groups policy regarding executive directors service contracts and appointment terms is to take account of market practice and to ensure that provisions in relation to notice periods or termination payments are not excessive.
Our policy is also to ensure that contracts provide appropriate protection for the Group for example in relation to restrictions on competition solicitation of customers or employees and the protection of intellectual property.
Executive directors are employed under service contracts commencing on dates as follows Javed Ahmed Chief Executive 10 October 2009 Nick Hampton Chief Financial Officer  1 September 2014.
The contracts provide for six months notice from the executive and 12 months notice from the Group.
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Terms of appointment The Chairman and nonexecutive directors have letters of appointment and do not have service contracts or notice periods.
Under the terms of their appointment they are usually expected to serve on the Board for a maximum of nine years subject to their annual reelection by shareholders.
The Company Chairman and nonexecutive directors receive a fee for their services do not participate in the Groups incentive or pension schemes do not receive any other benefits and have no right to compensation if their appointment is terminated.
Chairman and nonexecutive directors fees Nonexecutive directors fees excluding the Chairman are reviewed annually by the Chairman and executive directors of the Board.
The Chairmans fee is reviewed annually by the Committee excluding the Chairman.
Aggregate fees depend on the responsibilities assumed by each nonexecutive director.
A basic fee is paid to the Chairman to the Senior Independent Director and to each nonexecutive director.
Supplemental fees are paid to each Committee chairman.
Accordingly supplemental fees are paid to the chairmen of the Audit Corporate Responsibility and Remuneration Committees and of the Research Advisory Group to reflect the extra responsibilities required by each of these positions.
Increases in fees arising from the normal annual review will generally be limited to the market increase applicable to UK employees generally.
However a higher or lower increase may be awarded to ensure that fees paid are commensurate with those paid by other UKlisted companies.
Fees are set at a level to retain individuals with the necessary experience and ability to make a substantial contribution to the Group.
The Company may reimburse outofpocket expenses incurred in the normal course of business and settle taxes on these in accordance with HMRC rules.
Remuneration Policy for the Chairman and nonexecutive directors Other Policy items 82 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Service contracts for executive directors and letters of appointment for the Chairman and nonexecutive directors are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
Beyond the items disclosed in this report there are no further obligations on the Company which could give rise to a remuneration or lossofoffice payment to a Director.
Policy on the terms of directors appointment To ensure the continued growth and success of the business over time the Company must have the flexibility to appoint new individuals to the Board either by way of internal promotion or external appointment on terms that are sufficient to attract and motivate individuals of the highest calibre.
The following key principles describe our intended approach in these circumstances and are consistent with the principles that apply to the broader employee population.
The starting point for structuring any package on appointment will be the annual remuneration framework under the Remuneration Policy that has been approved by shareholders and is current at the time of the appointment.
To respond to specific circumstances andor to allow for differences in practice over time and by location the Committee retains flexibility outside the Policy to provide marketreferenced benefits which are considered necessary or appropriate to the role for example in relation to healthcare and insurance transport and security and provision for retirement.
Where an appointment requires an individual to relocate internationally or otherwise the Company may agree to make payments to offset certain expenses incurred as a consequence of relocation or may provide benefits in line with our globaldomestic mobility policy on appointment and on an ongoing basis depending on the circumstances.
Such benefits may include for example travel relocation and taxrelated assistance and similar repatriation benefits in due course.
The current Policy provides for a maximum level of variable remuneration that is equivalent to 475% of base salary in the financial year of appointment.
This is consistent with the aggregate current maxima under the Annual Bonus Plan and the Performance Share Plan.
The Committee retains flexibility to alter the balance between shortterm and longterm elements within this overall maximum and awards may be made on different terms.
Where an internal candidate is appointed contractual commitments that have been made prior to appointment to the Board along with any benefits andor incentive awards that have been awarded at that time may remain in effect and be honoured even if they would not otherwise be consistent with the shareholderapproved Remuneration Policy in effect at the time.
To secure the appointment of a suitable external candidate the Committee retains the flexibility to provide additional compensation for the value of incentive awards or other benefits that are forfeited on leaving a former employer.
In such circumstances the Committee may make use of cash andor shares as it considers appropriate in the circumstances.
The Committee will exercise careful judgement in formulating the terms on which such a compensatory award will be made taking into account the form of awards that are forfeited the timeframes over which they may otherwise have been earned and any performance conditions that would have applied with the principle that such awards be made on a likeforlike basis.
This Policy is intended to enable the Committee to structure an offer on terms that it considers to be in the best interests of the Company and our shareholders.
Depending on the circumstances and any restrictions or requirements that may apply the Company may consult with key shareholders as part of this process andor disclose terms on which a new appointment is made through a regulatory information service.
Policy on payments in connection with loss of office It is the Companys policy that executive directors are normally employed on contracts that provide for not more than 12 months notice from the Company and at least six months notice from the executive.
To protect the Groups interests restrictive covenants noncompetenonsolicitation apply for a period of 12 months following termination less any period of garden leave.
The Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer are each employed on contracts consistent with this policy.
The treatment of executive directors leaving the Company is designed to support a smooth transition from the Company encouraging an orderly transfer of responsibilities and taking into account the interests of shareholders in securing the sustained performance of the business beyond the executives departure.
At the same time the Committee is mindful of the need to avoid providing any element of reward for failure.
Termination for dishonesty or misconduct or poor performance are circumstances in which the executive director would retain only the minimum contractual entitlements on departure.
In these circumstances no bonus award would be made and unvested deferred shares or performance share awards would lapse.
Dishonesty or misconduct may lead to the operation of malus andor claw back provisions.
An executive directors departure in compassionate circumstances such as death or permanent disability would generally result in the most beneficial terms being received as summarised below.
If an executive director departs from the Company in other circumstances the treatment would be considered at the Committees discretion and approved on a casebycase basis in keeping with the principles above.
Such circumstances would potentially result in treatment that is more favourable than the contractual minimum but no more generous than that which applies under the compassionate circumstances mentioned above.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report continued Element of remuneration Treatment in compassionate circumstances e.
Salary and benefits Paid or provided prorata to the termination date.
Annual bonus award or Performance Share Plan vesting Any bonus or the vesting of Performance Share Plan awards will normally be considered and approved based on the extent to which the original performance targets are assessed to have been met at the relevant yearend reduced prorata for time over the relevant financial years prior to the termination date.
The Committee retains the flexibility to approve the timing and value of any award on a different basis depending on the circumstances for example to release awards on cessation in the case of deathdisability.
Deferred bonus awards and Performance Share Plan awards subject to a holding period Deferred bonus awards may continue in effect or be released early at the Committees discretion depending on the circumstances.
The postvesting holding period applicable to Performance Share Plan awards will cease on termination of employment.
Provisions for payments in lieu of notice and requirements for mitigation The Company has the option to make a payment in lieu of notice in relation to the fixed elements of remuneration only base salary pension and contractual benefits.
Depending on the circumstances such a payment may be subject to a duty of mitigation.
The Chief Financial Officers contract gives the Company the contractual right to phase the payments and to reduce them if the executive mitigates his loss.
Other elements of remuneration described in this table are not affected by these provisions.
In addition to contractual rights to any payment on loss of office any employee including executive directors may have statutory andor common law or other rights to certain additional payments for example in a redundancy situation.
Similarly additional consideration may be provided if necessary to secure specific agreements following separation for example an enhanced noncompete provision that protect the Groups interests.
Depending on the role and circumstances of departure a director who has been relocated may be repatriated in accordance with previously agreed terms.
The Company may pay some or all of the costs incurred by the executive director in respect of legal financial outplacement or other relevant personal advisory services andor expenses in connection with relocation.
The Committee will approve such arrangements on a casebycase basis with a view to maintaining compliance with regulatory requirements and consistency with internal Company policies that may apply.
Consideration of shareholders views The Committee led by the Committee chairman engages with our major institutional shareholders each year specifically on remuneration topics alongside the Boards widerranging shareholder engagement programme.
The Committee also receives regular updates on investors views and corporate governance matters.
These lines of communication ensure that emerging best practice principles are factored into the Committees decision making.
During 2016 the Committee chairman engaged with many of our 30 largest institutional shareholders and representatives primarily to consult on proposed changes to the Performance Share Plan PSP.
The Committee has been attentive to the need for simplification of pay structures and the need for transparent communication in relation to remuneration decisions alongside the detailed remuneration principles issued by many institutional investors and representative bodies.
These perspectives have guided the Committees thinking through the year and informed our decisions.
Our approach to remuneration has been relatively consistent since 2010 evolving over the intervening period to remain closely aligned with executional priorities and strategy including our 2020 Ambition which was launched in 2015 resulting in changes to performance metrics in the annual bonus and PSP and to keep in step with good practice in relation to features that improve the alignment with and protect shareholders interests.
These include adopting malus and claw back provisions in 2013 and incorporating a twoyear postvesting share holding period and dividend underpin for PSP awards in 2016.
Shareholders overwhelmingly approved the continuing use of the PSP as our longterm incentive with changes to the metrics in 2016.
Shareholders formally approved the current Remuneration Policy at the AGM in 2014 97.9% in favour.
Our intention is that the Policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM will apply for a period of three years from that date.
84 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 1 Annual bonus shows cash and deferred shares.
No bonus is paid at or below threshold the target opportunity is 75% of base salary for the Chief Executive and 50% for the Chief Financial Officer while the maximum is 175%.
2 The maximum award is 300% of base salary.
15% vests at threshold and the target shown is halfway between threshold and stretch i.
57.5% of the maximum.
Statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Group The principles on which we base remuneration decisions for executive directors as described on page 78 are congruent with those on which we base remuneration decisions for all employees.
In particular the Committee takes into account the general pay and employment conditions of other employees of the Group when making decisions on executive directors remuneration.
This includes considering the levels of base salary increase for employees below executive level and ensuring that the same principles apply in setting performance targets for executive directors incentives as for other employees of the Group.
The
Committee also reviews information on bonus payments and share awards made to the wider management group when determining awards and outcomes at executive director level.
Chief Executive Javed Ahmed Chief Financial Officer Nick Hampton Elementvalue 000s
Below threshold Threshold Target Stretch Base salary 72tel52telPension allowance 25tel13telOther benefits Annual bonus
Share Plan Total potential value telBelow threshold
76% 24% 36% 19% 45% 23% 49% 28% 100% Target Stretch 0m 1m 2m 3m 4m 5m
Threshold
26% 14% 74% 50% 36% 29% 50% 21% 100% Target Stretch 0m 1m 2m 3m 4m 5m Application of Remuneration Policy for executive directors The tables and charts below illustrate the value that may be delivered from each element of the package under different performance scenarios.
Our approach to remuneration operates consistently across the Group recognising that we recruit talented individuals so that we may deliver superior operational performance and outstanding financial results Salary and benefits including e.
Our pay for performance framework provides employees with opportunities for meaningful salary and career progression over time Remuneration arrangements provide a competitive reward opportunity to encourage the achievement of genuinely stretching shortterm and longterm objectives Key individuals with specific accountabilities for driving annual and longerterm performance participate variously in our sales incentive plan the annual bonus plan and the Performance Share Plan All aspects of remuneration are designed to encourage a focus on longterm sustained performance and risk management site 85 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report continued
Annual Report on Remuneration
Introduction
This Report sets out how our established Remuneration Policy has been implemented during the year.
It also covers details relating to the composition and key responsibilities of the Remuneration Committee and provides more information on how our incentive plans have operated.
Implementation of the Remuneration Policy in the financial year ending 31 March 2018 The Committee intends that the Policy contained in this Annual Report subject to shareholder approval at the AGM on 27 July 2017 will apply for a period of three years from the date of the AGM.
Resolution to approve the Report on Remuneration at the 2017 AGM A resolution to approve this Annual Report on Remuneration will be proposed at the AGM on 27 July 2017.
Statement of shareholder voting The Remuneration Policy was approved by shareholders at the AGM on 24 July 2014.
The last Annual Report on Remuneration was approved by shareholders at the AGM on 21 July 2016.
The following voting outcomes were disclosed after the relevant AGM
Total for number of votes % of vote Total against number of votes % of vote
Directors Remuneration Policy Report 289 561 233 97 Annual Report on Remuneration 295 781 004 93 Votes withheld are not counted in the calculation of the proportion of votes for or against a resolution.
2 On 24 July 2014 there were 467386228 ordinary shares in issue excluding treasury shares.
3 On 21 July 2016 there were 466659112 ordinary shares in issue excluding treasury shares.
Meetings during the year The Remuneration Committee comprises independent nonexecutive directors.
The Committee met six times during the year.
Membership and attendance during the year were as follows Directors as at 31 March 2017 Number of meetings attended Number of meetings eligible to attend Anne Minto Chr 6 6 William Camp 6 6 Paul Forman 6 6 Lars Frederiksen Jeanne Johns 4 4 Dr Ajai Puri 6 6 1 Unable to attend meetings due to preexisting conflicts one of which included an induction meeting at an overseas Tate and Lyle location.
The Committee met twice after the end of the financial year and before the signing of this Annual Report.
The Company Secretary serves as secretary to the Committee.
The Chairman of the Board the Chief Executive the Executive VP  Human Resources the VP  Global Compensation and Benefits and the Executive VP  General Counsel are normally invited to attend meetings to assist the Committee although none is present or involved when his or her own remuneration is discussed.
The Chairmandesignate was invited to attend meetings following his appointment to the Board on 1 January 2017.
The Committees external advisor Deloitte LLP attends each meeting to provide independent advice and also provides regular updates to the Committee on relevant corporate governance and marketrelated developments.
The Remuneration Committee 86 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 0 5tel25tel400 Marker 1.6mm x 1.6mm 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March Indexed value of 100 invested Chief Executives total remuneration 000s per single figure table Javed Ahmed Iain Ferguson 1 312 nil 170 na na na na na Annual bonus % of maximum 86% 100% 58% 18% 1.6% 0% 77% 80% LTI vesting % of maximum 0% 81% 100% 100% 67.7% 0% 10.9% 50% Committee advisor We appointed Deloitte LLP as our external advisor following a review and competitive tender process during 2012.
As part of its annual processes the Committee considered and confirmed that advice received during the year from Deloitte LLP was objective and independent.
Deloitte LLP is a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct this gives the Committee additional confidence that the advice received is objective and independent of conflicts of interest.
Fees charged by Deloitte LLP for the provision of remuneration advice to the Committee amounted to 59100 for the year ended 31 March 2017 with fees being charged on a time incurred basis.
During the year Deloitte LLP also provided services to the rest of the Group on corporate finance consulting systems tax compliance and accounting.
Chart showing total shareholder return and Chief Executives pay The chart illustrates the cumulative total shareholder return TSR performance of the Company against the FTSE 100 and FTSE 350 Indices over the past eight years.
These Indices are considered to provide an appropriate comparison as they represent a broad equity market with constituents comparable in size and complexity to the Company over the period to which the chart relates.
The graph shows the value of 100 invested in each Index and the Company in the eight years from 31 March 2009.
Tate and Lyle PLC ordinary shares FTSE 350 FTSE 100 1 Javed Ahmed has served as Chief Executive since his appointment on 1 October 2009.
Iain Ferguson was Chief Executive prior to that date.
2 The total remuneration figure shown for the year ended 31 March 2012 includes oneoff compensatory appointment awards.
Main responsibilities of the Remuneration Committee The main responsibilities of the Committee include Assessing the appropriateness of executive remuneration in the context of the Groups strategy and priorities as well as overall competitiveness taking into account data from independent external sources Setting the detailed remuneration of the executive directors designated members of senior management and the Company Chairman in consultation with the Chief Executive including base salary or fees annual bonus longterm incentives benefits and contractual terms Setting performance targets for awards made to senior executives under the annual bonus plan and the longterm incentive plan and reviewing performance outcomes Reviewing the broader operation of the annual bonus and Performance Share Plans including participation and overall award levels Reviewing its own effectiveness each year.
The Committee has a formal calendar of items for consideration.
The Committees terms of reference which are reviewed annually are available on the Companys website site site 87 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report continued Comparison of movement in Chief Executive and broader employee remuneration Change in value year ended 31 March 2017 vs 31 March 2016 Base salary Value of benefits Annual bonus Chief Executive 0% 110% 4% Broader employee population 3% 16% 22% 1 No changes to benefit policies were made in respect of the Chief Executive or employees during the year.
The percentage change in the employee benefits figure is the result of differences in employee participation levels and changes in the cost of insured benefits including healthcare.
The increase in the Chief Executives benefits figure reflects the increased cost of international healthcare since the position was originally established on appointment in 2009 driven by periodic premium renewals and the rates based on age and medical inflation trends over time as described on page 76 of last years report.
2 The broader employee population refers to a global population of salaried employees for salary comparison and the UK employee population for the benefits comparison reflecting the context in which executive directors salaries and benefits are determined.
For the bonus comparisons it refers to the global group of participants in the annual bonus plan so that the combination of business performance across our divisions that contributes to the Groups results is appropriately represented.
3 Includes deferred shares where applicable.
Relative importance of spend on pay Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 % change Remuneration paid to or receivable by employees of the Group continuing operations 328m 262m 25.2% Distributions to shareholders by way of dividend and purchase of ordinary shares 148m 137m 8.0% The year on year variance in employee remuneration is attributable to factors including foreign exchange rate movements reflecting our significant US employee base as well as variable pay arrangements driven by Group financial performance.
See Notes 10 14 and 22 for further information.
The sections that follow provide more information on remuneration decisions and the operation of incentive plans during the year ended 31 March 2017.
Base salary Executive directors salaries are reviewed annually with effect from 1 April.
At the 2017 review the Committee agreed executive directors salaries for the year ahead taking current market positioning into account.
The average increase awarded to employees across the Group was approximately 3%.
Executive directors base salaries as at 1 April  2017 2016 % change Javed Ahmed 72tel0% Nick Hampton 52tel2.5% Executive directors external appointments Nick Hampton was appointed as a nonexecutive director of Great Portland Estates plc on 17 October 2016 and received fees of 31319 in the period to 31 March 2017 which he is entitled to retain.
Chairmans and nonexecutive directors fees Fees are reviewed annually in accordance with our stated Policy by the Committee excluding the Chairman in respect of the Chairmans fee and by the Chairman and the executive directors in respect of other nonexecutive directors fees.
At the 2017 review taking into account the competitiveness of current fees against the comparable market position and the time commitment required of each role and the level of increase applicable to UK employees it was agreed that fees would be increased as summarised in the table below.
Fees per annum as at 1 April  2017 2016 % change Basic fees Nonexecutive director .5% Senior Independent Director .5% Supplemental fees per annum Chairman of Audit Committee .5% Chairman of Remuneration Committee .5% Chairman of Corporate Responsibility Committee .5% Chairman of Research Advisory Group .5% Dr Gerry Murphy was appointed Chairman on 1 April 2017 and will receive a total annual fee of 350000 which will not be reviewed until 2019.
Directors salaries and fees 88 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Annual bonus
The bonus structure described here applied during the year ended 31 March 2017 and will be retained for the year ending 31 March 2018 with a change to the topline salesgrowth metric as described below.
The bonus is based on performance against three objectives profitability sales performance and operating cash flow.
Before any bonus is payable a minimum level of profit has to be achieved by the Group regardless of performance against the other metrics.
For each performance metric there is a corresponding multiplier which varies between threshold target and stretch levels of performance.
Once the minimum profit threshold is achieved bonuses are calculated by applying the multipliers which have the effect of increasing or decreasing the value of the bonus depending on performance against each metric in turn.
At target level of performance the multiplier is one for each metric so if performance is at target against each metric the result is a target bonus outcome.
To achieve the maximum payout performance against all three metrics must be at or above the stretch level.
Profit performance is the most important of the three metrics so multipliers for the profitability factor are more heavily geared than for the other two metrics that is improvements in profitability have a significantly greater impact on bonus payments.
All multipliers and their weightings are agreed by the Committee when targets are set at the start of the year reflecting the importance of each of the metrics in the context of the progress made against the Groups longterm business strategy.
The maximum bonus opportunity is 175%.
Above a certain level of performance the bonus calculation for the Chief Executive is made on the basis that the bonus target is 50% rather than 75% of salary.
Malusclaw back provisions Both the cash and share elements are subject to malus and claw back provisions for a period of 24 months following the award.
This means that they may be recouped in whole or in part at the discretion of the Committee in the exceptional event that results were found to have been misstated or if an executive director commits an act of gross misconduct.
Deferral into shares The bonus amount up to 100% of base salary is paid in cash.
The excess above 100% of base salary is paid in the form of deferred shares.
The shares are released after two years subject to the executive director remaining in service with the Group and carry the right to receive a payment in lieu of dividend between award and release.
Both the cash and share elements are subject to malus and claw back provisions as set out above.
Arrangements for the coming year This overall framework will be retained for the year ahead with a change to the topline growth metric.
The Committee has agreed that targets for the year ahead will be set against an SFI volume growth metric which is a key driver of our longterm business strategy and 2020 Ambition.
The selection of an SFI volume metric is consistent with our reported KPIs and does not suffer from the impact of fluctuating corn price in the way that an equivalent sales metric would.
We understand shareholders regard this metric as a key indicator of progress against our strategy and we believe this metric will place greater focus on the necessary actions to grow the SFI business consistent with our business strategy.
The overall bonus framework will continue to give the greatest weighting to the Group profit metric and retains the requirement that a minimum level of profit must be achieved before any bonus is payable regardless of performance against other metrics.
The Board considers that bonus targets for the year ahead are commercially sensitive because they may reveal information about the business plan in the year ahead that may damage our competitive advantage and accordingly does not disclose these on a prospective basis.
However we continue our practice of reporting targets in full and the level of performance actually achieved for the year just ended.
T ar get bonus % of base salary Chief Ex ecutive 75% Chief Financial
50% Step 1
Step 2 Sales performance multiplier Step 3 Operating cash flow multiplier Bonus achieved as % of base salary site 89 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Overview for the year ended 31 March 2017 Awards are linked to stretching financial targets set at the start of the year Bonus awards at near maximum levels reflect very strong underlying financial performance 20% increase in Group adjusted profit before tax driven by good performance in both divisions SFI operating profit 5% with 8% profit growth in core business despite North America volume growth remaining challenging.
New Products sales increased 22% to US105 million BI operating profit 32% driven by strong commercial execution good demand robust margins and solid manufacturing performance Cash delivery was outstanding with adjusted free cash flow more than three times higher than the prior year driven by higher earnings management of capital expenditure and currency translation.
1 At constant currency.
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Annual bonus for the year ended 31 March 2017 audited The table below provides further information on each metric the targets set at the start of the year and actual performance for the year.
Bonus objective Profitability Growth Cash management Metric Adjusted profit before tax Net sales less cost of raw materials Operating cash flow Definition Adjusted profit before tax exceptional items amortisation and net retirement benefit interest Net sales less costs of raw materials used in production Adjusted group operating cash flow based on the average of halfyear and fullyear figures Rationale Measures the underlying profit generated by the business and whether management is converting growth into profit effectively Measures whether management is growing the business by assessing growth after deducting the cost of raw materials this metric better reflects the value added by the business Measures whether the business is managing its working capital and converting profit into cash effectively Threshold 192m 1 257m 87m Target 206m 1 343m 97m Stretch 216m 1 370m 107m Actual performance 1 Bonus targets are set and actual performance is assessed at constant budget exchange rates reflecting consistent practice with prior years.
Actual performance in the year against each of the three performance metrics has exceeded the corresponding stretch targets.
In determining final bonus awards the Committee also considers the Groups overall operational and financial performance to ensure the results are consistent with the Groups underlying strength and performance.
Having taken the Groups safety performance into account the Committee exercised its discretion to reduce the level of bonus payable to executive directors and other members of the Executive Committee.
For the Chief Executive this reduction was 20% and for the Chief Financial Officer this reduction was 10%.
Accordingly the Committee has approved awards of 140% of salary for the Chief Executive and 158% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer.
Targets
90 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Longterm incentive  Performance Share Plan PSP
The PSP provides a sharebased incentive to closely align executive directors and senior executives interests with the strategy and with the interests of shareholders over the long term.
It is therefore an important component of the overall package.
Maximum award level Since the 2010 AGM awards to executive directors and other senior executives have been granted at the discretion of the Committee with flexibility for the Committee to make awards of up to 300% of base salary where necessary to ensure market competitiveness while taking into account Group performance.
Individual awards made in any year are considered by the Committee on a casebycase basis.
Performance conditions for awards to 2015 The release of awards depends on the Groups performance during the threeyear performance period beginning on 1 April in the year of the award.
For awards made in the years 2010 to 2015 inclusive the performance conditions comprised two elements explained in the table below.
These metrics were selected following the review and consultation with shareholders at that time as they represented key drivers of shareholder value creation for the Group as a whole.
Metric Earnings per share EPS Return on capital employed ROCE Definition Compound annual growth rate CAGR of the Groups adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations over the performance period Adjusted ROCE on continuing operations achieved at the end of the threeyear performance period Weighting 50% of the award depends on this metric 50% of the award depends on this metric
2013 2014 and 2015 awards EPS performance CAGR Vesting outcome % of maximum ROCE performance Vesting outcome % of maximum Below 6% Nil Below 12.6% Nil 6% 15% 12.6% 15% Between 6% and 15% On a straight line between 15% and 100% Between 12.6% and 15.6% On a straight line between 15% and 100% At or above 15% 100% At or above 15.6% 100% 1 The ROCE outcome may be adjusted downward in the event of an asset impairment adding this back into capital employed this is to encourage a prudent investment strategy.
In these circumstances the ROCE figure for PSP purposes can be significantly lower than would otherwise be reported.
2 ROCE performance for awards made in 2013 2014 and 2015 is assessed on the basis of proportionate consolidation of joint ventures consistent with the basis on which targets were set for these awards prior to their grant.
Before any shares are released the Committee must also be satisfied that the level of vesting determined by performance against these targets is justified by the broader underlying financial performance of the Group.
2014 PSP awards vesting by reference to the period ended 31 March 2017 audited PSP awards made in 2014 were dependent on EPS growth and ROCE targets as described above with each condition applicable to half of the award.
Performance against these conditions and the vesting outcome is indicated in the table below.
Performance condition Weighting Performance outcome Vesting outcome for this element Combined vesting outcome EPS growth 50% 5.4% nil below threshold Based on the combination of EPS and ROCE performance 50% of the PSP awards made in 2014 will vest.
ROCE 50% 16.0% full vesting above stretch 1 ROCE performance is shown under proportionate accounting consistent with the basis on which the targets for the 2014 award were established.
The performance period applicable to 2014 awards is 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2017.
Over this period earnings per share did not meet threshold and accordingly the 50% of the award which relates to that performance metric will lapse.
Over the same period the business has maintained clear principles in relation to the disciplined use of capital and ROCE performance of 16.0% under proportionate accounting will result in 50% of the total award being permitted to vest.
In confirming the vesting outcome the Committee also considered the broader underlying financial performance of the Group over the performance period including the impact of impairments to ensure that vesting results based on these performance outcomes are consistent with a broader view of the financial health and performance of the business.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report continued Performance conditions for awards from 2016 In summary the metrics and targets for awards made from 2016 are ROCE performance applies to half of the award as we continue to believe very strongly in the efficient deployment of Group capital.
The other half of the award is focused on profit growth to best reflect our business mix and growth priorities half of this element relates to growth in Group adjusted profit before tax while half relates to growth in SFI adjusted operating profit excluding SPLENDA
Appropriate threshold and stretch targets for each of these metrics were considered carefully by the Committee taking into account a number of reference points as indicated below.
Overall performance at these levels requires both our Speciality Food Ingredients SFI and Bulk Ingredients BI businesses to perform strongly in their respective markets.
SFI should grow modestly ahead of the global market which is expected to grow at c.
45% and the BI business should be managed for steady earnings against a US bulk sweeteners market that is in longterm structural decline see pages 16 and 17 for more details in Marketplace.
Metrics for 2016
Rationale for metric Target range threshold stretch Rationale for target ranges SFI adjusted operating profit excluding
Sucralose 25%
8%  13% p.
Targets abovemarket SFI growth and significant New Product sales expressed in 2020 Ambition Value generative in the context of global market growth of 45% and our historic operating profit growth trend of c.
7% excluding
Sucralose
Growth rates reflect 2020 Ambition that Group profits from SFI increase to 70% over time Group adjusted profit before tax 25% Key performance metric to drive sustainable longterm profitable growth 5%  10% p.
Targets are consistent with execution of Group strategy steady earnings from BI currently c.
4050% of profits redeploying capacity to SFI over time with profitable SFI growth ahead of the market Targets are aligned with our longterm plan and the realities of our operating model without growth investment in BI Group adjusted ROCE 50% Drives efficient investment for valueadded returns from the total business 12%  16% in the final year of the threeyear performance period ROCE targets drive disciplinedefficient approach to capital allocation Reflects geographic footprint post exit from European bulk business Incentivises ROCE progression from current levels
Before any shares are released the Committee must also be satisfied that the level of vesting determined by performance against these targets is justified by the broader underlying financial performance of the Group.
Targets are set and performance is assessed at reported exchange rates.
The Committee reviews the appropriateness of metrics and targets ahead of the grant of awards in any year to ensure they remain sufficiently stretching.
The level of vesting at threshold is limited to 15% of the maximum for executive directors.
2016 PSP framework aligns with the longterm Group strategy The performance framework for awards made from 2016 was carefully developed to reflect the strategy and 2020 Ambition.
The metrics detailed below align the PSP with our strategic priorities to deliver longterm value by Incentivising overall growth in the value of the Group.
Focusing on abovemarket growth in our higher value SFI business.
Incentivising the maintenance of a strong balance sheet.
With this approach the Committee remains confident that PSP awards remain appropriately aligned with the strategy and priorities of the business and our longterm outlook as expressed in the 2020 Ambition.
We consulted with a broad group of our largest shareholders on these proposals and note that the proposals met with high levels of support during that consultation and were strongly endorsed by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
See pages 74 and 75 of our 2016 Annual Report for more details.
92 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Postvesting holding period and dividend underpin A postvesting holding period.
Executive directors will be required to hold shares for a twoyear period after the end of the threeyear performance period i. the combination of performance and holding period will be five years in total.
This holding period will sit alongside the existing personal shareholding requirements and claw backmalus provisions and demonstrates a strong longterm alignment with shareholder interests.
A dividend underpin supplements the existing financial performance underpin.
The Committee retains a specific additional discretion to reduce PSP vesting for the performance period regardless of the level of achievement against the applicable performance conditions if dividends paid by the Group over the performance period do not conform to the stated dividend policy.
We have made a commitment to a progressive dividend policy where we aim to grow the dividend over time taking into account the earnings prospects of the business.
This approach recognises the importance of the dividend to investors and underlines the Groups commitment to the stated dividend policy.
Malus and claw back provisions Awards made under the PSP from 1 April 2013 are subject to malus and claw back provisions for a period following the vesting date and extending to the fifth anniversary following the date of grant.
During this period the Committee may determine that an award will lapse wholly or in part or may require that a participant shall repay up to 100% of the value of any award that has vested by virtue of performance in the event of circumstances including the following material misstatement of financial results misconduct which justifies or could justify summary dismissal of the participant or if information emerges which would have affected the value of the original award that was granted to a participant or the level at which the performance conditions were judged to have been satisfied.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report continued Other audited disclosures 000s Salaryfees Benefits Annual bonus Share awards Pension Total Year ended 31 Marchtel 2016 2017 3teltel 2016
Sir Peter Gershon 334 325         334 325 Executive directors Javed Ahmed telNick Hampton Nonexecutive directors Liz Airey 72 73         72 73 William Camp 76 74         76 74 Paul Forman 65 63         65 63 Lars Frederiksen 65          65 Douglas Hurt 84 80         84 80 Jeanne Johns 28          28 Anne Minto 78 75         78 75 Dr Gerry Murphy 88          88 Dr Ajai Puri 89 86         89 86 Sybella Stanley 65          65 Former director Virginia Kamsky Totals telBenefits for executive directors include health insurance and car allowance.
As stated last year the cash value of the healthcare benefit provided to the Chief Executive has increased to reflect the cost of provision of international healthcare benefits since the position was originally established on appointment in 2009 driven by periodic premium renewals and the rates based on age and medical inflation trends over time.
2 In accordance with the Groups expenses policies nonexecutive directors receive reimbursement for their reasonable expenses for attending Board meetings.
In instances where those costs are treated by HMRC as taxable benefits the Group also meets the associated tax cost to the nonexecutive director through a PAYE settlement agreement with HMRC.
Amounts are minimal and do not show in the table after rounding.
3 Bonus includes the value of deferred shares.
The cash bonus award to Javed Ahmed was 721000 and the cash bonus award to Nick Hampton was 512750.
4 This is the PSP Award made in 2014.
PSP awards outcomes are discussed on page 91.
5 This relates to compensatory share awards made in connection with Mr Hamptons employment.
Further details are provided on page 96.
6 Yearonyear changes reflect changes in Committee chairmanship and Senior Independent Director responsibilities see page 13.
Dr Gerry Murphy Lars Frederiksen Jeanne Johns and Sybella Stanley joined the Board during the year Virginia Kamsky stepped down as a Director on 1 July 2015.
Total pension entitlements audited Directors participate in arrangements that are defined contribution in nature.
Contributions made to or in lieu of pension in respect of each director during the year are shown in the single figure table and are equivalent to 35% of salary for the Chief Executive and 25% for the Chief Financial Officer.
Payments to past directors audited There have been no payments to past directors other than as disclosed in this Report.
No lossofoffice payments have been made during the year.
Single figure table audited 94 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Share awards made during the year audited
Type of award Date of grant
Face value of award
Performance period % of vesting at threshold
Ahmed
Group Bonus Plan 31 March Nil cost option
Two years na
Share Plan Nil cost option 10 August tel% SFI adjusted operating profit excluding
25% Group adjusted profit 50% adjusted
Three financial years ending 31 March 2019 15%
Hampton
Group Bonus Plan 31 March Nil cost option
Two years na
Share Plan Nil cost option 10 August tel% SFI adjusted operating profit excluding
25% Group adjusted profit 50% adjusted
Three financial years ending 31 March 2019 15% 1 Deferred shares are granted under the annual bonus plan as described on page 89.
The full value of these awards has been previously disclosed for each Director in the single figure table in last years Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2016.
The share allocation is made during the year ending 31 March 2017 and shown in the table above based on the average share price over the last three months of the preceding financial year being 578.15 pence per share for the 2016 award.
2 Deferred bonus awards were subject to performance conditions in the year ending 31 March 2016 and remain subject to continued employment.
3 Under the terms of the plan approved by shareholders the number of shares comprising an award in any year is calculated based on the average share price over the last three months of the preceding financial year being 578.15 pence per share for the 2016 award.
During the year the Committee approved awards of 300% of salary for the Chief Executive and 300% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer which is within our approved Remuneration Policy.
4 Performance conditions applicable to Performance Share Plan awards made in 2016 are described on page 92.
Historic awards under allemployee schemes audited The table below sets out the current position of options to subscribe for ordinary shares of the Company that were granted to current and former executive directors in the years prior to the current reporting year.
Savingsrelated share options are options granted under the HMRCapproved Sharesave Plan.
Options are granted on the same terms to all participating employees are not subject to performance conditions and are normally exercisable during the six month period following the end of the relevant three or fiveyear savings contract.
The exercise price reflects a 20% discount to market value as permitted under HMRC rules and is applicable to all participants.
As at 1 April 2016 number
Options
Options
As at 31 March number
Exercise period Javed Ahmed Savingsrelated options 2014 Nick Hampton Savingsrelated options 2014 site 95 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Remuneration Report continued Share awards made in prior years audited The table below sets out the current position of sharebased awards made to executive directors.
As at 31 March number
Awards lapsed during year number
As at 31 March number
Market price on date awards exercised pence Vesting date Javed Ahmed Shareincentive arrangements on recruitment Compensatory Award A Performance Share Plan tel2tel 29 148 817.50  1506    305 584 707.83  After 310317 tel   292 595 616.04  After 310318 Nick Hampton Share incentive arrangements on recruitment 2014 Restricted Share Award 96 681   96 681  620.60 738.50 0109  96 680  620.60 696.00 010916 2015 Restricted Share Award 121 781    121 781 574.80  After 310317 Performance Share Plan tel   241 251 616.04  After 310318 1 This award to compensate Javed Ahmed for certain longterm incentives given up by him as a consequence of leaving his former employer was not subject to performance conditions.
The shares were available to exercise from 1 October 2011 being the second anniversary of Javed Ahmed joining the Group and will remain exercisable until 30 September 2017.
Pending delivery he receives a payment in lieu of dividend on these shares which is subject to the deduction of tax.
In the event of a change in control the shares would be delivered immediately.
2 The threeyear performance period for these awards began on the first day of the financial year in which the award was granted.
3 The performance conditions for PSP awards made in 2013 2014 and 2015 are 50% adjusted diluted EPS and 50% adjusted ROCE as described in this Report.
4 The PSP award made in 2014 will vest at 50% following the Committees assessment of performance conditions as described on page 91.
5 These awards were made in connection with Nick Hamptons employment to compensate him for incentives forfeited with his previous employer as described in the 2014 and 2015 Directors Remuneration Reports which were subject to advisory shareholder votes at the 2014 and 2015 AGMs 2014 Restricted Share Award RSA As described on pages 71 and 76 of the 2015 Annual Report the 2014 RSA may vest in two equal tranches on the first and second anniversary of appointment subject to employment and specified performance conditions.
The Committee approved the vesting of the first tranche of the award on 1 September 2015 as described on page 78 of the 2016 Annual Report.
The Committee approved the vesting of the second tranche of the award in full on 1 September 2016 being the second anniversary of appointment taking into account Nick Hamptons specific strategic and operational contributions to the business including Establishing a Business Performance Management function and leading global procurement initiatives to deliver material financial benefits reflected in Group financial performance through FY16 in the context of very significant commodities weakness adverse 29m as reported with our financial results for the period ending 31 March 2016 as well as demonstrable improvements in working capital and cash flow performance over the same period.
Leadership of a robust longterm financial planning exercise linked to our stated 2020 Ambition and associated Capital Markets event in January 2016.
Implementation of a revised approach to better link the longerterm commercial and capital expenditure plans through to annual operating planning objectives and execution plans.
These processes are underpinned by strengthened sales forecasting and operational supply chain and demand planning processes to enable the business to deliver more stable financial performance compared with when Nick joined the business and to enable the Group to better respond to market challenges and unforeseen risks during the year.
Strong overall stewardship of the major change projects executed during FY16 Eaststarch business realignment and consolidation of Sucralose manufacturing with the final outcomes delivered to the planned timehorizons and with exceptional cash costs lower than planned.
Leading the improvements in our communications with the market including the development of the enhanced disclosure framework a refreshed equity story and clear articulation of the 2020 Ambition with our halfyear results in November 2015 and the Capital Markets event in January 2016 that received positive investor feedback.
2015 Restricted Share Award RSA as described on page 71 of the 2015 Annual Report this award was made to compensate Mr Hampton for incentives forfeited with his previous employer and will vest based on continued employment and satisfactory personal performance following the announcement of results for the year ending 31 March 2017.
96 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Personal share ownership requirements policy on executive share ownership The Committee and executive management believe that personal investment in Company shares is an important part of our overall remuneration framework.
Material personal investment in Company shares serves to strengthen the longterm alignment of interests between senior executives and shareholders.
Our executive shareholding requirements are more demanding and extend to a greater number of senior executives in the Group when compared with similar UKlisted companies.
The Chief Executive has a target share ownership requirement of four times base salary.
At 31 March 2017 he holds shares in accordance with this policy with a value in excess of 30 times base salary.
The Chief Financial Officer has a target shareholding of three times base salary to be achieved within five years of appointment.
Nick Hampton joined the Group in September 2014 and therefore has until September 2019 to meet this target.
At 31 March 2017 he holds shares in accordance with the policy with a value of just under two times base salary.
Other Executive Committee members are subject to the share ownership policy with target holdings at three times salary.
This policy extends to a broader group of executives who have senior leadership roles within the Group.
The shareholding target for this group is equal to their base salary.
Under the shareholding policy the value of shareholdings is assessed net of tax at the prevailing share price and executives are expected to reach the required level of shareholding within five years of appointment.
The Committee monitors progress against the share ownership requirements annually.
Directors interests audited The interests held by each person who was a Director during the financial year in the ordinary shares of 25 pence each in the Company are shown below.
All these interests are beneficially held and no Director had interests in any other class of shares.
The table also summarises the interests in shares held through the Companys various share plans.
Interest in shares
Shares  not conditional on performance Options  not conditional on performance Total as at 31 March Total as at 31 March
Sir Peter Gershon 155 146    15telExecutive directors Javed Ahmed tel Nick Hampton 12tel151 149 tel579 922 Nonexecutive directors Liz Airey 26 000    William Camp 6 800    Paul Forman 10 000    Lars Frederiksen 15 000    15 000 Douglas Hurt 10 000    Jeanne Johns Anne Minto 8 600    Dr Gerry Murphy 10 000    10 000 Dr Ajai Puri 10 018    Sybella Stanley 4 983    4 983 1 Includes shares owned by connected persons.
2 Includes awards under the PSP .
These awards were made as options with a nil exercise price.
3 Includes vested but unexercised awards granted to Javed Ahmed and Nick Hampton and unvested awards made to Nick Hampton in connection with his appointment.
These awards were made as options with a nil exercise price.
4 These are HMRCapproved Sharesave Plan awards.
There were no changes in Directors interests in the period from 1 April 2017 to 24 May 2017.
The market price of the Companys ordinary shares at the close of business on 31 March 2017 was 764.50 pence and the range during the year ended 31 March 2017 was 574.50 pence to 807.00 pence.
On behalf of the Board Anne Minto OBE Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 24 May 2017 Statement of Directors shareholding and share interests site 97 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Directors Report Results and dividend A review of the consolidated Groups results can be found on pages 1 to 51.
An interim dividend of 8.2 pence per ordinary share was paid on 3 January 2017.
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 19.8 pence per ordinary share to be paid on 1 August 2017 to shareholders on the register on 30 June 2017 subject to approval at the 2017 Annual General Meeting AGM.
The total dividend for the year is 28.0 pence per ordinary share 2016  28.0 pence.
The Trustees of the Tate and Lyle PLC Employee Benefit Trust have waived their right to receive dividends over their total holding of 1956744 ordinary shares as at 31 March 2017.
Research and development The Group spent 37 million 2016  29 million on research and development during the year.
Articles of Association The Articles of Association set out the internal regulation of the Company and cover such matters as the rights of shareholders the appointment or removal of Directors and the conduct of the Board and general meetings.
Copies are available on request and are displayed on the Companys website site In accordance with the Articles of Association Directors can be appointed or removed by the Board or by shareholders in general meeting.
Amendments to the Articles of Association have to be approved by at least 75% of those voting in person or by proxy at a general meeting of the
Subject to UK company law and the Articles of Association the Directors may exercise all the powers of the Company and may delegate authorities to committees and may delegate daytoday management and decision making to individual executive directors.
Details of the Board Committees can be found on pages 66 to 73 and on page 87.
Share capital As at 31 March 2017 the Company had nominal issued ordinary and preference share capital of 119 million comprising 117 million in ordinary shares including 0.9 million in treasury shares and 2 million in preference shares.
To satisfy obligations under employee share plans the Company issued 20922 ordinary shares during the year and reissued 230619 ordinary shares from treasury.
The Company issued 1086 shares during the period from 1 April 2017 to 24 May 2017.
Further information about share capital is in Note 22.
Information about options granted under the Companys employee share plans is in Note 31.
The Company was given authority at the 2016 AGM to make market purchases of up to 46643284 of its own ordinary shares.
The Company purchased 2000000 of its own ordinary shares during the year ended 31 March 2017 these shares are held in treasury to satisfy awards made under performance share plans.
This authority will expire at the 2017 AGM and approval will be sought from shareholders for a similar authority to be given for a further year.
Restrictions on holding shares There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary and preference shares in the capital of the Company.
No limitations are placed on the holding of shares and no share class carries special rights of control of the Company.
There are no restrictions on voting rights other than those outlined in Shareholders rights on preference shares.
The
Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may restrict the transfer or exercise of voting rights.
Shareholders rights Holders of ordinary shares have the rights accorded to them under UK company law including the rights to receive the Companys annual report and accounts attend and speak at general meetings appoint proxies and exercise voting rights.
Holders of preference shares have limited voting rights and may not vote on the disposal of surplus profits after the dividend on the preference shares has been provided for the election of Directors or their remuneration any agreement between the Directors and the Company or the alteration of the Articles of Association dealing with any such matters.
Further details regarding the rights and obligations attached to share classes are contained in the Articles of Association which are available on the Companys website site Change of control At 31 March 2017 the Group had a committed bank facility of US800 million with a number of relationship banks which contains change of control clauses.
The Group also had 200 million of Guaranteed Notes and US400 million of Private Placement Notes which contain change of control provisions.
In aggregate this financing is considered significant to the Group and in the event of a takeover change of control of the Company these contracts may be cancelled become immediately payable or be subject to acceleration.
All of the Companys share plans contain provisions relating to a change of control.
Further information is set out in the Directors Remuneration Policy.
Disclosure table pursuant to Listing Rule LR 9.8.4C In accordance with LR 9.8.4C the table below sets out the location of the information required to be disclosed where applicable.
Applicable subparagraph within LR 9.8.4 Pages 1 Interest capitalised by the Group 135 2 Unaudited financial information None 4 Longterm incentive scheme only involving a Director 95 5 Directors waivers of emoluments None 6 Directors waivers of future emoluments Not applicable 7 Non prorata allotments for cash issuer 98 8 Non prorata allotments for cash major subsidiaries None 9 Listed company is a subsidiary of another company Not applicable 10 Contracts of significance involving a Director None 11 Contracts of significance involving a controlling shareholder Not applicable 12 Waivers of dividends 98 13 Waivers of future dividends 98 14 Agreement with a controlling shareholder Not applicable About the Directors Report The Directors Report comprises the Governance section from pages 52 to 73 the Directors Report on pages 98 and 99 and the Useful Information section from pages 187.
Other
Directors Report and which is incorporated by reference into the Directors Report is disclosed as follows Likely future developments of the Company throughout the Strategic Report Human rights page 42 Greenhouse gas emissions pages 47 and 48 Relationship with employees page 43 Financial instruments Note 29 Post balance sheet events Note 35.
98 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 DTR Rule 5 disclosure As at 31 March 2017 the Company had been notified under Rule 5 of the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the following holdings of voting rights in its shares
Black Rock Inc.
Ameriprise Financial Inc.
23767456 5.10 The Capital Group Companies Inc.
23129245 4.96 Artemis Investment Management LLP 23045106 4.94 AXA S.
22890148 4.98 Invesco Limited Schroders plc Barclays Global Investors committees of state candidates affiliated to the major parties.
In all 11 separate donations were made the largest being US5000 and the smallest US300.
US17450 13000 2016  US10500 7000 was also contributed by the Tate and Lyle Political Action Committee
Eight separate donations were made the largest being of US4500 and the smallest US250.
The PAC is funded entirely by US employees.
Employee contributions are entirely voluntary and no pressure is placed on US employees to participate.
No funds are provided to the PAC by Tate and Lyle but under US law an employeefunded PAC must bear the name of the employing company.
In the period from 1 April 2017 to 24 May 2017 Deutsche Bank AG held 23418534 shares 5.04% in the
Also during this period and as notified its holding reduced to below the 5% reporting threshold.
1 Notification was made over 12 months ago as permitted under Rule 5 shareholders are not required to notify us of subsequent changes within certain ranges.
2 As at the date in the notification to the Company.
Political donations Again this year in line with the Groups policy no political donations were made in the European Union EU.
Outside the EU the Groups US business made contributions during the year totalling US22000 17000 2016  US13000 9000 to state political party committees and to the campaign The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Directors Remuneration Report and the Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group Financial Statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU and Company Financial Statements in accordance with UK GAAP United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent State whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the EU have been followed for the Group Financial Statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company Financial Statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Financial Statements Prepare the Financial Statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group.
These records should enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group Financial Statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 52 to 55 confirm that to the best of his or her knowledge The Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys and the Groups position and performance business model and strategy The Group Financial Statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group The Company Financial Statements which have been prepared in accordance with UK GAAP United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company The Strategic Report and the Directors Report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
Disclosure of information to auditors So far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and he or she has taken all the steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Group and Companys auditors are aware of that information.
The Directors Report on pages 52 to 73 pages 98 and 99 and pages 187 to the inside back cover and the Directors Remuneration Report from pages 74 to 97 of this Annual Report were approved by the Directors on 24 May 2017.
On behalf of the Board ClaireMarie OGrady Company Secretary 24 May 2017 Directors Statement of Responsibilities site 99 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Tate and Lyle PLC 100 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Report on the Group financial statements Our opinion In our opinion Tate and Lyle PLCs Group financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of its profit and cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
What we have audited The Group financial statements comprise the consolidated statement of financial position at 31 March the consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended the consolidated statement of cash flows for the year then ended the consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the consolidated financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These are crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and applicable law.
Our audit approach
The context of our audit was set by the Groups major activities in the year ended 31 March 2017 FY17.
FY17 was the first year since the Groups realignment of the Eaststarch joint venture in Europe and the restructuring of activities in Singapore.
Consequently these are no longer included as specific areas of focus for FY17.
By comparison FY17 involved fewer significant business changes although the Group sold its interest in Howbetter China and restructured its Food Systems blending sites in Europe.
The goodwill associated with Gemacom the Groups Food Systems business in Brazil was previously identified by management as sensitive to reasonably possible changes in assumptions.
Subsequently management has recorded an impairment of 16 million in FY 17.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment has been added as an area of focus given management judgement is exercised in this area.
Our other areas of focus have been further refined to reflect certain developments in the Group during FY17.
Materiality
Overall Group materiality 12 million which represents approximately 5% of profit before tax from continuing operations adding back the Groups share of tax of joint ventures and associates and exceptional items which is our defined profit measure.
Audit scope Our audit included fullscope audits of six reporting components Tate and Lyle PLC Tate and Lyle International Finance the US Bu lk Ingredients business the US Speciality Food Ingredients business the US Sucralose business and G.
Hahn and Company Limited in Wales with specified audit procedures performed at a further three reporting components Tate and Lyle Services Slovakia Tand L Insurance Gibraltar and the US Tax Group.
Taken together the components at which audit work was performed accounted for 82% of consolidated sales and 63% of our profit measure as defined above.
This percentage is calculated on an absolute basis which aggregates component profits and losses ignoring sign convention.
Our audit covered all components that individually contributed more than 10% of consolidated sales and of our profit measure as defined above.
Areas of focus Commodity risk Complex tax accounting and uncertain tax positions Retirement benefit obligations and assets and Goodwill and intangible asset impairment.
Materiality
Audit Scope Areas of
Consolidated sales 1 Reporting components 82% 2 Other components 18% 1 1 Reporting components 63% 2 Other components 37%
1 As dened above.
100 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 101 The scope of our audit and our areas of focus We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland.
We designed our audit by determining materiality and assessing the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective ju dgements for example in respect of significant accounting estim ates that involved making assumptions and considering future events th at are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
The risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit including the allocation of our resources and eff ort are identified as areas of focus in the table below.
We have also set out how we tailored our audit to address these specific are as in order to provide an opinion on the financial statements as a whole and any comments we make on the results of our procedures should be read in this context.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Commodity risk Refer to Notes 2 28 and 29.
The Groups accounting policy is to marktomarket at each balance sheet date its commodity positions including its forward sales and purchase contracts with customers and grain suppliers.
In addition certain commodity raw material inventories are measured at net realisable value.
The Group manages the commodity price risk on sales and purchase contracts by taking long and short positions and through the use of derivative financial instruments.
This was an area of focus due to the complexity of the calculations and the judgement involved in the valuation of certain commodities positions most notably coproducts that do not have an actively traded futures market.
These coproducts include corn gluten feed corn gluten meal and corn oil.
Additionally basis adjustments are made to certain commodity valuations to reflect market conditions which necessitate further management judgement.
The fair values of commodities pricing contracts as at 31 March 2017 were assets of 29 million and liabilities of 16 million.
We understood and evaluated managements process for managing the commodity price risk inherent within its commodity positions and compared it with managements underlying risk management and accounting policies.
No matters were identified that would indicate that the risk management and accounting policies were not being followed.
We obtained managements forward pricing sheet for commodities used in its marktomarket calculations.
For those commodities with an actively traded market we assessed the consistency of the forward prices with those published by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
For those commodities where an active futures market does not exist principally coproducts and for the basis adjustments made we understood and challenged managements methodology for determining the valuations including the inputs and assumptions used.
To further assess the reasonableness of the forward prices estimated by management we performed trend analyses against similar market or exchange traded commodities and compared certain ratios of coproduct prices against historical ratios.
In addition to testing the forw ard price estimates we audited the calculations of the fair value and associated unrealised gains and losses on the commodity based positions.
We found that managements forward price estimates and the calculations of fair value of positions were reasonable and supported by market observable data where appropriate.
Where management had calculated values by reference to nonmarket observable data we found that these were within acceptable ranges.
For derivative financial instruments which were used to manage the commodity price risk we independently confirmed these positions with the counterparty and recalculated the fair value of the positions held.
We found that the fair values of these derivative financial instruments were supported by the confirmations and recalculations.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 101 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Tate and Lyle PLC continued 102 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Complex tax accounting and uncertain tax positions Refer to Notes 2 and 12.
The nature of the Groups multinational and crossborder operations exposes it to complicated tax regulations.
This requires management to exercise judgement in determining the appropriate amount of tax to prov ide in respect of tax obligations in a number of jurisdictions.
In addition certain financing arrangements that the Group has entered into while not uncommon or unduly aggressive have been previously subject to enquiry by tax authorities.
The result of enquiries by tax authorities could materially affect the quantum of tax provisions recognised in the Group financial statements.
At 31 March 2017 Tate and Lyle had centrally held provisions for uncertain tax positions of 34 million 2016  31 million.
Additionally the Group has executed transactions during FY17 for which the accounting and current and deferred tax considerations required substantial analysis.
These transactions have given rise to exceptional deferred tax assets of 65 million.
In conjunction with our UK US and international tax and transfer pricing specialists we evaluate d and challenged managements judgements in respect of esti mates of tax exposures and contingencies in order to assess the adequacy of the Groups tax provisions.
This included obtainin g a detailed understanding of the Groups key technical tax matters and risks related to business and legislative developments.
We recalculated managements valu ation of its tax provisions and determined whether the calculations were in line with the Groups methodology and principl es and whether they had been applied on a basis consistent with previous years.
We also examined managements ongoing analysis of its financing arrangements and considered recent correspondence with the tax authorities.
From the evidence obtained we concluded that the level of provisioning was acceptable.
Additionally we assessed the a ppropriateness of judgements and estimates as they pertain to taxation in transactions executed during FY17 and concluded they were appropriate.
The valuation of the exceptional de ferred tax assets of 65 million was judgemental and we assessed the key assumpt ions made by the Group and concluded they were appropriate.
In respect of the deferred tax asset of 34 million relating to previously unrecognised tax losses we also confirmed its recoverability as reasonable against expected future taxable profit.
Retirement benefit obligations and assets Refer to Notes 2 and 30.
The Group has significant retirement benefit obligations in the UK and the US including unfunded retirement medical plans in the US.
At 31 March 2017 the present value of these obligations was 1769 million 2016  1634 mi llion offset by plan assets at fair value of 1630 million 2016  1426 million in respect of funded schemes.
These retirement benefit obligations were determined based on a number of actuarial assumptions and calculations which were subject to significant judgement and estimate.
Changes in these assumptions can have a material impact on the quantum of obligations recorded in the cons olidated statement of financial position.
During FY17 a triennial valuation was completed on the main UK scheme and a gain was recorded in the US following a lumpsum settlement in the year.
We understood and evaluated the assumptions used by the Groups actuaries and management in calculating the retirement benefit obligations for the defined benefit pension plans in the UK and the US and the unfunded retirement medical scheme in the US.
In conjunction with our pensions specialists we challenged the actuarial assumptions by comparing these against benchmark ranges based on the market conditions and expectations at 31 March 2017.
Based on our review of the assumptions in each case we found that the actuarial assumptions used were reasonable and sat within our acceptable range and where appropriate were applied on a basis consistent with previous years.
In addition we independently confirmed the pension assets held by the UK and US schemes with the thirdparty custodians and fund managers.
We also performed an independent assessment of the asset valuations and concluded that they were appropriate.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment Refer to Notes 2 and 19.
At 31 March 2017 the Group has a net balance of 212 million of goodwill 2016  204 million.
In addition the Group has 189 million of intangible assets 2016  186 million comprising patents and other intellectual property capitalised development expenses and other acquired intangible assets.
The carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets are contingent on future cash flows and there is a risk that the assets will be impaired if these cash flows do not meet the Groups expectations.
The impairment reviews perfor med by the Group contained a number of judgements and estimate s including revenue growth the success of market and capacity expansion profit margin cash conversion terminal values and discount rates.
Changes in these assumptions could lead to an impairment to the carrying value of intangible assets and goodwill.
During the year the Group recogn ised a 16 million impairment charge against the carrying value of goodwill relating to the Gemacom business in Brazil 2 million against the goodwill relating to Howbetter in China and 5 million in respect of other intangibles.
We obtained the Groups annual impairment analyses and tested the reasonableness of key assumptions including profit and cash flow growth or decline terminal values and the selection of discount rates.
We assessed the appropriateness of the discount rate and challenged managements other key assumptions including comparing relevant assumptions with industry and economic forecasts.
We obtained and evaluated managements sensitivity analyses to ascertain the impact of reasonably possible changes in key assumptions and we performed our own independent sensitivity calculations to quantify the downside changes to managements models required to result in impairment.
With the exception of Biovelop there is no reasonably possible change in one or more of the key assumptions used in the impairment tests for goodwill and other intangible assets that would give rise to an impairment loss during the coming year.
As a result of our work we determined that the impairment charges recognised during the year were appropriate.
102 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 103 How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the geographic structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and th e industry in which the Group operates.
The Group is structured across two divisions Speciality Food Ingredients and Bulk Ingredients with a central support function.
The Group financial statements are a consolidation of the Groups reporting units spread across the two divisions which compr ise the Groups operating businesses and centralised functions of more than 250 individual components.
In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the repo rting units by us as the Group engagement team or component auditors from PwC UK or other PwC network firms operating under our instruction.
Where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the level of involvement we needed to have in the audit work at those components in order to be able to co nclude whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the Group financial statements as a whole.
This involvement included oversight visits meetings with management and review of working papers at the Groups two significant components in the US and at the Global Shared Services centre in Poland.
We also attended the clearance meetings for these components.
In addition we met with management in Slovakia and Wales and the nonPwC firm audit team for the Groups joint venture in Mexico and instructed PwC Mexico to review the working papers in respect of the audit work they performed.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality .
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determin e the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materi ality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall Group materiality 12 million 2016  10 million.
How we determined it Approximately 5% of profit before tax from continuing operations 233 million adding back the Groups share of tax of joint ventures and associates 12 million and exceptional items 18 million as defined in Note 3 to the Group financial statements.
Rationale for benchmark applied The Groups principal measure of earnings is adjusted profit before tax from continuing operations which excludes exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangible assets and net retirement benefit interest from profit before tax.
The Group adjusts for exceptional items as it believes that doing so is necessary to provide an understanding of financial performance.
We have not used the Groups principal measure as defined above as our benchmark since the amortisation of acquired intangible assets and net retirement benefit interest are recurring items.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 500000 2016 500000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Directors statement set out on page 99 in relation to going concern.
W e have nothing to report having performed our review.
Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relat ion to the Directors statement about whether they considered it approp riate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financi al statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
As noted in the Directors statement the Directors have concluded that it is appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
The going concern basis presumes that the Group has adequate resources to remain in operation and that the Directors intend it to do so for at le ast one year from the date the financial statements were signed.
As part of our audit we have concluded that the Directors use of the going concern basis is appropriate.
However because not all futu re events or conditions can be predicted these statements are not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going co ncern.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 103 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Tate and Lyle PLC continued 104 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Other required reporting Consistency of other information and compliance with applicable requirements Companies Act 2006 reporting In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statemen ts are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been pr epared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and its environmen t obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstate ments in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
ISAs UK and Ireland reporting Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
We have no exceptions to report. acquired in the course of performing our audit.
We have no exceptions to report. communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We have no exceptions to report.
The Directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation on page 39 of the Annual Report in accordance with provision C.2.1 of the Code that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to. are being managed or mitigated.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to. attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of th e principal risks facing the Group and the Directors statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the Directors process support ing their statements checking that the statements are in alignment wi th the relevant provisions of the Code and considering wheth er the statements are consistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing our au dit.
We have nothing to repor t having performed our review.
Adequacy of information and explanations received Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Corporate governance statement Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the part of the Corporate governance statement relating to ten further provisions of the Code.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
104 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 105 Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Our responsibilities and those of the Directors As explained more fully in the Directors Statement of Responsibilities set out on page 99 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Parent Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressl y agreed by our prior consent in writing.
What an audit of financial statements involves An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify any material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
Other matters We have reported separately on the Parent Company financial statements of Tate and Lyle PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017 and on the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
John Waters Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
24 May 2017 they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom go verning the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legi slation in other jurisdictions.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 105 Consolidated Income Statement 106 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Year ended 31 March
Continuing operations
Operating profit 6 233 Finance income 11 2 Finance expense 11 34 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 21 32 Profit before tax 233 Income tax creditexpense 12 22 Profit for the year  continuing operations 255 Profit for the year  discontinued operations 8 1 Profit for the year  total operations 256 Profit for the year attributable to owners of the Company noncontrolling interests Profit for the year 256 Earnings per share Pence
Continuing operations 13 basic 55.0p diluted 54.2p Total operations 13 basic 55.2p diluted 54.4p Analysis of adjusted profit for the year  continuing operations Profit before tax  continuing operations 233 Adjusted for Net charge for exceptional items 7 19 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 19 12 Net retirement benefit interest 11 30 7 Adjusted profit before tax  continuing operations 4 271 Adjusted income tax expense  continuing operations 4 12 49 Adjusted profit for the year  continuing operations telTate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income site 107 Year ended 31 March
Profit for the year 256 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that have beenmay be reclassified to profit or loss Fair value gain on cash flow hedges 23 1 Fair value loss on cash flow hedges transferred to the income statement 23 4 Reclassified and reported in the income statement in respect of availableforsale financial assets 23 1 Gain on currency translation of foreign operations 23 185 Fair value loss on net investment hedges 23 69 Share of other comprehensive incomeexpense of joint ventures and associates 21 23 7 Amounts transferred to the income statement upon disposal of subsidiary 23 34 1 Amounts transferred to the income statement upon disposal of joint ventures 23 34 Tax effect of the above items 12 23 Items that will not be reclas sified to profit or loss Remeasurement of retirement benefit plans actual return higherlower than interest on plan assets 30 179 net actuarial lossgain on net retirement benefit obligations 30 106 Tax effect of the above items 12 30 Total other comprehensive income 169 Total comprehensive income 425 Analysed by continuing operations 425 discontinued operations Total comprehensive income 425 Attributable to owners of the Company 425 noncontrolling interests Total comprehensive income 425 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 107 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 108 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 At 31 March
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Goodwill and other intangible assets 19 401 Property plant and equipment Investments in joint ventures 21 92 Investments in associates 21 4 Availableforsale financial assets 18 30 Derivative financial instruments 28 15 Deferred tax assets 12 22 Trade and other receivables 17 1 Retirement benefit surplus Current assets Inventories 15 441 Trade and other receivables 17 291 Current tax assets 12 1 Availableforsale financial assets 18 Derivative financial instruments 28 31 Cash and cash equivalents 16 261 Assets classified as held for sale 8 TOTAL ASSETS EQUITY Capital and reserves Share capital Share premium 22 406 Capital redemption reserve 8 Other reserves 23 253 Retained earnings 548 Equity attributable to owners of the Company Noncontrolling interests TOTAL EQUITY LIABILITIES Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 24 10 Borrowings 25 604 Derivative financial instruments 28 37 Deferred tax liabilities 12 25 Retirement benefit deficit 30 259 Provisions for other liabilities and charges Current liabilities Trade and other payables 24 315 Current tax liabilities 12 57 Borrowings and bank overdrafts 25 88 Derivative financial instruments 28 17 Provisions for other liabilities and charges 32 10 Liabilities classified as held for sale 8 TOTAL LIABILITIES TOTAL EQUITY AND LIABILITIES The notes on pages 111 to 177 form part of these financial state ments.
The consolidated financial statements on pages 106 to 177 were approved by the Board of Directors on 24 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Javed Ahmed Nick Hampton
108 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows site 109 Year ended 31 March
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax from continuing operations 233 Adjustments for depreciation of property plant and equipment 20 109 amortisation of intangible assets 19 40 sharebased payments 31 21 exceptional items 7 5 finance income 11 2 finance expense 11 34 share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 21 32 Changes in working capital and other noncash movements 26 4 Net retirement benefit obligations 36 Cash generated from continuing operations 366 Interest paid 30 Net income tax paid 35 Cash used in discontinued operations 8 3 Net cash generated from operating activities 298 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 127 Purchase of intangible assets 26 Disposal of property plant and equipment 2 Cash adjustment in respect of previous acquisitions 3 Disposal of businesses net of cash disposed 34 3 Acquisition of businesses net of cash acquired 34 Disposal of joint ventures 34 Purchase of availableforsale financial assets 18 4 Disposal of availableforsale financial assets 4 Interest received 2 Dividends received from joint ventures and associates 21 29 Net cash used infrom investing activities 114 Cash flows from financing activities Purchase of own shares to trust or treasury Cash inflow from additional borrowings 66 Cash outflow from repayment of borrowings 189 Repayment of capital element of finance leases 1 Dividends paid to the owners of the Company 14 130 Net cash used in financing activities 272 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 27 88 Cash and cash equivalents Balance at beginning of year 317 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 27 88 Currency translation differences 27 32 Balance at end of year 16 261 A reconciliation of the movement in cash and cash equivalents to the movement in net debt is presented in Note 27.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 109 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 110 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Share capital and share premium
Other
Retained earnings
Company
Non controlling interests
Total equity At 1 April Year ended 31 March 2016 Profit for the year  total operations Other comprehensive incomeexpense Total comprehensive income Sharebased payments net of tax Purchase of own shares to trust or treasury Dividends paid Note 14 At 31 March Year ended 31 March 2017 Profit for the year  total operations Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income Sharebased payments net of tax Purchase of own shares to trust or treasury Derecognition of put option on NCI Movement on NCI Dividends paid Note 14 At 31 March Year ended 31 March Dividends on ordinary shares pence per share
Pence
Pence
Proposed in respect of the financial year interim final Paid in the financial year interim  in respect of the financial year final  in respect of the pr evious financial year 110 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements site 111 Basis of preparation Description of business Tate and Lyle PLC the Company is a public limited company incorporated in the United Kingdom and registered in England.
The Companys ordinary shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The Company and its subsidiaries together the Group provide ingredients and solutions to the food beverage and other industries.
The Group operates from numerous production facilities around the world.
The Groups continuing operations comprise two operating segments Speciality Food Ingredients SFI and Bulk Ingredients BI.
Segment information is presented in Note 5.
Accounting period The Groups annual financial statements are drawn up to 31 March.
These financial statements cover the year ended 31 March 2017 with comparative financials for the year ended 31 March 2016.
Basis of accounting The consolidated financial statements on pages 106 to 177 have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and related interpretations as adopted for use in the European Union and those parts of the Companies Act 2006 that are applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue to operate for a period not less than 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements and that there are no material uncertainties around their assessment.
Accordingly the directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting.
The Groups principal accounting policies are set out in Note 2 and Note 3 and have been consistently applied throughout the year.
Functional and presentation currency The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling which is also the Companys functional currency.
All amounts are rounded to the near est million unless otherwise indicated.
Accounting standards adopted during the year In the current year the Group has adopted with effect from 1 April 2016 new or revised accounting standards as set out below IFRS 11 Joint arrangements Amendments IAS 16 Property plant and equipment Amendments IAS 38 Intangible assets Amendments IAS 27 Separate financial statements Amendments IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements Amendments Annual Improvements to IFRS  201214 cycles The adoption of these amendments has had no material effect on the Groups financial statements.
Use of alternative performance measures The Group also presents alternative performance measures including adjusted operating profit adjusted profit before tax adjusted earnings per share adjusted operating cash flow and adjusted free cash flow which are used for internal performance analysis and incentive compensation arrangements for employees.
These measures are presented because they provide investors with valuable additional information about the performance of the business.
For the years presented adjusted performance measures exclude where relevant Exceptional items excluded as they relate to events which are unlikely to recur are outside the normal course of business and therefore merit separate disclosure in order to provide a better understanding of the Groups underlying financial performance Amortisation of acquired intangible assets costs associated with amounts recognised through acquisition accounting that impact earnings compared to organic investments Net retirement benefit interest accounting charges or credits which are not linked to the underlying performance of the business.
The amounts excluded reflect the net interest cost of postretirement benefit plans substantially closed to future accrual and Tax on the above items and tax items that themselves meet these definitions.
Alternative performance measures reported by the Group are not defined terms under IFRS and may therefore not be comparable with similarlytitled measures reported by other companies.
Reconciliations of the alternative performance measures to the most directly comparable IFRS measures are presented in Note 4.
Changes in constant currency Where changes in constant currency are presented they are calculated by retranslating current year results at prior year exchange rates.
This represents a change to the methodology applied in previous years which involved retranslating prior year results at current year exchange rates.
This change which has not had a material impact has been made to align with how the majority of external stakeholders view constant currency performance comparisons.
Reconciliations of the movement in constant currency have been included in the additional information within this document.
Principal accounting policies requiring significant judgements and estimates In preparing these consolidated financial statements management has made judgements and used estimates and assumptions in establishing the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expense under the Groups accounting policies.
Judgements are based on the best evidence available to management.
Estimates are based on factors including historical experience and expectations of future events corroborated with external information where possible.
Judgements and estimates and their underlying assumptions are reviewed and updated on an ongoing basis with any revisions being recognised prospectively.
However given the inherent uncertainty of such estimates the actual results might differ significantly from the anticipated ones.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 111 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 112 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Principal accounting policies requiring significant judgements and estimates continued The accounting policies and information about the accounting estimates and judgements made in applying these accounting policies that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements are set out below.
Fair value measurement this accounting policy applies principally to Availableforsale financial assets Derivatives and hedge accounting Financial instruments  fair value and risk management and Retirement benefit obligations  see Notes 18 28 29 and 30 A number of the Groups accoun ting policies and disclosures require the measurement of fair value for either financial or nonfinancial assets and liabilities.
Examples of the former include loans interest rate swaps and commodity contracts examples of the latter include intangibles and property plant and equipment acquired in a business combination.
Fair value is the amount of money or other consideration expected to be exchanged for an asset or a liability in an arms length transaction.
When measuring fair value the Group takes into account the characteristics of the asset or liability and uses observable market data such as prices quoted on a recognised exchange to the greatest extent possible.
Where such data is not available the Group has an established framework in place that deals with setting monitoring and evaluating nonobservable inputs including the respective classification of the fair value measurements.
Such unobservable inputs are based on managements own assessment of market and other conditions currently prevailing or expected to prevail.
Fair value measurements are categorised into three different levels based on the degree to which the inputs used to arrive at the fair value of the assets and liabilities are observable and the significance of the inputs to the fair value measurement in its entirety as follows Level 1 inputs are quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the entity can assess at the measurement date.
The prices of equity shares or bonds quoted on the London Stock Exchange are examples of Level 1 inputs Level 2 inputs are those other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable either directly or indirectly.
Most interest rate swaps fall in this category as their prices are referenced to a published rate curve but it is not price specific to the swap itself Level 3 inputs are unobservable inputs.
The Group generally classifies assets or liabilities as Level 3 when their fair value is determined using unobservable inputs that individually or when aggregated with other unobservable inputs represent more than 10% of the fair value of the observable inputs of the assets or liabilities.
This would include expected future cash flows from budgets and forecasts the entity has made.
Certain elements of the Groups commodity contract portfolio also fall into this category as their values include significant managementderived assumptions.
For assets and liabilities that are recognised in the financial statements at fair value on a recurring basis the Group determines whether transfers have occurred between levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation based on lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole at the end of the reporting period.
Judgements and estimates Corn and coproduct inventories held in the US business are measured at net realisable value since they are considered to be agricultural produce after harvest.
The Group uses financial instruments mainly forward contracts to manage price risk within its US business by hedging the contracted amount of corn when either business division Bulk Ingredients or Speciality Food Ingredients enters into a finished good sales contract.
The elements of the Groups US net corn position are accounted for as follows Contracts for the physical purchase of corn in respect of corresponding committed sales of finished goods are marked to market in accordance with IAS 39 with any gains or losses recognised in the income statement Contracts for the sale of corn and corn based products are marked to market in accordance with IAS 39 with any gains or losses recognised in the income statement Corn inventories are measured at net realisable value in accordance with IAS 2.3 with any gains or losses recognised in the income statement Financial instruments futures and options are carried at fair value with any gains or losses recognised immediately in the income statement.
Although the Group manages corn price risk by entering into offsetting backtoback corn positions there is still underlying price risk on the basis cost that must be paid to get delivery of the corn to its plants.
This basis is the difference in price between that at which a farmer will sell and the price on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange CME and is typically driven by local supply demand and logistic s factors requiring estimation for valuation purposes.
The production of finished goods from corn also results in the production of three coproducts corn gluten feed corn gluten meal and corn oil.
The price risk associated with these coproducts cannot readily be hedged as there are no actively traded markets for these commodities.
Whilst the Group actively manages its overall coproduct positions in the US the Group can hold either a net long or short position for each coproduct based on the volume of coproducts made bought or short sold and forward sold at any point in time.
These positions are measured at fair value at each reporting date with gains and losses recognised in the income statement.
Management exercises significant judgement in deriving these fair values which involves estimating the basis and the price at which the Group will purchase or sell these coproduct positions in the future.
These inputs are classified as unobservable and are derived by inhouse experts with reference to sources such as the expected supply and demand for corn and substitute products expectations of weather conditions and historical published coproduct pricing levels over a period of up to three months from the balance sheet date.
Whilst it is possible to model the sensitivity of profit to changes in any one of the key assumptions it is important to note that due to the complexity and interdependence of related assumptions the overall net impact in reality is likely to be different.
112 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 113 The accounting for corn and coproduct positions can create significant volatility in the Groups income statement although the use of such contracts is critical to the business as it effectively limits the Groups exposure to fluctuating market prices.
Whilst it is not practical to quantify all elements included in fair value measurements the Group discloses sensitivity analysis on the key areas of judgement price of coproducts and basis and the carrying amounts impacted by estimation uncertainty in Note 29.
Full details of the valuation technique are also included in Note 29.
Taxation this accounting policy principally applies to Income taxes  see Note 12 Taxable profit differs from accounting profit because it excludes certain items of income and expense that are recognised in the financial statements but are treated differently for tax purposes.
Current tax is the amount of tax expected to be payable or receivable on the taxable profit or loss for the current period.
This amount is then amended for any adjustments in respect of prior periods.
Current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been written into law enacted or irrevocably announcedcommitted by the respective government substantively enacted at the periodend date.
Current tax receivable assets and payable liabilities are offset only when there is a legal right to settle them net and the entity intends to do so.
This is generally true when the taxes are levied by the same tax authority.
Because of the differences between accounting and taxable profits and losses reported in each period temporary differences arise on the amount certain assets and liabilities are carried at for accounting purposes and their respective tax values.
Deferred tax is the amount of tax payable or recoverable on these temporary differences.
Deferred tax liabilities arise where the carrying amount of an asset is higher than the tax value more tax deduction has been taken.
This can happen where the Group invests in capital assets as governments often encourage investment by allowing tax depreciation to be recognised faster than accounting depreciation.
This reduces the tax value of the asset relative to its accounting carrying amount.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally provided on all taxable temporary differences.
The periods over which such temporary differences reverse will vary depending on the life of the related asset or liability.
Deferred tax assets arise where the carrying amount of an asset is lower than the tax value less tax benefit has been taken.
This can happen where the Group has trading losses which cannot be offset in the current period but can be carried forward.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only where the Group considers it probable that it will be able to obtain the benefit of them in the future for example use such losses by offsetting them against future taxable profits.
Taxable temporary differences can also arise on investments in foreign subsidiaries and associates and interests in joint ventures.
Where the Group is able to control the reversal of these differences and it is probable that these will not reverse in the foreseeable future then no deferred tax is provided.
Deferred tax is calculated using the enacted or substantively enacted rates that are expected to apply when the asset is realised or the liability is settled.
Similarly to current taxes deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset only when there is a legal right to settle them net and the entity intends to do so.
This normally requires both assets and liabilities to have arisen in the same country.
Income tax expense reported in the financial statements comprises current tax as well as the effects of changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Tax expensecredits are generally recognised in the same place as the items to which they relate.
For example the tax associated with a gain on disposal is recognised in the income statement in line with the gain on disposal.
Equally the tax associated with pension obligation actuarial gains and losses is recognised in other comprehensive income in line with the actuarial gains and losses.
Judgements and estimates The Group operates in a large number of countries around the world.
Uncertainties exist in relation to the interpretation of complex tax legislation changes in tax laws and the amount and timing of future taxable income.
In some jurisdictions agreeing tax liabilities with loca l tax authorities can take several years.
This could necessitate future adjustments to taxable income and expense already recorded.
At the periodend date tax liabilities and assets are based on managements best judgements around the application of the tax regulations and managements estimate of the future amounts that will be settled.
Management considers tax exposures individually and arrives at judgements with support from experienced tax professionals and external advisors.
There is however a risk that the Groups judgements are challenged by the tax authorities resulting in a different tax payable or recoverable from the amounts that have been provided.
As described in Note 12 the Group has internal funding structures that favourably affect the amount of tax payable.
In managements view these structures are compliant with the relevant tax regulations.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for unused tax losses only to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the losses can be utilised.
Management judgement is required to determine the amount of deferred tax that should be recognised dependent on the anticipated timing and quantum of future taxable profit.
The main uncertainties impacting taxation arise from potential changes to legislation.
Firstly the OECDs Base Erosion and Profit Shifting BEPS project has been one of the most significant multilateral initiatives in recent years for modifying international tax rules.
As these recommendations continue to evolve and are adopted into local tax legislation over the coming years this may continue to impact the Groups effective tax rate.
Secondly the UK government has announced changes to UK tax legislation in respect of restrictions to interest relief and the use of carry forward losses.
Whilst this legislation has yet to be enacted these changes may impact our ability to deduct interest and fully utilise brought forward losses in the UK in the future.
Lastly potential reform of the US tax system could impact the Groups effective tax rate depending on the nature of any such reforms.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 113 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 114 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Principal accounting policies requiring significant judgements and estimates continued Taxation continued Judgements and estimates continued The Groups operating model involves crossborder supply of significant volumes of goods into numerous end markets and the provision of services from one jurisdiction to another.
There is a risk that different tax authorities could seek to assess higher profits or lower costs to activi ties being undertaken in their jurisdiction potentially leading to higher total tax payable by the Group.
Retirement benefit plans this accounting policy principally applies to Retirement benefit obligations  see Note 30 The Group operates both defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans principally in the UK and the US and unfunded retirement medical plans in the US.
For accounting purposes a valuation of each of the defined benefit plans is carried out annually at 31 March using independent qualified actuaries.
Benefit obligations are measured using the projected unit credit method and are discounted using the market yields on highquality corporate bonds denominated in the same currency as and of similar duration to the benefit obligations.
Plan assets are measured at their fair value at the periodend date.
Where a plan holds a qualifying insurance policy the fair value of the policy is deemed to be equivalent to the present value of the related benefit obligations.
A deficit or surplus is recognised on each plan representing the difference between the present value of the benefit obligation and the fair value of the plan assets.
Where a plan is in surplus the surplus recognised is limited to the present value of any amounts that the Group expects to recover by way of refunds or a reduction in future contributions.
The costs of the defined benefit plan that are recognised in the income statement include the current service cost any past service cost and the interest on the net deficit or surplus.
Gains or losses on curtailments or settlements of the plans are recognised in the income statement in the period in which the curtailment or settlement occurs.
Plan administration costs incurred by the Group are also recognised in the income statement.
Current service cost represents the increase in the present value of the benefit obligation due to benefits accrued during the period less employee contributions.
Past service cost represents the change in the present value of the benefit obligation that arises from benefit changes that are applied retrospectively to benefits accrued in previous years.
Any past service cost is recognised in full in the period in which the benefit changes are made.
Interest on the net deficit or surplus is calculated by applying the discount rate that is used in measuring the present value of the benefit obligation to the deficit or surplus.
Remeasurements of the deficit or surplus are recognised in other comprehensive income.
Remeasurements comprise differences between the actual return on plan assets less asset management expenses and the interest on the plan assets and actuarial gains and losses.
Actuarial gains and losses represent the effect of changes in the actuarial assumptions made in measuring the present value of the benefit obligation and experience differences between those assumptions and actual outcomes.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur.
Contributions made by the Group to defined contribution pension schemes are recognised in the income statement in the period in which they fall due.
Judgements and estimates At 31 March 2017 the present value of the benefit obligations of the plans was 1769 million 2 016  1634 million including 76 million 2016  66 million in respect of the unfunded medical plans.
The present value of the benefit obligations is based on actuarial estimates of the future benefits that will be payable to the members of the plans.
As such the benefit obligations are based on a number of assumptions changes to which could have a material impact on the reported amounts.
The present value of the benefit obligations is most sensitive to the discount rate applied to the benefit obligations assumed life expectancies and expected future price inflation rates.
Whilst the Group establishes the assumptions on a consistent basis reflecting advice from qualified actuaries based on published indices and other actuarial data management must apply judgement in selecting the most appropriate value from within an acceptable range.
Changes in the assumptions used in determining the present value of the benefit obligations will have an impact on the Groups income statement through their effect on the service cost and the interest on the net de ficit or surplus in the plans.
However most of the impact of such changes together with fluctuations in the actual return on the plan assets will be reflected in other comprehensive income.
Impairment of nonfinancial assets this accounting policy principally applies to Goodwill and other intangibles and Property plant and equipment  see Notes 19 and 20 Property plant and equipment and intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever any events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amounts may not be recoverable.
If such an indication exists then the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated.
In addi tion goodwill is tested for impairment annually.
An asset is impaired to the extent that its carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
An assets recoverable amount represents the higher of the benefit which the entity expects to derive from the asset over its life discounted to present value value in use and the net price for which the entity can sell the asset in the open market fair value less costs of disposal.
The discount rate used for the value in use calculation is a pretax rate that reflects the risks specific to the asset or groups of assets tested.
For the purpose of impairment testing assets are grouped together into the smallest group of assets which has cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
This could also be a single asset.
Goodwill does not generate cash inflows independently and is therefore tested for impa irment at the level of the Cash Generating Unit CGU or group of CGUs to which it is allocated.
Note 19 shows the allocation of ma terial elements of goodwill to CGUs for impairment testing purposes.
114 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 115 When goodwill is tested for impairment and the carrying amount of the CGU or group of CGUs to which it is allocated exceeds its recoverable amount the impairment is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of the goodwill and then prorata to the other nonfinancial assets belonging to the CGU or group of CGUs on the basis of their respective carrying amounts.
Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement.
Impairment losses recognised in previous periods for assets other than goodwill are reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the assets recoverable amount.
Such reversals are limited to the carrying amount of the asset had no impairment been recognised in previous periods.
Impairment losses recognised in respect of goodwill cannot be reversed.
Asset impairments have the potential to significantly impact operating profit.
In order to determine whether impairments are required the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the asset.
This calculation is usually based on projecting future cash flows over a fiveyear period and using a terminal value to incorporate expectations of growth thereafter.
A discount factor is applied to obtain a present value value in use.
The fair value less costs of disposal of an asset may be used where this results in an amount in excess of value in use.
Judgements and estimates Estimated future cash flows for impairment calculations are based on managements expectations of future volumes and margins based on plans and best estimates of the productivity of the assets in their current condition.
Future cash flows therefore exclude benefits from major expansion projects requiring future capital expenditure where that expenditure has not been approved and committed on the dates the assets are tested unless a fair value less costs of disposal model is used.
Future cash flows are discounted using a discount rate appropriate for the CGU being tested.
The discount rate is impacted by estimates of interest rates equity returns and market and countryrelated risks.
The Groups weighted average cost of capital which is used as the initial reference point for the discount rate before any asset specific adjustments are made is reviewed on a regular basis.
If the cash flow or discount rate assumptions were to change because of market conditions the level of impairment could be different and could result in the asset impairment being increased or excepting goodwill reversed in part or in full at a future date.
Provisions and contingent liabilities see Note 32 A provision is a liability of uncertain timing or amount that is recognised when 1 the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event 2 it is more likely than not that a payment will be required to settle the obligation and 3 the amount can be reliably estimated.
Where a payment is not probable or the amount of the obligation cannot be measured with sufficient certainty a contingent liability is disclosed.
Contingent liabilities are also disclosed if a possible obligation arises from past events but its existence will be confirmed only by the occurrence or nonoccurrence of uncertain future events.
Provisions are determined by discounting the expected future payments using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
The unwinding of any discount is recognised in the income statement within finance expense.
The impact of any discounting is not material to the
Provision is made for restructuring costs when a detailed formal plan for the restructuring has been determined and the plan has been communicated to those affected by it.
Gains from the expected disposal of assets are not taken into account in measuring restructuring provisions.
Future operating losses are not provided for.
Provisions are recognised for onerous contracts to the extent that the benefits expected to be derived from a contract are lower than the unavoidable cost to the Group of meeting its obligations under the contract.
Before establishing the amount of the provision any impairment losses on assets associated with the contract are recognised.
Judgements and estimates The Group is subject to claims and litigation generally arising in the ordinary course of its business some of which are for substantial amounts.
All such actions are strenuously defended but provision is made for liabilities that are considered likely to arise on the basis of current information and legal advice and after taking into account the Groups insurance arrangements.
Whilst there is always uncertainty as to the outcome of any claim or litigation it is not expected that claims and litigation existing at 31 March 2017 will have a material adverse effect on the Groups financial position.
At 31 March 2017 provisions included amounts for insurance claims payable by the Groups reinsurance company legal matters employee termination and other restructuring costs.
These have been based on managements judgement as to whether any obligation legal or otherwise existed at the balance sheet date and if so management s estimate of the likelihood magnitude and timing of future pa yments related to the obligation.
Other principal accounting policies The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modi fied in respect of the revaluation to fair value of availableforsale financial assets derivative financial instruments certain inventories assets classified as held for sale assets held by defined benefit pension plans and intangible and tangible assets acquired in a business combination.
Basis of consolidation a Business combinations A business combination is a transaction or other event in which the Group obtains control over a busi ness.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method the key elements of which are set out below.
Identifiable assets and liabilities of the acquired business are generally measured at their fair value at the acquisition date.
Retirement benefit obligations and deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured in accordance with the Groups accounting policies.
Consideration transferred represents the sum of the fair values at the acquisition date of the assets gi ven liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control over the acquired business.
Acquisitionrelated costs are charged to the income statement in the peri od in which they are incurred.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 115 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 116 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Other principal accounting policies continued Basis of consolidation continued a Business combinations continued Any noncontrolling interest in the acquired business is measured either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the identifiable assets and liabilities of the business.
Put options written by the Group over noncontrolling interests are initially recognised as a liability measured at the present value of the exercise price with a corresponding charge directly to equity.
Subsequently the liability is measured at the present value of the expected redemption amount and remeasured in accordance with IAS 39 at amortised cost with changes recognised in the income statement.
Goodwill arising in a business combination represents the excess of the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquired business and where a business combination is achieved in stages the fair value at the acquisition date of the Groups previously held equity interest over the net total of the identifiable assets and liabilities of the acquired business at the acquisition date.
Any remeasurement gain or loss on the previously held equity interest is recognised in the income statement.
Any shortfall or negative goodwill is recognised immediately as a gain in the income statement.
Changes in the Groups ownership interest in a subsidiary that do not result in a loss of control are accounted for within equity.
Any gain or loss upon loss of control is recognised in the income statement.
Subsidiaries are all entities including structured entities over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which the Group obtains control.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
A noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary represents the share of the net assets of the subsidiary that is attributable to the equity interest in the subsidiary that is not owned by the Group.
The Groups income and expenses assets and liabilities and cash flows include those of each of its subsidiaries from the date on which the Company obtains control until such time as control is lost.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains or losses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
An associate is an entity over which the Group has significant influence.
Significant influence is the power to participate in financial and operating policy decisions but not to control or jointly control them.
A joint venture is an entity or a contractual arrangement under which the Group and other parties undertake activities that are subject to joint control whereby the Group has rights to the net assets of the arrangement rather than to the arrangements assets or obligations for its liabilities.
Interests in associates and joint ventures together Equity accounted investments are accounted for under the equity method.
They are initially recognised at cost which includes transaction costs.
Subsequently the Groups share of the profit or loss other comprehensive income and net assets are shown on one line of the relevant primary financial statements until the date on which significant influence or joint control ceases.
Losses of an equity accounted investment in excess of the Groups interest in the entity are not recognised except to the extent that the Group has incurred obligations or made payments on behalf of the investment.
Unrealised profits or losses on transactions between the Group and its equity accounted investments are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest.
Losses are however recognised in full where they represent a reduction in the net realisable value of a current asset or an impairment loss.
Discontinued operations see Note 8 An operation is classified as disc ontinued if it is a component of the Group that i has been disposed of or meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale and ii represents a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations or will be disposed of as part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations.
The results assets and liabilities and cash flows of discontinued operations are presented separately from those of continuing operations.
Discontinued operations comprised the following activities Eaststarch  Morocco On 31 October 2015 the Group completed the realignment of its Eaststarch joint venture leading to the disposal of the majority of the Groups European Bulk Ingredients business.
In a related agreement the Group also agreed to sell its corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco to Archer Daniels Midland Inc.
ADM and completed this disposal on 1 June 2016.
Sugars and European Starch pension settlements The Group announced on 29 September 2015 that the Commercial Court in London had handed down a decision in a case brought by American Sugar Re fining Inc.
ASR in which it made a number of claims in relation to its acquisition of the Groups European Sugars business in 2010.
The European Sugars business formed part of the Groups discontinued Sugars segment and accordingly the costs associated with those claims were recognised within discontinued operations.
During the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group also made a settlement payment of 2 million to transfer all remaining obligations under a legacy pension scheme related to the Groups discontinued European Wheat Starch business which was disposed of in the 2008 financial year.
Foreign currency translation this accounting policy applies to all transactions and net assets in foreign currencies At entity level transactions in foreign currencies are translated into the entitys functional currency at the exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rate ruling at the periodend date.
Currency translation differences arising at entity level are recognised in the income statement.
116 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 117 The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling.
On consolidation the results of foreign operations are translated into pounds sterling at the average rate of exchange for the period and their assets and liabilities are translated into pounds sterling at the exchange rate ruling at the periodend date.
Currency translation differences arising on consolidation are recognised in other comprehensive income and taken to the currency translation reserve.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operation and translated accordingly.
When a foreign operation is sold the gain or loss on disposal recognised in the income statement is determined after taking into account the recycling of cumulative currency translation differences arising on consolidation of the operation subsequent to the adoption of IFRS.
In the cash flow statement the cash flows of foreign operations are translated into pounds sterling at the average exchange rate for the period.
Revenue recognition this accounting policy relates to Notes 5 and 6 a Sales of goods and services Revenue comprises the fair value of consideration receivable in the ordinary course of business net of value added and sales taxes rebates and discounts and after eliminating sales within the Group.
Sales are recognised at the point or points at which the Group has performed its obligations in connection with the contractual terms of the sales agreement primarily at the point of delivering to the customer and in exchange obtains the right to consideration.
Discounts mainly comprise volume driven rebates.
The Group accrues for discounts against agreed customer terms reflecting latest expectations of amounts likely to fall due under the terms of the customer contract subsequently adjusted for actual performance.
Interest income is recognised on a time proportion basis using the effective interest rate method.
Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established.
Exceptional items this accounting policy principally relates to Note 7 Exceptional items comprise items of income and expense including tax items that are material in amount relate to events which are unlikely to recur ar e outside the normal course of business and therefore merit separate disclosure in order to provide a better understanding of the Groups underlying financial performance.
Examples of events that give rise to the disclosure of material items of income and expense as exceptional items include but are not limited to impairment events significant business transformation activities disposals of operations or significant individual assets litigation claims by or against the Group and restructuring of components of the Groups operations.
All material amounts relating to exceptional items in the Groups financial statements are classified on a consistent basis across accounting periods.
Goodwill and other intangible assets see Note 19 a Goodwill Goodwill arising in a business co mbination is recognised as an intangible asset and is allocated to the CGU or group of CGUs that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested for impairment annually.
Goodwill is carried at cost less any recognised impairment losses.
Intangible assets other than goodwill are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and any recognised impairment losses.
An intangible resource acquired in a business combination is recognised as an intangible asset at its fair value at the date of acquisition if it is separable from the acquired business or arises from contractual or legal rights.
Acquired intangible assets for example patents and customer relationships are amortised on a straightline basis over the periods of their expected benefit to the Group which range from three to 15 years.
Other intangible assets mainly comprise certain capitalised costs relating to product development marketing computer software and the global ISIT system.
Costs incurred on the development design and testing of new or improved products are capitalised only when the technical and commercial feasibility of the product has been proven and prior to the product going into full production.
Research and other development expenditures are charged to the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Other intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over the periods of their expected benefit to the Group which are in the range of three to ten years.
Capitalised costs in respect of the core global ISIT system are being amortised over seven years.
Property plant and equipment see Note 20 Land and buildings mainly comprise manufacturing sites and administrative facilities.
Plant and machinery mainly comprise equipment used in the manufacturing and operating process.
Assets under the course of construction comprise property plant and equipment which is in the process of being completed and not ready for use.
Property plant and equipment is stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment.
Historical cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the expenditure will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
All repairs and maintenance expenditures are charged to the income statement during the period in which they are incurred.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 117 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 118 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Other principal accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment continued Depreciation is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost of each asset to its residual value over its useful economic life as follows Freehold land No depreciation Freehold buildings 20 to 50 years Leasehold property Period of the lease Plant and machinery 3 to 28 years Residual values and useful lives are reviewed at each periodend date and adjusted as appropriate with any resulting changes recognised in the income statement prospectively.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the disposal proceeds with the carrying amount and are included in the income statement.
Leased assets see Notes 20 25 29 and 33 Leases of property plant and equipment where the Group assumes substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classified as finance leases.
Assets held under finance leases are capitalised at the lower of the fair value of the leased asset and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
The corresponding lease commitments net of finance charges are included in liabilities.
Leasing payments are analysed between capital and interest components so that the interest element is charged to the income statement over the period of the lease at a constant rate of interest.
Depreciation on assets held under finance leases is charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the shorter of the lease term and its useful life.
All other leases are treated as operating leases.
The total amount payable under the operating lease including lease incentives and guaranteed lease increases is spread over the lease period on a straightline basis.
Where termination or extension options are available to the Group management considers whether it is reasonably certain of exercising these options in determining the lease period.
Inventories
Corn and coproduct inventories held in the US business are measured at net realisable value since they are considered to be agricultural produce after harvest in accordance with IAS 2.3.
Gains and losses are recognised in the income statement.
All other inventories are carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials and where applicable direct labour costs and those overheads that have been incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition and is calc ulated using the first infirst out or weighted average methods appropriate to the materials and production processes involved.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs to completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Provisions are made for any slow moving obsolete or defective inventories.
Financial instruments see Notes 16 17 18 24 25 28 and 29 a Trade receivables Trade receivables are initially recognised at fair value which is generally the same as the invoiced amount and subsequently measured at amortised cost or their recoverable amount.
Trade receivables are predominantly short term and the effects of timevalue of money are not considered material.
Where there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivable the receivable is considered to be impaired.
Significant financial difficulties of the debtor probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default or delinquency in payments are considered to be objective evidence of impairment.
The amount of the impairment and related provision is the difference between the receivables original value and the present value of the estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The impairment is recognised in the income statement immediately and the provision is netted against the value of the receivable.
When a trade receivable is deemed uncollectable it is written off against the related provision.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against operating expenses in the income statement in the period in which they are recovered.
Trade payables are predominantly shortterm and are initially recognised at fair value which is generally the invoice amount.
The effects of timevalue of mone y are not considered material.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand deposits held at call with banks and other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less and for the purposes of the ca sh flow statement only bank overdrafts where the legal right of offset exists.
Equity instruments held by the Group are generally available forsale and are carried at fair value with movements in fair value recognised in other comprehensive income.
The Group does not trade equity instruments and does not manage them on a fair value basis.
Where fair value cannot be reliably measured the assets are carried at cost.
Cumulative fair value gains or losses on an asset are recycled through the income statement when the asset is disposed or impaired.
A significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of a security below its cost is considered as an indicator that the securities are impaired.
Impairments are recognised in the income statement.
Impairment losses recognised in profit or loss for an investment in an availableforsale equity instrument are not reversed through profit or loss.
However if the fair value of an impaired availableforsale debt security subsequently increases and the increase can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised then the impairment is reversed through profit or loss.
118 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 119 e Borrowings Borrowings are initially measured at fair value net of transaction costs incurred which is generally the amount of proceeds received.
Borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method whereby the net proceeds are gradually increased to the amount that will be ultimately settled using a constant rate of interest.
This constant rate of return is used to calculate the amount recognised as interest expense in the income statement.
As explained under Hedge accounting see below the carrying amount of a borrowing may be adjusted where it is a hedged liability in a fair value hedge.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the periodend date.
Dividends on preference shares that are classified as a liability are recognised in the income statement as interest expense.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments to reduce its exposure to commodity price currency exchange rate and interest rate movements.
The Group does not hold or issue derivatives for speculative purposes.
All derivative financial instruments held by the Group are recognised as assets or liabilities measured at their fair values at the periodend date.
As explained under Hedge accounting below unless and to the extent that a derivative is in a designated and effective cash flow or net investment hedging relationship fair value gains and losses on derivatives are recognised in the income statement.
Derivative financial instruments that are not in a designated hedging relationship are classified as held for trading.
Some contracts may include features that are similar to and expose the Group to the same risks as standalone derivatives.
Where such an embedded derivative is not closely related to the host contract and where the host contract itself is not already recognised at fair value the embedded derivative is separated from the host contract and accounted as a standalone derivative.
The hedge accounting principles described below equally apply to embedded derivatives.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount presented in the statement of financial position only where there is a legally enforceable right to offset them and the Group intends to either settle them on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Hedge accounting see Notes 28 and 29 As described in Note 29 the Grou p uses derivatives to mitigate risk.
In many cases the changes in the fair value of the derivatives are recognised before the hedged risk affects the Group income statement.
For example when the Group takes out a forward foreign currency contract to fix the exchange rate on committed or highly probable future sales in a foreign currency changes in the fair value of the forward foreign exchange contract will be recognised in the income statement immediately whereas the future sale will not affect the income statement until it is made.
This creates a mismatch in the timing of recognition for compensating gains and losses.
Hedge accounting seeks to mitigate this mismatch by applying specific accounting rules if strict criteria are met to the items that create the exposure to risk and the items used to manage that risk.
A hedging relationship principally consists of two items the hedged item and the hedging in strument.
The hedged item is the transaction or balance that exposes the Group to a risk that can be identified and the hedging instrument is the transaction or balance that is used to manage the risk.
In the above example the contract to sell goods at a future date in a foreign currency gives rise to foreign currency transaction exposure for the Group.
As exchange rates change the eventual proceeds from the future sale when expressed in the entitys functional currency will also change creating risk.
This is the hedged item.
In this example the foreign currency exchange contract the Group takes out locks in a known functional currency value for its foreign currency cash receipt and therefore eliminates the volatility in cash flows on the sale.
The forward currency exchange contract is the hedging instrument.
For a hedging relationship to qualify for hedge accounting it must be documented at inception together with the Groups risk management objective and strategy for initiating the hedge.
The hedge must both be expected to be highly effective in offsetting the changes in cash flows or fair value attributed to the hedged risk and actually be highly effective in doing so.
This relationship is demonstrated by matching the terms of hedging instruments very closely to the hedged items or where the Group uses more complex arrangements by the use of statistical methods that show the relationship between the hedging pairs.
There are three hedging models that apply to different types of transactions.
Hedging relationships are classified as cash flow hedges where the hedging instrument hedges ex posure to variability in cash flows that are attributable either to a particular risk associated with a recognised asset or liability such as interest payments on variable rate debt a highly probable forecast transaction such as commodity purchases or the foreign currency risk in a firm commitment such as the purchase of an item of equipment.
Where a hedging relationship is classified as a cash flow hedge to the extent that the hedge is effective changes in the fair value of the hedging instrument are recognised in other comprehensive income rather than in the income statement.
When the hedged item affects the income statement the cumulative fair value gain or loss recognised in other comprehensive income is transferred to the income statement.
When a hedged firm commitment results in the recognition of a noncurrent asset the initial carrying amount of the asset is adjusted for the cumulative fair value gain or loss.
If the hedging instrument expires or is sold or if the hedging relationship no longer meets the conditions for hedge accounting the cumulative fair value gain or loss remains in equity until the forecast transaction is recognised in the income statement.
If a hedged forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative fair value gain or loss is immediately transferred to the income statement.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 119 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 120 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Other principal accounting policies continued Hedge accounting continued b Net investment hedges A net investment hedge is the hedge of the currency exposure on the retranslation of the Groups net investment in a foreign operation.
Net investment hedges are accounted for similarly to cash flow hedges.
Changes in the fair value of the hedging instrument are to the extent that the hedge is effective recognised in other comprehensive income.
In the event that the foreign operation is disposed of the cumulative fair value gain or loss recognised in other comprehen sive income is transferred to the income statement where it is included in the gain or loss on disposal of the foreign operation.
Hedging relationships are classified as fair value hedges where the hedging instrument hedges the exposure to changes in the fair value of a recognised asset or liability that is attributable to a particular risk such as the fair value of fixed rate debt.
Where the hedging relationship is classified as a fair value hedge the carrying amount of the hedged asset or liability is adjusted by the change in its fair value attributable to the hedged risk only and the resulting gain or loss is recognised in the income statement where to the extent that the hedge is effective it offsets the fair value gain or loss on the hedging instrument.
Sharebased payments see Note 31 The Company operates sharebased compensation plans under which it grants awards over its ordinary shares to its own employees and to those of its subsidiaries.
All of the awards granted under the existing plans are classified as equitysettled awards.
The Group recognises a compensation expense that is based on the fair value of the awards measured at the grant date using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
Fair value is not subsequently remeasured unless relevant conditions attaching to the award are modified.
Fair value reflects any market performance conditions and all nonvesting conditions.
Adjustments are made to the compensation expense to reflect actual and expected forfeitures due to failure to satisfy serv ice conditions or nonmarket performance conditions.
The resulting compensation expense is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the vesting period and a corresponding credit is recognised in equity.
In the event of the cancellation of an award whether by the Group or a participating employee the compensation expense that would have been recognised over the remainder of the vesting period is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Assets held for sale see Note 8 An asset or group of assets is classified as held for sale if its carrying amount will be principally recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use in the business and the following conditions are met it is available for immediate sale in its present condition management has committed to and has initiated a plan to sell the asset and the sale is expected to complete within 12 months of the balance sheet date and must be highly probable.
Assets that are classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of their carrying amount when they were classified as held for sale and their fair value less costs to sell.
Any impairment loss on a disposal group is allocated first to goodwill and then on a prorata basis to the remaining assets and liabilities other than inventories financial instruments investment property employee benefits and deferred tax assets which continue to be measured in accordance with the relevant Group accounting policies.
Impairment on the initial recognition of held for sale assets and gains or losses on subsequent remeasurement are recognised in the income statement.
Once classified as held for sale property plant and equipment and intangible assets are no long er depreciated or amortised.
Equity accounted investments are no longer equity accounted when classified as held for sale.
Accounting standards issued but not yet adopted The following new standards have been issued and are relevant to the Group but were not effective for the financial year beginning 1 April 2016 and ha ve not been adopted early a IFRS 15  Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective for the year ending 31 March 2019 The Group has undertaken a review of its commercial arrangements across all significant revenue streams and geographies including assessing the timing of revenue recognition as well as focusing on the accounting for principal and agency relationships consignment stocks and discounts provided.
As a result of the review the Group has concluded that the adoption of IFRS 15 is not expected to have a material impact on reported revenue or revenue growth rates and will continue to review its contracts and transactions with customers to ensure compliance with IFRS 15 on adoption.
The Group has undertaken a review of the key areas of IFRS 9 focused principally on classification and measurement of financial assets and liabilities impairment of financial assets and hedge accounting.
The Group has concluded that the adoption of IFRS 9 will not ha ve a material impact on its consolidated results or financial position and will continue to review its activities in these areas to ensure compliance with IFRS 9 upon adoption.
The standard eliminates the classification of leases as either operating or finance leases and introduces a single accounting model and will require the Group to recognise substantially all of its current operating lease commitments on the statement of financial position.
The financial impact of this together with any other implications of the standard will be assessed during the 2018 financial year.
There are no other new standards new interpretations or amendments to standards or interpretations that have been published that are expected to have a significant impact on the Groups financial statements.
120 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 121 Reconciliation of alternative performance measures For the reasons set out in Note 1 the Group presents alternat ive performance measures including adjusted operating profit adjusted profit before tax and adjusted earnings per share.
For the years presented these alternative performance measures exclude where relevant exceptional items the amortisation of acquired intangible assets net retirement benefit interest tax on the above items and tax items that themselves meet these definitions.
The following table shows the reconciliation of the key altern ative performance measures to the most directly comparable measures reported in accordance with IFRS Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 m unless otherwise stated
Adjusting items
FRS reported
Adjusted reported Continuing operations
Operating profit Net finance expense Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates Profit before tax Income tax creditexpense Noncontrolling interests Profit attributable to owners of the Company 255 33 Basic earnings per share pence Diluted earnings per share pence Effective tax rate 9.6% 18.2% 4.0% 16.5% The following table shows the reconciliation of the adjusting items in the current and comparative year Year ended 31 March
Continuing operations Exceptional items in operating profit Amortisation of acquired intangible assets Total excluded from adjusted operating profit Net retirement benefit interest Total excluded from adjusted profit before tax Tax on adjusting items 12 Exceptional deferred tax credits 7 12 Total excluded from adjusted profit attributable to owners of the Company STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 121 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 122 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Reconciliation of alternative performance measures continued The Group also presents two alternative cash flow measures which are defined as follows a Adjusted free cash flow represents cash generated from continuing operations excluding the impact of exceptional items less net interest paid less income tax paid less capital expenditure. within working capital.
The following table shows the reconciliation of these alternative cash flow performance measures Year ended 31 March Adjusted operating profit from continuing operations 264 Adjusted for Depreciation and adjusted amortisation 137 Sharebased payments charge 21 Changes in working capital and other noncash movements 4 Net retirement benefit obligations 36 Capital expenditure 153 Net interest and tax paid 63 Adjusted free cash flow 174 Add back net interest and tax paid 63 Add back net retirement cash contributions 42 Less derivatives and margin call movements within changes in working capital 6 Adjusted operating cash flow 273 Restated to reflect exclusion of operating postretirement benefit costs.
The Group presents certain financial measures as defined in its ex ternal financial covenants as well as return on capital emplo yed ROCE metrics as Key Performance Indicato rs.
Net debt to EBITDA and interest cove r are defined under the Groups financial covenants and reported on a proportionate consolidation basis.
Fo r financial covenant purposes these ratios are calculated base d on the accounting standards that applied for the 2014 financia l year with new accounting standards adopted by the Group subsequent to 1 April 2014 disregarded.
Net debt is calculated using average currency exchange rates.
Average invested operatin g capital represents the average at the beginning and end of the period of shareholders equity excluding net debt net tax assetsliabilities investment in joint ventures and associates and net retirement benefit obligations.
All ratios are calculat ed based on unrounded figures in  million.
The following tables present the calculation of these alternative measures 31 March
Calculation of net debt to EBITDA ratio  on a financial covenant basis Net debt Further adjustments set out in financial covenants to reflect use of average exchange rates in translating net debt 13 Net debt  on a financial covenant basis 439 Adjusted operating profit 264 Further adjustments set out in financial covenants to reflect proportionate consolidation 48 to exclude charges for sharebased payments 21 to add back depreciation and adjusted amortisation 137 Preexceptional EBITDA 470 Net debt to EBITDA ratio times 0.9 122 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 123 Reconciliation of alternative performance measures continued 31 March Calculation of interest cover ratio  on a financial covenant basis Adjusted operating profit 264 Further adjustments set out in financial covenants to reflect proportionate consolidation 43 to exclude charges for sharebased payments 21 Operating profit before exceptional items and amortisation of intangible assets on a financial covenant basis 328 Adjusted net finance expense 25 Further adjustments set out in financial covenants to reflect proportionate consolidation other 1 Net finance expense  on a financial covenant basis 24 Interest cover ratio times 13.9 31 March Calculation of return on capital employed Adjusted operating profit 264 188 Add back amortisation on acquired intangible assets 12 11 Profit before interest tax and exceptional items from continuing operations for ROCE 252 177 Goodwill and other intangible assets 401 390 Property plant and equipment telWorking capital provisions and nondebt derivatives 394 323 Other  29 Invested operating capital of continuing operations Average invested operating capital Return on capital employed ROCE % STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 123 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 124 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Segment information Segment information is presented on a consistent basis with the information presented to the Board the designated Chief Operat ing Decision Maker for the purposes of allocating resources within the Group and assessing the performance of the Groups businesses.
Continuing operations comprise two operating segments Speciality Food Ingredients and Bulk Ingredients.
Central which comprises central costs including head office treasury and reinsurance activities does not meet the definition of an operating segment under IFRS 8 Operating Segments but no subtotal is shown for the Groups two operating segments in the tables below so as to be consistent with the presentation of segment information presented to the Board.
Both segments are serv ed by a single manufacturing network and receive services from a number of global support functions.
The segmental allocation of costs is performed using standard product costs to allocate all direct costs including plantbased depreciation and allocatio n keys for all indirect costs including sharebased payments and amorti sation which reflect the value of service provided to each operating unit consistently applied over time.
The Board uses adjusted operating profit as the measure of the profitability of the Groups businesses.
Adjusted operating prof it is therefore the measure of segment profit presented in the Groups segment disclosures.
Adjusted operating profit represents operating profit before specific items that are considered to hinder comparison of the trad ing performance of the Groups businesses yearonyear.
During the years presented the items excluded from operating profit in arriving at adjusted operating profit were the amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional items.
The segmental classification of exceptional i tems is detailed in Note 7.
An analysis of total assets and total liabilities by operating segment is not presented to the Board but it does receive segmen tal analysis of net working capital inventories trade and other receivables less trade and other payables.
Accordingly the amo unts presented for segment assets and segment liabilities in the tabl es below represent those assets and liabilities that comprise elements of net working capital.
The segmental split of working capital allocates raw material and coproduct inventories and associated payables based on the segmental split of primary capacity.
Other payables work in progress and finished goods inventories and receivables are allocated based on the products to which they relate.
The segment results were as follows a Segment sales Year ended 31 March
Speciality Food Ingredients 996 Bulk Ingredients Sales  continuing operations Sales  discontinued operations 8 3 Sales  total operations b Segment results Adjusted operating profit as defined in Notes 1 and 4 is the measure of profitability of the Groups businesses used by the B oard as it is considered to be the best measure to compare the results over time.
Year ended 31 March
Speciality Food Ingredients Bulk Ingredients
Adjusted operating profit  continuing operations 264 Adjusting items exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangible assets Operating profit  continuing operations Finance income 11 Finance expense 11 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 21 Profit before tax  continuing operations 233 Profit before tax  discontinued operations 8 1 Profit before tax  total operations 234 124 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 125 Segment information continued Year ended 31 March % % Adjusted operating margin Speciality Food Ingredients 18.2% 16.7% Bulk Ingredients 7.3% 5.8% Central na na Total  continuing operations 9.6% 8.0% c Segment assetsliabilities Segment assets and segment liabilities include net working capital inventories trade and other receivables less trade and ot her payables.
An analysis of total assets and total liabilities by operating segment is not presented to the Board.
At 31 March 2017
Liabilities
Net
Net working capital Speciality Food Ingredients 371 129 Bulk Ingredients 349 146 Central 13 50 Group working capital  continuing and total operations 733 325 Other assetsliabilities Group assetsliabilities 2 771 1 439 At 31 March 2016
Liabilities
Net
Net working capital Speciality Food Ingredients 339 150 Bulk Ingredients 341 146 Central 11 54 Group working capital  continuing operations 691 350 Group working capital  discontinued operations 5 2 Group working capital  total operations 696 352 Other assetsliabilities Group assetsliabilities 2 554 1 525 d Other information  depreciation Year ended 31 March Speciality Food Ingredients Bulk Ingredients 63 Central 1 Depreciation  continuing operations 109 Depreciation  discontinued operations Depreciation  total operations 109 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 125 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 126 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Segment information continued e Other information  amortisation Year ended 31 March Speciality Food Ingredients Bulk Ingredients 9 Central 1 Amortisation  continuing operations 40 Amortisation  discontinued operations Amortisation  total operations 40 f Other information  sharebased payments Year ended 31 March Speciality Food Ingredients 7 Bulk Ingredients 6 Central 8 Sharebased payments  continuing operations 21 Sharebased payments  discontinued operations Sharebased payments  total operations g Other information  capital investment Capital investment comprises the cost of acquisition of business es and capital expenditure on property plant and equipment intangible assets including amounts accrued and investments.
Ca pital investment is allocated based on the products to which the investment relates.
Where capital expenditure relates to plant sustaining or cost reduction projects the cost is allocated bas ed on the segmental split of the product mix by plant.
Year ended 31 March Speciality Food Ingredients 66 Bulk Ingredients 73 Central 19 Capital investment  continuing operations 158 Capital investment  discontinued operations Capital investment  total operations h Geographical information  sales by destination Year ended 31 March
United Kingdom 34 United States Other European countries 306 Rest of the world 356 Sales  continuing operations Sales  discontinued operations 8 3 Sales  total operations Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 127 Segment information continued i Geographical information  sales by origin Year ended 31 March
United Kingdom 37 United States Other European countries 335 Rest of the world 208 Sales  continuing operations Sales  discontinued operations 8 3 Sales  total operations j Concentration of revenue During the year ended 31 March 2017 no customer contributed more than 10% of the Groups external sales from continuing operations 2016  no customer contributed more than 10%.
The parent company is based in the United Kingdom.
The location of noncurrent assets other than financial instruments deferr ed tax assets and retirement benefits are as follows At 31 March United Kingdom 20 United States 1 088 Other European countries 343 Rest of the world 108 Noncurrent assets STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 127 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 128 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Operating profit Analysis of operating expenses by nature Year ended 31 March Continuing operations Notes External sales Operating expenses Cost of inventories included in cost of sales Staff costs of which 153 million 2016  131 million was included in cost of sales 10 328 Depreciation of property plant and equipment owned assets of which 99 million 2016  71 million was included in cost of sales 20 106 leased assets included in cost of sales 20 3 Exceptional items 7 19 Amortisation of intangible assets acquired intangible assets 19 12 other intangible assets 19 28 Operating lease rentals plant and machinery 32 Research and development expenditure 37 Impairment of trade receivables 17 5 Impairment of intangible assets nonexceptional items 5 Other operating expenses 496 Total operating expenses Operating profit 233 Included within discontinued operations are operating expenses totalling 3 million 2016  14 million partially offset by a net exceptional gain of 1 million 2016  more than offset by 46 million net exceptional gain.
128 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 129 Exceptional items Exceptional items recognised in arriving at operating profit were as follows Year ended 31 March
Continuing operations Business realignment  impairment restructuring and other net costs a 5 Asset impairmentsreversals and related costs b 26 US retirement benefit obligation settlement gain c 9 Tate and Lyle Ventures disposals d 3
Sucralose  revised table top commercial agreement e US litigation f Slovakia remeasurement gain g Exceptional items  continuing operations 19 Discontinued operations Business realignment  Eaststarch and Morocco disposals h 1 ASR litigation settlement i Exceptional items  discontinued operations 1 Exceptional items  total operations 18 There was net tax on exceptional items within continuing operations of nil 2016  21 million credit.
In addition the following exceptional deferred tax item s were recognised in the current and comparative year Year ended 31 March
Continuing operations Recognition of UK tax losses j 34 Sucralose IP transfer k 31 Exceptional deferred tax credit  continuing operations 65 Discontinued operations Moroccan tax matters l Exceptional tax charge  discontinued operations Exceptional tax creditcharge  total operations 65 Continuing operations  within operating profit a In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group recognised a further net 5 million charge 6 million of additional cash costs offset by a 1 million noncash credit in respect of the business realignment of SPLENDA Sucralose and its European operations.
Cash payments in respect of this realignment were 21 million.
The net 5 million charge was recognised within the Speciality Food Ingredients segment.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised exceptional costs relating to business realignment totalling 48 million.
Of this charge 43 million was recognised within the Speciality Food Ingredients segment and 5 million was classified within Central costs.
Of the total charge 29 million was paid in cash in 2016.
The final total of business realignment costs relating to th e Groups restructuring programme announced in April 2015 was 171 million with 61 million being cash costs and 110 million being noncash costs.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 129 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 130 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Exceptional items continued Continuing operations  within operating profit continued b In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group recognised a net 13 million noncash exceptional charge in respect of its Brazilian food systems business Tate and Lyle Gemacom Tech Indstria E Comrcio S.
The charge comprised a partial impairment of goodwill totalling 16 million reflecting lower growth expectations against the backdrop of a weaker macroeconomic outlook in Brazil and a credit of 3 million arising from lower contingent consideration now expected to fall due in 2019 under the terms of the December 2014 acquisition agreement.
The net charge was recognised within the Speciality Food Ingredients segment.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group recognised a 7 million charge in respect of its equity interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd. its Food Systems subsidiary in China which the Group sold on 23 December 2016.
The charge comprised a 3 million cost reflecting the impact of impairing and deconsolidating the Groups investment itself a cash generating unit before disposal together with a 4 million charge for associated costs.
Accordingly the Group has derecognised the 3 million financial liability previously recorded in equity for the written put option over the minority shareholders equity interest.
Cash payments for costs totalled 3 million to date.
This charge was recognised within the Speciality Food Ingredients segment.
Also recognised in the year ended 31 March 2017 was a noncash charge of 6 million in respect of the impairment of certain redundant assets at our Decatur facility in the US that are no longer in use in the business.
The charge was recognised within the Bulk Ingredients segment.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised a noncash exceptional credit of 3 million in respect of the recognition of a partial reversal of an impairment of plant and equipmen t assets which were previously im paired through an exceptional charge.
The exceptional credit was classified within the Bulk Ingredients segment. elements of its US retirement benefit plan obligations.
Under the settlement some deferred members of the plans elected to receive a lump sum during the year ended 31 March 2017 in exchange for surrendering their rights to future payments under the scheme.
The exceptional gain was recognised within the Bulk Ingredients segment 6 million and the Speciality Food Ingredients segment 3 million. availableforsale financial asset.
This profit was classified within central costs.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised a net 7 mi llion gain 9 million gain partially offset by 2 million los s primarily from disposals in its venture fund portfolio.
Sucralose and the renegotiation of our commercial agreements for the SPLENDA Sucralose brand table top business.
The Group also wrote off a marketingrelated intangible asset loss of 9 million and wrote back an associated payable gain of 2 million.
These amounts were all classified within the Speciality Food Ingredients segment.
River litigation 6 million.
See Note 32 for further details. investment in Slovakia.
This gain was classified within the Speciality Food Ingredients segment.
Net tax on exceptional items within continuing operations was n il 2016  21 million credit.
Tax creditscharges on exceptio nal items are only recognised to the extent that gainslosses incurr ed are expected to result in tax recoverablepayable in the fut ure.
Discontinued operations  within operating profit h On 1 June 2016 the Group completed the sale of its corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco to Archer Daniels Midland Inc.
ADM receiving gross cash proceeds of 4 million.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 following completion of this disposal the Group recognised a 1 million exceptional gain resulting from the recycling of cumulative foreign exchange translation gains from reserves to the income statement.
This noncash gain was recognised within the Bulk Ingredients segment.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised a net exce ptional gain of 64 million in relation to the exit from a substantial part of its European Bulk Ingredients business.
The Group recognised an exceptional profit on disposal of 68 million in respect of the disposal of its share in the Ea ststarch joint venture see Note 34.
The Group also recognised a 4 million noncash impairment charge in respect of its Bulk Ingredients facility in Morocco with an agreement reached with ADM to purchase this facility.
The impairment represented the excess of book carrying value over the expected proceeds.
130 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 131 Exceptional items continued Discontinued operations  within operating profit continued i In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised an 18 million exceptional charge within discontinued operations for settlement made with American Sugar Refining Inc.
ASR in respect of claims made in relation to its acquisition of the Groups EU Sugars business in September 2010.
There was no tax on discontinued exceptional item s in either the current or comparative year.
Continuing operations  exceptional deferred tax items j In the year ended 31 March 2017 following changes in UK tax legislation and changes to the internal financing arrangements we use to fund our international businesses the Group recognised an exceptional deferred tax credit of 34 million reflecting previously unrecognised tax losses in the UK which based on enacted legislation are now expected to be utilised against future UK taxable profits. consolidate all sucralose production into our US facility in the 2016 financial year.
This transaction led to the recognition of an exceptional deferred tax credit of 31 million reflecting the anticipated future tax benefits.
Discontinued operations  exceptional tax items l During the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised an exceptional tax charge of 5 million in discontinued operations in respect of historical tax matters relating to the Moroccan facility which the Group has now sold to ADM.
Exceptional cash flows Net cash outflow on exceptional items were as follows Year ended 31 March Continuing operations
Business realignment  impairment restructuring and other net costs a 21 Asset impairmentreversals and related costs b 3
Sucralose  revised table top commercial agreement e US litigation f Net cash outflow  exceptional items 24 Income statement charge  included in profit before tax 19 Adjustment for exceptional items  per cash flow statement 5 In addition in the year ended 31 March 2017 there were exceptional cash flows relating to the sale of assets from the Groups venture fund portfolio totalling 2 million 2016  18 mill ion recognised within cash from investing activities.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 131 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 132 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Discontinued operations and assets classified as held for sale The discontinued operations of the Group are disclosed and discussed further in Note 3.
The results of the discontinued operations which have been incl uded in the consolidated income statement were as follows Year ended 31 March 2017
Discontinued operations
Sales 5 Operating profit including exceptional items Profit for the year  discontinued operations Basic and diluted earnings per share p ence  discontinued operations 13 On 1 June 2016 the Group completed the sale of its corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco to ADM receiving gross cash proceeds of 4 million and recognising a 1 million exceptional gain in the year ended 31 March 2017 see Note 7.
Year ended 31 March 2016 Discontinued operations
Eaststarch
Morocco
Sugars
EU Starch
Sales 13 Operating profitloss including exceptional items 65 20 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 21 2 Profitloss before tax Income tax charge exceptional item 7 12 5 Profitloss for the year  discontinued operations 62 20 Basic earnings per share pence  discontinued operations 13 Diluted earnings per share pence  discontinued operations 13 In the year ended 31 March 2016 sales of 13 million were recogn ised by the Groups corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco.
The
Group realised an exceptional profit on disposal of 68 million in respect of the disposal of the Hungarian Bulgarian and Turk ish Eaststarch plants.
This exceptional profit was partially offset by a 3 million operating loss in relation to the Groups corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco which included an except ional impairment charge of 4 million see Note 7.
The 20 million loss relating t o Sugars and EU Starch comprised the 18 million ASR charge described in Note 7 and 2 million Amylum UK Pension Scheme payment see Note 30.
The results of the discontinued operations which have been includ ed in the consolidated statement of cash flows were as follows Year ended 31 March 2017
Discontinued operations Profit before tax from discontinued operations Adjustment for Exceptional items and changes in working capital Cash used in discontinued operations Year ended 31 March 2016 Discontinued operations
Morocco
Sugars
EU Starch
Profitloss before tax from discontinued operations 67 20 Adjustments for Exceptional items and changes in working capital 69 5 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 2 Cash used in discontinued operations 4 25 132 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 133 Discontinued operations and assets classified as held for sale continued Assets held for sale There were no assets or liabilities classified as held for sale at 31 March 2017.
The assets and liabilities of Tate and Lyle Morocco SA were classified as held for sale at 31 March 2016 based on the agreement to sell to ADM which completed on 1 June 2016.
The carrying amounts of assets and liabilities totalled 5 million consisting of assets totalling 7 million and liabilities totalling 2 million after recognition of a 4 million impairment charge see Note 7.
Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys external auditors Pricewat erhouseCoopers LLP and its associates were as follows Year ended 31 March Fees payable for the audit of the Company and consolidated financial statements 0.7 Fees payable for other services the audit of the Companys subsidiaries 1.7 auditrelated services 0.1 other nonaudit services 0.1 Fees in respect of the audit of the Groups pension schemes 0.1 Total 2.7 The audit and nonaudit fees related to joint ventures payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and its associates excluded from the table above were nil 2016  nil and nil 2016  nil respectively.
Staff costs Staff costs were as follows Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016
Discontinued operations
Discontinued operations Wages and salaries 275  233 Social security costs 22  17 Other pension costs defined benefit pension schemes 2  2 defined contribution pension schemes 7  4 Retirement medical benefits 1  3 Sharebased payments 21  9 Total 328  262 The average number of people employed by the Company and its subsidiaries including parttime employees is set out below Year ended 31 March By operating segment Continuing operations Speciality Food Ingredients Bulk Ingredients Central 489 Total In addition the average number of people employed relating to discontinued operations was 15 2016  93.
At 31 March 2017 the Group employed 4146 2016  4326 people within continuing operations.
The number of people employed by the Group relating to discontinued operations at 31 March 2017 was nil 2016  91.
The Groups two operating segments are supported by Global Operations which is responsible for running the Groups manufacturing facilities.
The Group allocates the headcount of the Global Operations team to segments based on th e split of primary capacity at each location.
Central includes sharedservice employees who perform activities for the whole Group including the Speciality Food Ingredients and Bulk Ingredients segments.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 133 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 134 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Staff costs continued Key management compensation Year ended 31 March Salaries and shortterm employee benefits 11 Retirement benefits 1 Sharebased payments 9 Total 21 Key management is represented by the Executive Committee and th e Companys Directors.
Remuneration details of the Companys Directors are given in the Directors Rem uneration Report on pages 74 to 97.
Members of the Executive Committee are identified on pages 20 and 21.
The aggregate gains made by the Directors on th e exercise of share options were 4 million 2016  9 million .
Finance income and expense Year ended 31 March Continuing operations
Net finance expense Interest payable on bank and other borrowings 25 Fair value hedges fair value loss on interest rate derivatives 4 fair value adjustment of hedged borrowings 4 Finance lease interest 1 Net retirement benefit interest 30 7 Unwinding of discount on liabilities 1 Finance expense 34 Finance income 2 Net finance expense 32 Reconciliation to adjusted net finance expense
Net finance expense 32 Net retirement benefit interest 30 7 Adjusted net finance expense  continuing operations 4 25 Finance expense is shown net of borrowing costs capitalised within property plant and equipment of 2 million 2016  2 milli on at a capitalisation rate of 3.8% 2016  3.3%.
Interest payable on other borrowings includes 0.2 million 2016  0.2 million of dividends in respect of the Groups 6.5% cumulative preference shares.
Finance income and fina nce expense relate wholly to continuing operations.
134 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 135 Income taxes Analysis of charge for the y ear  continuing operations Year ended 31 March Continuing operations Current tax United Kingdom UK Overseas 23 Adjustments in respect of previous years Deferred tax Credit for the year 45 Adjustments in respect of previous years Income tax creditexpense  continuing operations 22 Reconciliation to adjusted income tax expense
Income tax creditexpense 22 Taxation on exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and net retirement benefit interest 6 Exceptional deferred tax credits 7 65 Adjusted income tax expense  continuing operations 4 49 The Groups adjusted effective tax rate on continuing operations calculated on the basis of the adjusted income tax expense of 49 million 2016  32 million as a proportion of adjusted profit before tax of 271 million 2016  193 million was 18.2% 2016  16.5%.
The Groups reported tax rate on continuing operations calculated on the basis of the reported income tax credit of 22 millio n 2016  charge of 5 million as a proportion of profit before tax of 233 million 2016  126 million was a credit of 9.6% 2016  charge of 4.0%.
The Groups income tax credit for the year ended 31 March 2017 of 22 million 2016  charge of 5 million is stated after recognition of a net deferred tax credit of 45 million 2016  25 million.
The deferred tax credit comprises exceptional def erred tax credits of 65 million 2016  nil partially offset by underlying net deferred tax charges of 20 million 2016  25 million net credit.
Exceptional deferred tax credits recognised in the year of 65 million comprised two items.
Firstly changes to UK tax legislat ion and the Groups internal financing structure which led to the recognition of an exceptional deferred tax credit of 34 million aris ing from previously unrecognised tax losses in the UK which based on enacted legislation are now expected to be utilised against futu re UK taxable profits.
Secondly the Group also transferred at fair value its sucralose intellectual property assets from the UK to the US.
This transfer led to the recognition of an exceptional deferred tax credit of 31 million.
Further details can be found in Note 7.
The Groups adjusted income tax charge of 49 million 2016  32 million is stated before the exceptional deferred tax credit s above and the tax impact of the adjustments made between reported and adjusted profit before tax being adjustments for amortisation of acquired intangibles exceptional items in operating profit and net retirement benefit interest items.
The standard rate of corporation tax in the UK reduced from 20% to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and is expected to reduce from 19% to 17% with effect from 1 April 2020.
The Group recognised no tax charge in the UK in the year 2016  nil as costs together with brought forward losses exceede d current year taxable income.
The remaining UK losses have been tr eated as partially recoverable in future periods as reflected in the deferred tax asset booked for the year see page 137.
At 31 March 2017 the carrying value of current tax assets tota lled 1 million 2016  3 million and the carrying value of th e current tax liabilities totalled 57 million 2016  66 million.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 135 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 136 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Income taxes continued An analysis of tax chargedcredited on adjusting items and exceptional tax items within continuing operations is set out belo w Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016
Pretax
Tax charge credit
Tax charge credit Exceptional items Business realignment  impairment restructuring and other net costs Asset impairmentsreversals and related costs US retirement benefit obligation settlement gain Tate and Lyle Ventures disposals
Sucralose agreement US litigation Slovakia remeasurement gain Exceptional items Amortisation of acquired intangibles Net retirement benefit interest Adjusting items Exceptional deferred tax items Recognition of UK tax losses Sucralose IP transfer Exceptional deferred tax items Total  continuing operations 136 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 137 Income taxes continued Reconciliation of the effective tax rate As the Groups head office and parent company are domiciled in the UK the Group uses the UK corporation tax rate to reference its effective tax rate notwithstanding that only a small proportion of the Groups business is in the UK.
The tax on the Groups p rofit before tax differs from the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK as follows Year ended 31 March Profit before tax 233 Less share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 32 Parent Company and subsidiaries profit before tax 201 Corporation tax charge thereon at 20% 2016  20% 40 Adjusted for the effects of nondeductible expenses and other permanent items impairment of assets not deductible 5 benefits from internal financing arrangements sale of investments not taxable 1 manufacturing credits losses not currently treated as being recoverable in future periods losses previously considered irrecoverable now expected to be recoverable 3 exceptional deferred tax credits adjustments to tax in respect of prior years tax rates above the UK rate applied on overseas earnings Total tax creditcharge  continuing operations 22 1 The Groups tax rate is favourably affected by its internal financing arrangements which involve borrowing by its US operations from the UK the interest on which has the effect of reducing the amount of tax payable.
2 The Group benefits from certain tax incentives available to manufacturing companies.
3 The Group incurs expenses in jurisdictions where it does not currently expect to be able to recover these amounts against futur e taxable profits.
This has the effect of increasing the Groups overall effective tax rate.
4 The Group undertook certain intragroup transactions in the 2017 financial year which resulted in the recognition of deferred ta x assets in respect of UK losses now expected to be utilised.
This amount comprised the exceptional credit of 34 million relating to the Gr oups internal financing transaction and an exceptional credit of 31 million relating to the sale of Sucralose IP.
5 The Group benefited from the favourable settlement of certain prior year ta x matters in the previous year.
6 The Group is subject to tax rates in the jurisdictions in which it operates which are above the UK corporation tax rate the Gr oups reference rate leading to an increase in total tax charge.
Key factors impacting the sustainability of the effective tax rate are as follows Our ability to continue to operate an efficient internal financing arrangement One of our internal financing arrangements involves borrowing by our US operations from the UK the interest on which has the effect of reducing the amount of tax payable.
This delivered a benefit of 21 million in the 2017 financial year 2016  25 mi llion.
As a result of recent changes in UK legislation arising from th e OECDs Base Erosion and Profit Shifting BEPS project and cha nges to the internal financing arrangements we use to fund our inte rnational businesses we have recognised a deferred tax asset of 34 million arising from previously unrecognised tax losses in th e UK which are now expected to be utilised against future UK taxable profits.
In the current period the recognition of this deferred tax asset lowers the reported effective tax rate on s tatutory earnings.
If our ability to operate this revised arrangement was constrained in the future due to legislative change or other factors our tax rate could increase materially.
The timing of recognising tax benefits from brought forward losses in the UK The Group expects to recognise taxable profits in the UK in futu re periods and as such has recognised historical losses in th e form of deferred tax assets expected to be utilised to offset these profits.
However legislative changes in the UK have been announ ced which will restrict the utilisation of these brought forward losses by 50%.
Upon substantive enactment of these changes the Gr oup will be required to adjust the deferred tax asset recognised in respect of historical losses which is expected to lead to a si gnificant taxation charge in the Groups income statement.
To the extent that UK taxable profits exceed current year losses in any subseq uent year the Groups ability to relieve these profits against prior year losses will be limited resulting in a UK tax charge.
Material changes in the geographic mix of profits The Groups effective tax rate is sensitive to the geographic mix of profits and reflects a combination of higher rates in certain jurisdictions such as the US nil effective rates in the UK due to the availability of losses and rates that lie somewhere in b etween.
If the geographic mix of profits were to change materially through changes in the composition of the Groups business or chang es in performance our tax rate could change materially.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 137 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 138 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Income taxes continued Key factors impacting the sustainability of the effective tax rate are as follows continued Changes in tax rates Changes in tax rates in the jurisdictions in which the Group oper ates could have a material effect on the Groups effective tax rate.
An increase in geopolitical uncertainties in the US following the election of President Trump and elsewhere increases the likelihood of material tax reform.
The precise nature of any such reform and its impact on the Group remains uncertain.
Resolution of tax judgements arising from current or future tax issues At any one time the Group can be subject to a number of challeng es by tax authorities in the ju risdictions in which it operates.
The outcome of these challenges is inherently uncertain pote ntially resulting in a different tax charge from the amounts initially provided.
At 31 March 2017 the Group carried a central provision in resp ect of uncertain tax positions totalling 34 million 2016  31 million within current tax payables.
Based on all substantively enacted le gislation the Group believes that no reasonably possible cha nge in assumptions would lead to a material change in this number.
Exceptional deferred tax credits In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group recognised exceptiona l deferred tax credits totalling 65 million in respect of rece nt changes to UK tax legislation and the Groups internal financing structure and a transfer of intellectual property assets rela ted to
Sucralose to align ownership with the underlying US manuf acturing base.
Further details can be found in Note 7.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is calculated on differences between the accounting value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax value s.
The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year were as follows
Retirement benefit obligations
Tax losses
Total
At 1 April 2015 Creditedcharged to the income statement underlying Credited to the income statement exceptional Credited to other comprehensive income Charged directly to equity
Currency translation differences At 31 March 2016 Chargedcredited to the income statement underlying Credited to the income statement exceptional Charged to other comprehensive income Credited directly to equity Currency translation differences At 31 March 2017 1 During the year the Group rationalised ownership of its Sucralose IP to align it with the underlying US manufacturing base.
This resulted in the recognition of a deferred tax asset of 31 million.
Other deferred tax items include temporary differences arising from accounting provisions where the timi ng of the tax deduction is different from the timing of accounting recognition and business combinations.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where there is a le gally enforceable right of offset and there is an intention t o settle the balances net.
After taking these offsets into account the net position of 3 million liability 2016  18 million liability is presented as a 22 million deferred tax asset 2016  3 million asset and a 25 million deferred tax liability 2016  21 million liabili ty in the Groups statement of financial position.
138 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 139 Income taxes continued Deferred tax continued Changes in enacted tax rates had no effect on the amount of deferred tax charged to the income statement and other comprehensive income or equity.
There was no impact from the imposition of new taxes.
No deferred tax assets have been recognised in respect of tax losses of 508 million 2016  753 million as there is uncertainty as to whether taxable profits against which these assets may be recovered will be available.
No unrelieved tax losses expi red under current tax legislation in the y ear ended 31 March 2017.
The total deferred tax on unremitted earnings is 3 million 2016  4 million of which 2 million 2016  nil has been reco gnised.
The Group has not recognised the full amount as it is able to control the timing of the reversal of certain of these temporary differences and it is not probable that they will reverse in the foreseeable future.
Discontinued operations The income tax charge in respect of discontinued operations Note 8 in the year ended 31 March 2017 was nil 2016  5 millio n.
The prior year charge reflected an exceptional cost in respect of historical tax matters at the Moroccan facility which the Gr oup sold to ADM during the 2017 financial year.
Tax on other comprehensive income The following table sets out the tax arising on components of other comprehensive income Year ended 31 March Retirement benefit obligations Deferred tax creditcharge relating to co mponents of other comprehensive income 30 Tax on items recognised directly in equity A deferred tax credit of 3 million in relation to sharebased payments was recognised directly in equity 2016  3 million charge.
Earnings per share Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit at tributable to owners of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year excluding an averag e of 4 million shares 2016  4 million shares held by the Com pany or the Employee Benefit Trust to satisfy awards made under the Groups sharebased incentive plans.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated by adjusting the weig hted average number of ordinary shares in issue to assume conversion of potentially dilutive ordinary shares reflecting vesting assumptions on employee share plans as well as the prof it attributable to owners of the Company for any proceeds on such conversions.
Potentially dilutive ordinary shares arise from awa rds made under the Groups sharebased incentive plans.
Where the vesting of these awards is contingent on satisfying a service or performance condition the number of potentially dilutive ordinary shares is calculated based on the status of the condition at the end of the period.
Potentially dilutive ordi nary shares are dilutive only when the average market price of the Companys ordina ry shares during the period exceeds their exercise price options or issue price other awards.
Otherwise the effect of exercis ing such options or awards would be to increase the earnings per share rather than to dilute.
The greater any such excess the greater the dilutive effect.
The average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year was 695p 2016  574p.
The dilutive effect of sharebased incentives was 7.1 million shares 2016  3.4 million shares.
Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total operations Profit attributable to owners of the Company  million Weighted average number of ordinary shares million  basic 464.1 464.1 464.1 464.3 Basic earnings per share pence 55.0p 0.2p 55.2p 26.1p Weighted average number of ordinary shares million  diluted 471.2 471.2 471.2 467.7 Diluted earnings per share pence 54.2p 0.2p 54.4p 25.9p STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 139 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 140 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Earnings per share continued Adjusted earnings per share A reconciliation between profit attributable to owners of the Company from continuing operations and the equivalent adjusted metric together with the resulting adjusted earnings per share metrics can be found below Year ended 31 March Continuing operations
Profit attributable to owners of the Company Adjusting items exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangible assets net retirement benefit interest tax effect of the above adjustments 12 6 exceptional deferred tax credits 7 12 65 Adjusted profit attributable to owners of the Company Adjusted basic earnings per share pence  continuing operations 47.8p Adjusted diluted earnings per share pence  continuing operations 47.1p Dividends on ordinary shares Dividends on ordinary shares in respect of the financial year Year ended 31 March
Pence
Per ordinary share interim dividend paid 8.2 final dividend proposed 19.8 Total dividend 28.0 The Directors propose a final dividend for the financial year of 19.8p per ordinary share that subject to approval by sharehol ders will be paid on 1 August 2017 to shareholders who are on the Register of Members on 30 June 2017.
Dividends on ordinary shares paid in the financial year Year ended 31 March Final dividend paid relating to the prior financial year Interim dividend paid relating to the financial year 38 Total dividend paid 130 Based on the number of ordinary shares outstanding at 31 March 2017 and the proposed amount the final dividend for the financi al year is expected to amount to 92 million.
Inventories
At 31 March Raw materials and consumables 206 Work in progress 19 Finished goods 216 Total 441 Finished goods inventories of 4 million 2016  7 million are carried at net realisable value this being lower than cost.
A gricultural produce after harvest of 103 million 2016  101 million is ca rried at net realisable value.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group recognised a writedown of inventories totalling 6 million which relates to the normal course of business and is in cluded in the cost of inventories.
During the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised a writedown of inventories totalling 4 million of which 3 million related to the normal course of business and was included in the cost of inventories.
The remai ning 1 million related to the writedown of sucralose inventories as part of the business realignment costs see Note 7.
140 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 141 Cash and cash equivalents At 31 March Cash at bank and in hand 261 Shortterm bank deposits Total 261 At 31 March 2017 the Group held nil shortterm deposits.
The effective interest rate on shortterm deposits at 31 March 2016 was 0.5% with an average maturity of 19 days.
The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalent s was denominated in the following currencies At 31 March US dollar 226 Euro 12 Sterling 2 Other 21
Trade and other receivables At 31 March Trade receivables 264 Less provision for doubtful debts 14 Trade receivables  net 250 Prepayments and accrued income 15 Margin deposits 3 Other receivables 23 Total 291 The above amounts do not include noncurrent other receivables of 1 million 2016  1 million.
The carrying amount of trade and other receivables was denominated in the following currencies At 31 March US dollar 184 Euro 46 Sterling 12 Other 50 Total 292 During the year the Group recognised impairments or writeoffs of receivables totalling 5 million 2016  nil.
At 31 March 2017 trade receivables of 7 million 2016  9 million were past due but not impaired because they were considered to be collectib le.
The ageing analysis of these trade receivables was as follows At 31 March Up to 30 days past due 6 13 months past due 1 Over 3 months past due Total 7 Trade receivables are not generally interestbearing but interest may be charged to customers on overdue amounts.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 141 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 142 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Availableforsale financial assets Availableforsale financial assets comprise 30 million 2016  23 million of unlisted securities.
The fair values of availablefor sale financial assets are carried at cost where fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Year ended 31 March 2017
Disposals
Remeasurement of nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements Currency translation differences At 31 March 2017 The carrying value of the availableforsale financial assets was denominated in the following currencies At 31 March US dollar 25 Sterling 2 Euro 3 Total 30 Presented in the statement of financial position as follows At 31 March Noncurrent assets 30 Current assets Total 30
At 1 April 2015 Year ended 31 March 2016
Disposals
Impairment loss At 31 March 2016 142 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 143 Goodwill and other intangible assets
Patents and other IP Other acquired intangibles Total acquired intangibles
Total
Cost
At 1 April 2016 Remeasurement of acquisition Additions at cost Disposals and writeoffs Currency translation differences At 31 March 2017 Accumulated amortisation and impairment At 1 April 2016 Impairment charge Disposals and writeoffs Amortisation charge Currency translation differences 1  At 31 March 2017 Net book value at 31 March 2017 212 4 5telCost At 1 April 2015 Subsidiaries acquired Additions at cost Disposals and writeoffs Transfer to assets held for sale Currency translation differences 14  At 31 March 2016 Accumulated amortisation and impairment At 1 April 2015 Disposals and writeoffs Amortisation charge Currency translation differences At 31 March 2016 Net book value at 31 March 2016 204 5 5telGoodwill The carrying amount of goodwill is allocated as follows At 31 March Allocated by geographical area United States 74 Allocated by operating segment Speciality Food Ingredients 136 Bulk Ingredients Total 212 i Impairment tests carried out during the year The Group is principally operated as an integrated network in th e United States and Europe with a large amount of interdepende ncy between plants servicing both the Speciality Food Ingredients an d Bulk Ingredients segments.
Goodwill is therefore tested for impairment on a geographical basis except where it can be allocated to a specific CGU.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 143 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 144 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Goodwill and other intangible assets continued i Impairment tests carried out during the year continued A description of the impairment tests conducted in relation to th e most significant goodwill amounts are set out as follows.
In each case the recoverable amount was calculated based on value in use with the exception of Brazilian Food Systems business Tate and Lyle Gemacom Tech Indstria e Comrcio S.
Gemaco m Tate and Lyle Boleraz s.
Biovelop.
Value in use was calculated based on budgets and plans covering the next five years that have been approved by th e
Cash flows were projected during the fiveyear period based on budgeted operating profit and managements expectations of market developments.
Beyond the fiveyear plan cash flows we re generally assumed to grow at the longterm growth rate for the relevant geographical markets based on forecasts included in industry reports.
Cash flows were discounted using pretax rat es that are based on the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted where appropriate to reflect differences between the risk profile of the geographical areas or CGUs concerned and that of the Group as a whole.
Goodwill allocated by geographical area United States Goodwill allocated to the US single ingred ients operations of 74 million 2016  65 million relates to the Staley acquisitio n in 1988.
The key assumptions in the model are derived from the Groups Annual Operating Plan for 2018 and Boardapproved fiveyear plan which includes midsingledigit volume growth in Speciality Food Ingredients and flat volumes in Bulk Ingredients.
Operating pr ofit is assumed to increase by low single digits for both Speciality Food Ingredients and Bulk Ingredients based on managements longterm industry expectations.
Based on the risk profile of th e assets tested cash flows were discounted using a pretax rat e of 8.8% 2016  9.6%.
Significant headroom exists and ma nagement concluded that no impairment is required.
Goodwill allocated by operating segment Speciality Food Ingredients Goodwill allocated to the Speciality Food Ingredients segment includes 63 million 2016  58 million that relates to the Eur opean Food Systems acquisitions of G.
Hahn and Company in June 2007 and that of Cesalpinia Foods in December 2005.
As these businesses are operationally integrated they are tested for impair ment as one CGU.
The key assumptions in the model are derive d from the Groups Annual Operating Plan for 2018.
Volumes are expect ed to grow at a midsingle di git compound annual growth rate over the subsequent four years and the model anticipates a recovery to profitability over the fiveyear timeframe.
Cash flows w ere discounted using a pretax rate of 8.8% 2016  9.6%.
Management concluded that no impairment is required.
During the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group completed the re alignment of the Eaststarch joint venture whereby the remaining 50% of Amylum Slovakia s. was purchased subsequently rename d Tate and Lyle Boleraz s.
This entity has goodwill of 43 million 2016  provisionally recorded as 35 million at the acquisition date of 31 October 2015 see Note 34.
The acquis ition business case assumes expansion beyond normal maintenance ca pital expenditure and the recoverable amount was determined based on fair value less costs of disposal.
The fair value was de termined based on a discounted cash flow model using a postta x discount rate and cash inflows and outflows from future expansion.
Cash flows from 2018 onwards are expected to grow at a midsingle digit compound annual ra te over the subsequent four years.
Cash flows were discounted using a posttax rate of 7.1%.
Management concluded that no impairment is required.
Goodwill allocated to the Speciality Food Ingredients segment includes 23 million preimpairment 2016  18 million that r elates to Gemacom.
The impairment model assumes expansion beyond normal maintenance capital expenditure and the recoverable amount was calculated based on fair value less costs of disposal .
The fair value was determined based on a discounted cash flow model using a posttax discount rate and ca sh inflows and outflows from future expansion.
The model assumes a return to profitability over the first two years with volume and contribution margin growth in low double digits over the five years.
Lon gterm growth rate is assumed to be 5% thereafter reflecting the longterm growth expectations for this market.
Cash flows were discounted using a posttax rate of 12% 2016  14% posttax.
It was concluded that the recoverable amount of this CGU was low er than its carrying value.
As a result of this analysis manageme nt has recognised an impairment charge of 16 million which has been recognised within other expenses as an exceptional item.
Refer to Note 7 for further details.
Goodwill of 10 million allocated to the Speciality Food Ingred ients segment relates to the acqu isition of Biovelop the PromOat Beta Glucan plant in Sweden in the 2014 financial year.
The ke y assumptions in the model are de rived from the Groups Annual Operating Plan for 2018 and the model assumes significant operat ing profit growth as the facility expansion is completed.
Management concluded that no impairment is required.
Cash flows were discounted using a posttax rate of 7.1% 2016  7.8%.
However this calculation resulted in a lo w level of headroom compared with the carryi ng value as growth has been below the lev el in the prior years model.
The amount of headroom was particular ly sensitive to the discount rate and volumes sold.
Reasonably possible changes in these assumptions being changes in excess of an increase in the discount rate of 30bps and a reduction in volumes sold of 200bps could lead to an impairment.
There are no other individually material elements of goodwill allocated to either the Speciality Food Ingredients or Bulk Ingre dients operating segments.
Management considers that with the exception of Biovelop there is no reasonably possible change in one or more of the key assumptions used in the impairment tests for goodwill and other in tangible assets that would give rise to an impairment loss during the coming year.
144 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 145 Property plant and equipment
Land and buildings Plant and machinery Assets in the course of construction
Cost
At 1 April Additions at cost Transfers on completion Disposals and writeoffs Currency translation differences At 31 March Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 1 April Depreciation charge Impairment charge Disposals and writeoffs Currency translation differences At 31 March Net book value at 31 March tel77 Including assets held under finance leases
At 1 April Additions at cost Subsidiaries acquired Transfers on completion Disposals and writeoffs Transfers to assets held for sale Currency translation differences At 31 March Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 1 April Depreciation charge Impairment charge Reversal of impairment losses Disposals and writeoffs Transfers to assets held for sale Currency translation differences At 31 March Net book value at 31 March tel197 Including assets held under finance leases 1 In the year ended 31 March 2017 the formerly impaired assets at the Singapore plant were decommissioned and removed from the f ixed asset register.
2 Excludes impairment charge in relation to assets held for sale see Note 8.
Impairment reviews During the year the Group recognised an impairment charge of 6 million in respect of the impairment of certain redundant asse ts at the Decatur facility in the US see Note 7.
As part of the impairment and deconsolidation of the Groups equity interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd the Group recognised a 1 million charge see Note 7.
Management conducted impairment reviews of other property plant and equipment during the year and concluded that there were no other impairments.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised an impairment charge of 1 million related to assets in the European Food Systems business.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 145 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 146 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Equity accounted investments The amounts recognised in the Group consolidated income statement are as follows Year ended 31 March
Associates  continuing operations Joint ventures  continuing operations 32 Joint ventures  discontinued operations 8 Total operations 32 The amounts recognised in the Group consolidated statement of financial position are as follows At 31 March
Joint ventures 92
The Groups only associate which is accounted for under the equi ty method is Tapioca Development Corporation see Note 38.
The associate has share capital consisting solely of ordinary sh ares which are held directly by the Group and the country of incorporation or registration is also its principal place of business.
Tapioca Development Corporation is a private company and there is no quoted market price available for its shares.
In the opinion of the Directors this associate is not considered to be material to the Group and there are no contingent liabi lities relating to the Groups interest in the associate.
The investment in the associate as at 31 March 2017 was 4 million 2016  3 million.
The Group recognised nil net profit 2016  nil in its consolidated income statement.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group received nil dividend 2016  1 million from its associate.
Joint ventures In the opinion of the Directors the Groups material joint ve ntures which are accounted for under the equity method are Almi dones Mexicanos SA Almex and DuPont Tate and Lyle Bio Products Compan y LLC BioPDO see Note 38.
The joint ventures have share capital consisting solely of ordinary shares which are held di rectly by the Group and its joint venture partners and are pri vate companies.
No quoted market price is avai lable for their shares.
There are no contingent liabilities relating to the Groups interest in the joint ventures.
On 31 October 2015 the Group disposed of its investment in Ea ststarch C.
As a result the Group no longer has any guarantees in respect of banking facilities of Eaststarch.
The Group receiv ed predisposal dividends from Eaststarch joint venture totalli ng 94 million 68 million.
The movements in the carrying value of the Groups investment in joint ventures are summarised as follows Investments in joint ventures
At 1 April 2016 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures  total operations Other comprehensive income including exchange 23 Dividends paid At 31 March 2017
At 1 April 2015 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures  total operations Disposal including goodwill Other comprehensive expense including exchange 23
At 31 March 2016 146 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 147 Equity accounted investments continued Set out below is the summarised financial information for each material joint venture accounted for using the equity method.
The information reflects the amounts presented in the financial st atements of the joint ventures and not the Groups share of those amounts adjusted for differences in accounting policies between the Group and the joint ventures to make it consistent with th e Groups accounting policies.
Income Statement Year ended 31 March 2017
BioPDO
Other
Total
Sales 618 90 Depreciation and amortisation 2 7 Other expense 546 65 Profit before tax 70 18 Income tax expense 20 4 Profit for the year from total operations 50 14 Other comprehensive income 5 10 1 Total comprehensive income 55 24 1 Dividends 33 24 Income Statement Year ended 31 March 2016
Almex
BioPDO
Other
Total
Sales
Depreciation and amortisation Finance income Other expense Profit before tax Income tax expense Profit for the year from total operations Other comprehensive expenseincome Total comprehensive expenseincome
Eaststarch comprises the results of Amylum Slovakia from 1 Ap ril 2015 until it became a subsidiary on 31 October 2015 and the results of the disposal group from 1 April 2015 until it became held for sale on 21 April 2015.
The profit on disposal is included as an exceptional item see Not e 7.
For further details see Note 34.
Statement of Financial Position At 31 March 2017
BioPDO
Other
Total
Assets
Noncurrent assets Cash and cash equivalents 7 10 Other current assets 155 14
Other noncurrent liabilities 4 Current borrowings 22 Other current liabilities 62 13 Net assets STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 147 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 148 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Equity accounted investments continued Statement of Financial Position At 31 March 2016
BioPDO
Other
Total
Assets
Noncurrent assets Cash and cash equivalents Other current assets
Other noncurrent liabilities Current borrowings Other current liabilities Net assets Reconciliation of the summarised financial information presented to the carrying amount of the Groups interest in joint ventur es Reconciliation of summarised financial information
BioPDO
Other
Total
Opening net assets at 1 April Profit for the year from total operations 50 14 Other comprehensive incomeexpense 5 10 1 Dividends 33 24 Closing net assets at 31 March Interest in joint venture % 50% 50% 50% Interest in joint venture at share Carrying value at 31 March Reconciliation of summarised financial information
Almex
BioPDO
Other
Total
Opening net assets at 1 April Profit for the year from total operations
Other comprehensive expenseincome
Closing net assets at 31 March 2016 Interest in joint venture % 50% 50% 50% 50% Interest in joint venture at share Goodwill at 1 April 2015 Goodwill disposed Goodwill at 31 March 2016 Carrying value at 31 March 2016 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 149 Share capital and share premium Ordinary share capital
Total
At 31 March 2017 and 31 March tel523 Ordinary shares carry the right to participate in dividends and ea ch share entitles the holder to one vote on matters requiring shareholder approval.
Allotted called up and fully paid equity share capital Number of shares
Number of shares
At 1 April 46tel46telAllotted under share option schemes 20 922  11 969 At 31 March 46tel46tel The nominal value of each share is 25 pence.
Own shares Own shares represent the Companys ordinary shares that are ac quired to meet the Groups expected obligations under share based incentive arrangements see Note 31.
Own shares are held either by the Company in treasury or by an Employee Benefit Trust EBT that was established by the Company.
Movements in own shares held were as follows
Cost
Number of shares
At 1 April Purchased in the market into treasury into the EBT Transferred to EBT 15 572 Transferred to employees from treasury 230 619 2 325 950 from the EBT 958 408 7 1 682 224 At 31 March  Shares held for the benefit of untraceable shareholders and bearer warrant holders transferred to the trust at nil cost.
At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016
Market value % of outstanding share capital
Market value % of outstanding share capital Treasury shares Shares held in the EBT
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 149 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 150 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Other reserves Hedging reserve
Other reserves
At 1 April 2015 4 34 99 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Cash flow hedges reclassified and reported in the income statement in the year 2 Currency translation differences gain on currency translation of foreign operations  60 fair value loss on net investment hedges  18 Share of other comprehensive expense of joint ventures  12 Items transferred to income on disposal of joint ventures  34 At 31 March 2016 2 30 99 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Cash flow hedges fair value gain in the year 1 reclassified and reported in the income statement in the year 4 tax effect of the above movements Availableforsale financial assets reclassified and reported in the income statement in the year   1 Currency translation differences gain on currency translation of foreign operations  185 fair value loss on net investment hedges  69 Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures  7 Items transferred to income statement on disposal of subsidiary  1 At 31 March Trade and other payables At 31 March Current payables Trade payables 185 Social security 6 Accruals and deferred income 107 Other payables 17 Total 315 The above amounts do not include noncurrent other payables of 10 million 2016  13 million.
The carrying amount of trade and other payables was denominated in the following currencies At 31 March US dollar
Sterling
Other
Total
150 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 151
Noncurrent borrowings At 31 March 2394000 6.5% cumulative preference shares of 1 each 2 Industrial Revenue Bonds 20232036 US70100000 56 US Private Placement 20232027 US400000000 319 6.75% Guaranteed Notes 2019 200000000 212 Total 589 Other bank loans 1 Total 1 Other borrowings Obligations under finance leases 14 Total 14 Total noncurrent borrowings 604 Current borrowings At 31 March US commercial paper 70 6.625% Guaranteed Notes 2016 US250000000 Industrial Revenue Bond 2016 US7555000 Shortterm loans 16 Unsecured bank overdrafts 1 Total 87 Other borrowings Obligations under finance leases 1 Total current borrowings 88 Included within borrowings are 150 million 2016  206 million of borrowings subject to fair value hedges the amortised cos t of which has been increased by 13 million 2016  17 million in the tables above.
Lease liabilities are effectively secured as the rights to the le ased asset revert to the lessor in the event of default.
There are no other securities on borrowings.
Taking into account the Groups interest ra te and cross currency swap contracts the effective interest rates of its borrowings are as follows Year ended 31 March 25m 3.83% US Private Placement Notes 2023 3.8% 3.8% 180m 4.06% US Private Placement Notes 2025 4.1% 4.1% 100m 4.16% US Private Placement Notes 2027 4.2% 4.2% 95m US Private Placement FRN 2023 2.4% 2.0% 2394000 6.5% cumulative preference shares of 1 each 6.5% 6.5% Industrial Revenue Bonds 20232036 US70100000 0.7% 0.1% 6.625% Guaranteed Notes 2016 US250000000 4.2% 6.75% Guaranteed Notes 2019 200000000 5.2% 4.7% 1 The US7555000 Industrial Revenue Bond matured in December 2016.
2 Floating rate based on US sixmonth LIBOR  1.47%.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 151 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 152 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Borrowings continued Shortterm loans and overdrafts Shortterm loans mature within the next 12 months and overdr afts are repayable on demand.
Both shortterm loans and bank overdrafts are arranged at floating rates of interest and expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk.
Credit facilities and arrangements Tate and Lyle International Finance PLC holds a US800 million fiveyear committed revolvin g credit facility with a core of highl y rated banks which matures between July 2020 and 2021.
At 31 March 2017 the facility has a value of 638 million 2016  556 million  and was undrawn.
The facility incurs commitment fees at market rate s prevailing when the facility was arranged.
The lenders have th e right but not the obligation to cancel th eir commitments in the event of specified events of default.
In addition the Group has substantial uncommitted facilities.
Finance lease commitments Amounts payable under finance lease commitments are as follows At 31 March Minimum lease payments Present value of minimum lease payments Minimum lease payments Present value of minimum lease payments Within one year Between one and five years After five years Total Less future finance charges 3 3 Present value of minimum lease payments 15 12 Change in working capital and other noncash movements Year ended 31 March Continuing operations Decreaseincrease in inventories 13 Decrease in receivables 35 Decreaseincrease in payables 47 Increasedecrease in derivative financial instruments excluding debtrelated derivatives 4 Decreaseincrease in provisions for other liabilities and charges 2 Change in working capital 5 Other noncash movements 9 Change in working capital and other noncash movements 4 152 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 153 Net debt Reconciliation of the decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents to the movement in net debt Year ended 31 March Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 88 Net decrease in borrowings 124 Decrease in net debt resulting from cash flows 36 Fair value and other movements 3 Currency translation differences 57 Increasedecrease in net debt in the year 18 Net debt at beginning of the year 434 Net debt at end of year 452 Movements in the Groups net debt are as follows Borrowings and finance leases Cash and cash equivalents
Noncurrent
Debtrelated derivatives
At 1 April 2015 Decreaseincrease resulting from cash flows Fair value and other movements
Currency translation differences At 31 March 2016 Increasedecrease resulting from cash flows Fair value and other movements
Currency translation differences At 31 March 2017 Net debt is denominated in the following currencies At 31 March US dollar 347 Euro 41 Sterling 46 Other 18 Total 452 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 153 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 154 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Derivatives and hedge accounting At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Noncurrent derivative financial instruments used to manage the Groups net debt profile Currency swaps 2 37 5 Interest rate swaps 13  16 Current derivative financial instruments used to manage the Groups net debt profile Currency swaps  1 Interest rate swaps 2  3 Total derivative financial instruments used to manage the Groups net debt profile 17 38 24 Other current derivative financial instruments Forward foreign exchange contracts Commodity pricing contracts cash flow hedges 3 1 held for trading 26 15 40 Total other derivative financial instruments 29 16 40 Total derivative financial instruments 46 54 64 Presented in the statement of financial position as follows Noncurrent derivative financial instruments 15 37 21 Current derivative financial instruments 31 17 43 All hedges are considered to be highly effective.
The ineffectiveness recognised in profit or loss in the current and prior per iods is not material.
Cash flow hedges The Group employs forward foreign exchange contracts and commodity pricing contracts to hedge cash flow risk associated with forecast transactions.
The notional amounts of the outstanding forward foreign exchange contracts are as follows At 31 March US dollar 2 Singapore dollar Brazilian real Euro 4 South African rand 6
Gains and losses recognised in the hedging reserve in equity Note 23 on forward foreign exchange and commodity pricing contracts at 31 March 2017 are expected to be reclassifi ed to the income statement at various future dates.
Fair value hedges The Group employs interest rate swap contracts to hedge interest rate risks associated with its borrowings.
The notional princi pal amounts of the outstanding interest rate swap contracts applied in fair value hedging re lationships as of 31 March 2017 were 150 million 2016  206 million.
154 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 155 Derivatives and hedge accounting continued Net investment hedges The Group employs currency swap contracts to hedge the currency risk associated with its net in vestments in subsidiaries located primarily in the US and Europe.
The notional principal amounts of the outstanding currency swap contracts applied in net investment hedging relationships as of 31 March 2017 were 1 82 million 2016  161 million.
Within net investment hedging gainslosses a fair value loss of 21 million 2016  8 million loss on translation of the currency swap contracts to pounds sterling at the periodend date was recognised in the transl ation reserve in shareholders equity Note 23.
In addition at 31 March 2017 of the Groups liabilities a total of 188 million 2016  312 million are designated as hedg es of the net investments in foreign operations.
Financial instruments  fair value and risk management Financial instruments by category Set out below is a comparison by category of carrying values and fair values of all of the Groups financial assets and financi al liabilities as at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016.
At 31 March 2017
Amortised costcash Derivatives in a hedging relationship
Availablefor sale financial assets Total carrying value Fair value Availableforsale financial assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Derivative financial instruments assets
Derivative financial instruments liabilities Trade and other payables
At 31 March 2016
Amortised costcash Derivatives in a hedging relationship
Availablefor sale financial assets Total carrying value Fair value Availableforsale financial assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Derivative financial instruments assets
Derivative financial instruments liabilities Trade and other payables
Trade and other receivables presented above excludes 15 million 2016  17 million relating to prepayments.
Trade and other payables presented above excludes 6 million 2016  5 million relating to social security.
Borrowings with a carrying value of 212 million 2016  390 million relate to listed bonds with a fair value of 229 million 2016  409 million according to quoted market prices and are categorised as Level 1 for fair value measurement.
Borrowings with a carrying value of 319 million 2016  277 million relates to US Private Placement Notes with a fair value of 322 mil lion 2016  277 million according to broker dealer quotations and are categorised as Level 3 for fair value measurement.
The remaining borrowings have a fair value measured by discounted estimated cash flows with an applicable market quoted yield and are categorised as Level 2 for fair value measurement.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 155 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 156 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Financial instruments  fair value and risk management continued Fair value hierarchy The following tables illustrate the Groups financial assets an d liabilities measured at fair value at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 refer to Note 2 for a description of the three levels of fair value measurement At 31 March 2017
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets at fair value Availableforsale financial assets Derivative financial instruments currency swaps interest rate swaps commodity pricing contracts Assets at fair value Liabilities at fair value Derivative financial instruments currency swaps commodity pricing contracts Liabilities at fair value At 31 March 2016
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets at fair value Availableforsale financial assets Derivative financial instruments currency swaps interest rate swaps commodity pricing contracts Assets at fair value Liabilities at fair value Other financial liability within other payables Derivative financial instruments currency swaps forward foreign exchange contracts commodity pricing contracts Liabilities at fair value During the year the Group reviewed and enhanced its methodology for classifying commodity pricing contracts within the fair v alue hierarchy.
Prior year numbers have been restated to reflect presentation using this new methodology.
156 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 157 Financial instruments  fair value and risk management continued Financial instruments measured at fair value The following table shows the methodology used to measure Level 3 fair values.
The table isolates the unobservable inputs however the full impact on the Groups income statement is described within the price risk management section.
Type
Valuation technique Significant unobservable inputs Sensitivity of the fairvalue measurement in reasonable changes to inputs Written commodity contract Based on the Groups own assessment of the commodity supply and demand as well as expected pricing.
Price of coproduct positions refer to fair value measurement section in Note 2.
Basis refer to fair value measurement section in Note 2.
10% increasedecrease in the price of the coproducts would result in a net increasedecrease in fair value of nil in respect of Level 3 financial instruments.
10% increasedecrease in the cost of basis would result in a net increase decrease in fair value of 2 million in respect of Level 3 financial instruments.
In addition to the above the Groups avai lableforsale financial assets are sensitive to a number of market and nonmarket factors.
The following table reconciles the movement in the Groups net fi nancial instruments classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy Commodity pricing contracts assets Commodity pricing contracts liabilities
Other financial liability
At 1 April 2015 Total gainslosses in operating profit
Settlements
Transfers between levels At 31 March 2016 Total gainslosses in operating profit in other comprehensive income Remeasurement of nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements
Settlements
At 31 March 2017 Management of financial risk The key financial risks faced by the Group are credit risk liquidity risk and market risks which include interest rate risk foreign exchange risk and certain commodity price risks.
The Board regularly reviews these risks and approves written policies covering the use of financial instruments to manage these risks and sets over all risk limits.
The derivative financial instruments approved by the Board of Tate and Lyle PLC to manage financial risks include swaps both interest rate and currency swaptions caps forward rat e agreements foreign exchange and commodity forward contracts and options and commodity futures.
The Chief Financial Officer retains overall responsibility for management of financial risk for the Group.
Most of the Groups financing interest rate and foreign exchange risk are managed through the Group treasury company Tate and Lyle International Finance PLC whose operations are directed by its board.
Tate and Lyle International Finance PLC arranges funding and manages interest rate foreign exchange and bank counterparty risks within limits approved by the Board of Tate and Lyle PLC.
Commodity price risks are managed through divisional commodity trading functions in the US and Europe.
These functions are controlled by divisional management who are responsible for ratifying general strategy and overseeing performance on a monthly basis.
The performance of the commodity trading function is monitored against its ability to match the Groups needs for raw materials with purchase contracts as well as the Groups output of coproducts with sales contracts.
Commodity price contracts are categorised as being held either for trading or for hedging price exposures.
The Group applies a limited level of hedge accounting to its economic price exposure hedges.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 157 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 158 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Financial instruments  fair value and risk management continued Market risks Foreign exchange management The Group operates internationally and is exposed to foreign exch ange risks arising from commercial transactions transaction exposure and from recognised assets liabilities and investments in foreign operations translation exposure.
Transaction exposure The Groups policy requires subsidiaries to hedge transactiona l currency exposures against their functional currency once the transaction is committed or highly probable mainly through the us e of forward foreign exchange contracts although exceptions can be approved by the Chief Financial Officer.
The amounts deferred in equity from derivative financial instruments designated as cash flow hedges are released to the income statement or statement of financial position and offset against the movement in underlyi ng transactions only when the forecast transactions affect the inco me statement or statement of financial position respectively.
Translation exposure The Group manages the foreign exchange exposure to net investments in overseas operations particularly in the US and Europe by borrowing principally in US dollars which provide a partia l match for the Groups major foreign currency assets.
The Group also manages some of its foreign exchange exposure to net investments in foreign operations through the use of currency swap contracts and other liabilities.
The amount deferred in equity fr om the hedging instruments designated as net investment hedges is offset against the foreign currency translation effect of the ne t investment in foreign operations and is released to the inco me statement upon disposal of those investments.
The following table illustrates only the Groups sensitivity to the fluctuation of the Groups major currencies against sterlin g on its income statement and other components of equity assuming that ea ch exchange rate moves in isolation.
The equity impact for foreign exchange sensitivity relates to derivative and nonderi vative financial instruments hedging the Groups net investments in its European and US operations.
At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016
Equity
Income
Equity
SterlingUS dollar 10% change Sterlingeuro 10% change 1 5 Interest rate management The Group has an exposure to interest rate risk arising princi pally from changes in US dollar sterling and euro interest rate s.
This risk is managed by fixing or capping portions of debt using in terest rate derivatives to achieve a target level of fixedfloati ng rate net debt which aims to optimise net finance expense and reduce volati lity in reported earnings.
The Groups policy is that between 30% and 75% of Group net debt is fixed for more than one year and th at no interest rates are fixed for more than 12 years.
At 31 Ma rch 2017 the longest term of any fixed rate debt held by the Grou p was until October 2027 2016  October 2027.
The proportion of net debt managed by the Groups treasury function at 31 March 2017 that was fixed or capped for more than one year was 65% 2016  60%.
The Group considers a 100 basis point change in interest rates a re asonably possible change except where rates are less than 100 basis points.
In these instances it is assumed that the inte rest rates increase by 100 basis points and decrease to zero fo r the purpose of performing the sensitivity analysis.
The impact is calculated with reference to the gross debt and cash held as at 31 March 2017 assuming that other variables remain unchanged.
As at 31 March 2017 if interest rates increased by 100 basis poin ts Group profit before tax would decrease by 2 million 201 6 1 million.
If interest rates decreased by 100 basis points or less where applicable Group profit before tax would increase by 1 million 2016  1 million increase.
Price risk management The Group participates mainly in four markets food and beverage  industrial ingredients pharmaceutical and personal care and animal feed.
Food and beverage and industrial ingredients are th e most significant.
All ingredients are produced from renewable crops predominantly corn.
The Group is exposed to movements in the future prices of co mmodities in those domestic and international markets where the Group buys and sells corn and related cop roducts and energy for production.
Commodity futures forwards and options are used where available to hedge inventories and the costs of raw materi als for unpriced and prospective contracts not covered by forwa rd product sales.
Some of the contracts are used to hedge coproduct pricing for which there is no active market.
The pricing is established by the Group based on a number of inputs as discussed on pages 112 to 113.
Due to the seasonality of corn product ion at certain points in time throughout the year the expo sure to commodity pricing contracts may be higher.
As at 31 March 2017 a 50% increasedecrease in the price of corn will result in a decreaseincrease to the income statement of 3 million 2016  nil and related decreaseincrease in other components of equity of nil 2016  1 million.
158 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 159 Financial instruments  fair value and risk management continued Credit risk management Counterparty credit risk arises from the placing of deposits and entering into derivative financial instrument contracts with b anks and financial institutions as well as credit exposures inherent within the Groups outstanding receivables.
The Group manages credit risk by entering into financial instru ment contracts substantially with investment grade counterpartie s approved by the Board.
The Board has approved maximum counterparty exposure limits for specified banks and financial institutions based on the long term credit ratings of Standard and Poors and Moodys.
Trading limits assigned to commercial customers are based on ratings from Dun and Bradstreet and Credit Risk Monitor.
In cases where publis hed financial ratings are not available or inconclusive credit application reference checking and obtaining of customers financial information such as liquidity and turnover ratio are re quired to evaluate customers credit worthiness.
Analysis of maximum credit exposure Counterparties positions are monitored on a regular basis to ensu re that they are within the approved limits and there are no significant concentrations of credit risks.
The Groups trade receivables are short term in nature and la rgely comprise amounts receivable from business customers.
Concentrations of credit risk with respect to trade receivables are limited with our customer base including large unrelated and internationally dispersed customers.
The Group considers its maximum exposure to cr edit risk at the yearend date is the carrying value of each class of financial a ssets as disclosed under financial instruments by category on page 155.
Analysis of amounts setoff The Group does not offset financial assets and liabilities in its statement of financial position as the Group has no intention to net settle except as described below.
Derivative assets and liabilities of 17 million 2016  19 millio n could be offset under an enforceable master netting agree ment.
Amounts which do not meet the criteria for offsetting in the st atement of financial position but could be settled net in certai n circumstances principally relate to derivative transactions un der International Swaps and Derivatives Association ISDA agreem ents where each party has the option to settle amounts on a net basis in the event of default of the other party.
Liquidity risk management The Group manages its exposure to liquidity risk and ensures maximum flexibility in meeting changing business needs by maintaining access to a wide range of funding sources including capital markets and bank borrowings.
Capital market issues outstanding at 31 March 2017 are listed in Note 25.
At the year end the Group held cash and cash equivalents of 261 million 2016  317 million and had committed undrawn facilities of 638 million 2016  556 million.
These resources are maintained to provide liquidity backup and to meet the p rojected maximum cash outflow from debt repayment capital expenditure and seasonal working capital needs foreseen for at least a year into the future at any one time.
The Group has a core committed bank facility of US800 million of which US80 million matures in 2020 and US720 million in 2021.
This facility is unsecured and contains financial covenants for the Group th at the interest cover ratio should not be les s than 2.5 times and the multiple of net debt to EBITDA as defined in our financial covenants should not be greater than 3.5 times.
Refer to Note 4 for the calculation of these measures for financial co venant purposes.
The Group monitors compliance against all its financial obligations and it is Group policy to manage the consolidated statement of financial position so as to operate well w ithin these covenanted restrictions.
In both the current and comparat ive reporting periods the Group complied with its financial covenants at all measurement points.
The majority of the Group s borrowings are raised through the Group treasury company Tate and Lyle International Finance PLC and are then onl ent to the business units on an arms length basis.
Current Group policy is to ensure that after taking into accoun t the total of undrawn committed facilities no more than 10% o f gross debt matures within 12 months and at least 35% matures beyond 2.5 years.
At 31 March 2017 after taking account of undrawn committed facilities the Group was compliant with the policy.
Th e average maturity of the Groups gross debt was 6.2 years 20 16 6.6 years taking account of undrawn committed facilities.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 159 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 160 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Financial instruments  fair value and risk management continued The table below analyses the undiscounted cash flows related to the Groups nonderivative fina ncial liabilities and derivative assets and liabilities.
At 31 March 2017 Liquidity analysis 1 year 1  5 years 5 years Borrowings including finance leases 79 212 Interest on borrowings 26 79 Trade and other payables 315 10 Derivative contracts receipts 107 179 payments 105 206 Commodity pricing contracts 3 1 At 31 March 2016 Liquidity analysis 1 year 1  5 years 5 years Borrowings including finance leases 200 208 Interest on borrowings 29 82 Trade and other payables 337 13 Derivative contracts receipts 77 197 payments 71 198 Commodity pricing contracts 15 1 Included in borrowings are 2394000 of 6.5% cumulative preference shares.
Only one years worth of interest payable on these shares is included in the less than one year category.
Derivative contracts include currency swaps forward exchange co ntracts and interest rate swaps.
Commodity pricing contracts included above represent options and futures.
Financial assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than pounds sterling are translated to pounds sterling using y ear end exchange rates.
Capital risk management The Groups primary objectives in managing its capital are to safeguard the business as a going concern to maintain the divide nd policy to maintain sufficient financial flexibility to undertake its investment plans and to retain an investment grade credi t rating which enables access to debt capital marke ts.
The Groups financial profile and level of financial risk is assessed on a regula r basis in the light of changes to the economic conditions business environment the Groups business profile and the risk characteris tics of its businesses.
Tate and Lyle has contractual relationships with Moodys and Standard and Poors SandP for the provision of credit ratings.
At 31 M arch 2017 the longterm credit rating from Moodys was Baa2 stable outlook and from SandP was BBB stable outlook.
The Group regards its total capital as follows At 31 March
Net debt 27 452 Equity attributable to owners of the Company Total capital The Board has set two ongoing key performance indicators KPIs to measure the Groups financial strength.
The target levels fo r these financial KPIs are that the ratio of net debtEBITDA should not exceed two times and interest cover should exceed five ti mes.
These ratios are calculated on the same basis as the external financial covenants noted above.
The ratios for these KPIs for th e financial years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 were
Times
Times
Net debtEBITDA 4 0.9 Interest cover 4 13.9 160 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 161 Retirement benefit obligations a Plan information i Pensions The Group operates a number of defined benefit pension plans principally in the UK and the US.
Generally the pension benefits provided under these plans are determined based on the pensionabl e salary and period of pensionable service of the individual members.
Most of the plans are funded and the plan assets held separately from those of the Group in funds that are under the control of trustees.
The extent of the powers of the trustees in particular in respect of funding and investment strategy var ies and is dependent on local regulations and the rules of each plan.
Payments made by the Group to the plans principally comprise fu nding contributions agreed with the trustees that are determined in accordance with local regulations to ensure that appropriate funding levels are maintained and funding deficits are eliminat ed over a reasonable period of time.
All of the significant defined benefit pension plans operated by the Group are closed to new entrants and to future accrual.
The Group operates defined contribution pension plans in a number of countries.
Contributions payable by the Group to these pla ns during the year amounted to 7 million 2016  4 million.
The Groups subsidiaries in the US provid e unfunded retirement medical plans to the majority of their employees.
Such plans provide financial assistance in meeting various costs including medical dental and prescription drugs.
Employees are required to contribute to the cost of benefits received under the plans.
The Group meets the remaining costs of providing these benefits in the period in which they are incurred.
At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016
Medical benefits
Pensions
Medical benefits
Benefit obligations Funded plans Unfunded plans Fair value of plan assets Net deficit Presented in the statement of financial position as Retirement benefit surplus Retirement benefit deficit Net defined benefit liability reconciliation
Medical benefits
At 1 April 2015 Year ended 31 March 2016 net decrease in the benefit obligation net decrease in the fair value of plan assets At 31 March 2016 Year ended 31 March 2017 net increase in the benefit obligation net increase in the fair value of plan assets At 31 March 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 161 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 162 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Retirement benefit obligations continued ii Analysis of movements in the benefit obligation Pension benefits
US
Other
Total
Medical benefits
At 1 April 2015 Year ended 31 March 2016 Service cost  current Service credit  past Plan administration costs Interest on benefit obligation Actuarial gains changes in financial assumptions changes in demographic assumptions experience against assumptions Net actuarial gain Benefits paid Settlement loss buyout transaction
Currency translation differences Decrease in the benefit obligation At 31 March 2016 Year ended 31 March 2017 Service cost  current Plan administration costs Interest on benefit obligation Actuarial gainslosses changes in financial assumptions changes in demographic assumptions experience against assumptions Net actuarial lossgain Benefits paid Settlement gain see Note 7 Remeasurement of nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements see Note 18 Currency translation differences Increase in the benefit obligation At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2017 the benefits expected to be paid by the plans over the next ten years were as follows Pension benefits
US
Other
Total
Medical benefits
Benefit payments within 12 months between 1 to 2 years between 3 to 5 years between 6 to 10 years Total expected benefit payments for the next ten years 430 359  Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 163 Retirement benefit obligations continued In the UK members can elect to forego a portion of their future pension benefits in return for a lump sum payment or a trans fer out to other arrangements.
These amounts are excluded from future benefit projections.
The pension benefits paid in respect of US plans in the 2017 financial year were 35 million higher than those projected for t he 2018 financial year due to the settlement made by some deferred members during the year which resulted in the recognition of a 9 million exceptional gain as detailed in Note 7c.
At 31 March 2017 the weighted average duration of the significant defined benefit obligations was as follows
Pension plans
16 years
11 years Medical benefits 10 years
For accounting purposes the benefit obligation of each plan has been calculated in accordance with IAS 19 based on data gather ed for the most recent actuarial valuation and by applying assumpti ons made by the Group on the advice of independent actuaries.
The principal assumptions used in calculating the benefit obligation were as follows At 31 March 2017
US
Inflation rate 2.33.3% 2.5% Expected rate of salary increases na 3.5% Expected rate of pension increases deferred pensions 2.3% na pensions in payment 3.1% na Discount rate 2.4% 4.0% At 31 March 2016 UK
Inflation rate 2.03.0% 2.5% Expected rate of salary increases na 3.5% Expected rate of pension increases deferred pensions 2.0% na pensions in payment 2.8% na Discount rate 3.4% 3.8% Assumptions regarding future mortality rates of members of the Groups pension plans are based on published statistics and take into account the profile of the plan members.
On this basis th e average life expectancies assumed for members of the plans are as follows At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016 UK US UK
Male aged 65 now 21.6 years 20.9 years 22.7 years 21.2 years Male aged 65 in 20 years time 23.7 years 22.5 years 26.6 years 22.9 years Female aged 65 now 23.8 years 22.9 years 23.9 years 23.2 years Female aged 65 in 20 years time 26.1 years 24.5 years 27.0 years 24.9 years Shorter longevity assumptions are used for members who retire on grounds of ill health.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 163 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 164 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Retirement benefit obligations continued Medical benefits Principal assumptions used in calculating th e benefit obligation are medical cost inflation and the discount rate applied to th e expected benefit payments.
The Group has assumed medical cost infl ation at 8.0% per annum 2016  6.0% grading down to 5% by 2023 and used a discount rate of 3.9% 2016  3.6%.
At 31 March 2017 the sensitivity of the net deficit on the plan s to changes in the principal assumptions was as follows assum ing in each case that the other assumptions are unchanged Increasedecrease in obligation Change in assumptions Increase in assumption Decrease in assumption Pension plans Inflation rate 50 bp 62 Life expectancy 1 year 71 Discount rate 100 bp 220 Medical benefits Medical cost inflation 50 bp 3 Discount rate 100 bp 7 iii Analysis of movements in the plan assets
US
Total
At 1 April Year ended 31 March 2016 Interest on plan assets 37 15 Actual return lower than interest on plan assets 35 17 Employers contributions including 2 million related to buyout transaction 25 13 Benefits paid 50 28 Settlements 81 Currency translation differences  13 Decrease in fair value of plan assets 104 4 At 31 March Year ended 31 March 2017 Interest on plan assets 34 17 Actual return higher than interest on plan assets 164 15 Employers contributions 22 16 Benefits paid 51 69 Currency translation differences  56 Increase in fair value of plan assets 169 35 At 31 March  Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 165 Retirement benefit obligations continued Analysis of plan assets At 31 March 2017
US
Total
Equities  quoted 324 110 Corporate bonds  quoted 138 254 Government bonds  quoted 385 53 Other assets  quoted 62 Property  unquoted  22 Insurance policies  unquoted At 31 March 2016
US
Total
Equities  quoted 285 101 Corporate bonds  quoted 124 234 Government bonds  quoted 312 49 Other assets  quoted 31 Property  unquoted  20 Insurance policies  unquoted The fair value of the insurance policies are deemed to be equi valent to the present value of the related benefit obligation.
The Group also paid an additional 4 million 2016  4 million to the US unfunded retirement me dical plans to meet the cost o f providing the benefits in the financial year.
Plan assets do not include any direct investments in securities issued by the Group or any property occupied by or other assets used by the Group.
Assets are classified as quoted only if they have a quoted market price in an active market as defined by IF RS 13 Fair Value Measurement.
All other assets are classified as unquoted.
Where a plan is in surplus the surplus recognised is limited to the present value of any amounts that the Group expects to rec over by way of refunds or a reduction in future contributions.
The Group considers that it has an unconditional right to the surplus relating to the UK plan as the scheme rules state that any surp lus should be returned to the Group in the event that there are no members left in the pension scheme.
The defined benefit pension plans expose the Group to actuarial risks such as interest rate longevity inflation and investmen t risk.
The Group encourages the trustees of the plans to adopt an invest ment policy that seeks to miti gate these risks which involves investing a significant proportion of the plan assets in liabilit ydriven investment portfolios that mitigate interest rate in flation and investment risks.
The Group seeks to ensure that as far as prac ticable the investment portfolios of the funded plans are inve sted in longterm fixed interest securities with matu rities and in currencies that match the expected future benefit payments as they f all due.
In the UK interest rate derivatives are used to achieve close matching where matching fixedinterest securities are not available in the market.
Most of the inflation risk for the Group arises in the UK since deferred pensions and pensions in paym ent in the US do not attract inflation increases.
Inflation risk is mitigated by holding indexlinked government bonds and corporate b onds and in the UK inflation derivatives.
At 31 March 2017 282 mi llion 2016  270 million of the benefit obligation was match ed by qualifying insurance policies that also mitigate longevity risk.
The plans also maintain a portfolio of returnseeking investme nts principally in the form of equities and property.
As required by local regulations actuarial valuations of the US pension plans are carried out each year and those of the UK pe nsion plans are carried out at least every three years.
During the year the actuarial valuation at 31 March 2016 of the Tate and Lyle Group Pension Scheme Scheme was concluded with core funding contri butions remaining at 12 million per year.
The secured funding account established under the previous actuar ial valuation will continue to receive su pplementary contributions of 6 million per year until March 2023 payable to the truste es on certain triggering events such as under performance of the Schemes investmen ts or a deterioration in the strength of the Groups financial covenant.
The Group will continue to fund the UK plan administratio n costs.
During the year the Amylum UK Pension Scheme was formally wound up.
This followed the final settlement of 2 million in the pri or year included in discontinued operations.
During the year ending 31 March 2018 the Group expects to contribute approximately 39 million to its defined benefit pension plans and to pay approximately 5 million in relation to retirement medical benefits.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 165 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 166 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Sharebased payments The Company operates sharebased incentive arrangements for the executive directors senior executives and other eligible employees under which awards and options are granted over the Companys ordinary shares.
All of the arrangements under which awards and options were outstanding during the 2017 and 2016 fina ncial years are classified as equitysettled.
During the year the compensation expense recognised in profit or loss in respect of sharebased incentives was 21 million 2016  9 million.
The following arrangements existed during the period a Performance Share Plan The Groups principal ongoing sharebased incentive arrangement is the Performance Share Plan PSP.
Participation in the PSP i s restricted to the executive directors and other senior executives.
Awards made under the PSP normally vest provided the partici pant remains in the Groups employment until the end of the perfor mance period and subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions.
The conditions applicable to PSP awards made from 1 April 2016 relate to the achievement of the Group adjusted return on capita l employed ROCE and adjusted profit targets.
Up to 50% of ea ch award vests dependent on the Groups adjusted ROCE from continuing operations reaching specified levels at the end of th e performance period.
Up to 25% of each award vests dependent o n the compound annual growth in the Groups adju sted profit before tax with the remainin g 25% from compound annual growth of the Speciality Food Ingredients business adjusted operating profit excluding SPLENDA
The conditions applicable to PSP awards made prior to 31 March 2016 relate to the achievement of earnings per share EPS and return on capital employed ROCE targets.
Up to 50% of each award vests dependent on the co mpound annual growth rate of the Groups adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations reaching specified levels over the performance period.
Up to 50% of eac h award vests dependent on the Groups adjusted ROCE from continuing operations reaching specified levels at the end of the performance period.
The performance period is the period of th ree financial years beginning with the financial year in which the award is granted.
Bonuses earned under the Group Bonus Plan are normally paid in cash up to 100% of the base salary of the participating executiv e.
Any excess above 100% of base salary is paid in the form of deferred shares that are released after two years subject to the executive remaining in the Groups employment.
During the vesting period payments in lieu of dividends are made in relation to the deferred shares.
Options are granted from time to time under the Companys Shares ave Plan which is open to all employees in the UK.
It offers eligible employees the option to buy shares in the Company after a period of three or five years funded from the proceeds of a savings contract to which they contribute on a monthly basis.
The exercise price reflects a discount to market value of up to 2 0%.
The Company has made Restricted Share Awards to a number of el igible employees.
Awards made normally vest provided the participant remains in the Groups employment during the performance period and other conditions specific to the individual awards are met.
During the year the Company has made a Conditional Share Award CSA to eligible employees.
Up to 50% of each award vests dependent on an adjusted Group profit after tax on continuing operations for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Up to 50% of each award vests dependent on the Groups adjusted ROCE from continuing operations as at 31 March 2017.
The award vests as soon as practicable after 31 March 2017 however some employees are subjec t to an additional retention period ending 31 March 2018.
Th e vesting level of the awards may be reduced in other circumstances specified at award.
Further information for these awards made in relation to exec utive directors a b and c only are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 74 to 97.
Movements in the year Movements in the awards outstanding during the year were as follows
Weighted average exercise price pence
Weighted average exercise price pence Outstanding at 1 April 10 607 961 10p 9 895 482 8p 3p Outstanding at 31 March 12 435 492 10p 10 607 961 Exercisable at 31 March 603 939 3p 548 530 The weighted average market price of the Companys ordinary shares on the dates on which awards were exercised during the year was 684p 2016  529p.
166 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 167 Sharebased payments continued Awards granted in the year During the year PSP awards were granted over 4177420 shares 2016  3502180 shares no Restricted Share Awards were granted 2016  166367 shares Conditional Share Awards were granted over 1474000 shares 2016  1515000 shares the deferred element of Group Bonus Plan awards were granted over 161503 shares 2016  nil and Sharesave options were granted over 62429 shares 2016  81417 shares.
The compensation expense recognised in relation to these awards is based on the fair value of the awards at their respective grant dates.
The weighted average fair values of the awards granted during the year and the principal assumptions made in measuring those fair values were as follows Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 PSP Sharesave CSA PSP
CSA
Fair value at grant date Principal assumptions Share price on grant date Expected life of the awards 3 years 3.35.3 years years 3 years years years Riskfree interest rate 0.37% 0.76% 1.01% 1.40% Dividend yield on the Companys shares 3.87% 4.20% 4.51% 4.61% 4.74% 5.56% Volatility of the Companys shares na 25% na na 25% na In addition deferred shares issued under the Group Bonus Plan during the year have an expected life of 2.0 years with a fair v alue at the grant date of 614p.
No deferred shares were issued under the Group Bonus Plan during the prior year.
The fair value of the awards was measured using the BlackScholes option pricing formula taking into account factors such as nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
Expected volatility was based on the historical volatility of the market price of the Companys shares over the expected life of the awards.
Awards outstanding at the end of the year The range of exercise prices and the weighted average remaining contractual life of the awards outstanding at the end of the ye ar were as follows At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016 Exercise price
Weighted average contractual life months
Weighted average contractual life months STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 167 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 168 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Provisions and contingent liabilities
Insurance
Restructuring and closure provisions Other provisions
At 1 April Year ended 31 March 2016 Provided in the year Released in the year   1 Utilised in the year   9 Exchange and other movements 2  1 At 31 March Year ended 31 March 2017 Provided in the year Released in the year 1 1 Utilised in the year 5 14 Exchange and other movements At 31 March At 31 March Provisions are expected to be utilised as follows within one year after more than one year
Provisions primarily relate to Group legal matters and previously disposed businesses restructuring and closure provisions relating to restructuring within the Group and insurance funds representing amounts provided by the Groups captive insurance subsidiary in respect of the expected level of insurance claims.
All provisions are expected to be utilised within five years.
The difference between the carrying value and the discou nted present value was not material in either year.
Contingent liabilities Passaic River The Group remains subject to a legal case arising from the noti fication in 2007 by the U.
En vironmental Protection Agency USEPA that Tate and Lyle along with approximately 70 others is a potentially responsible party PRP for a 17 mile secti on of the northern New Jersey Passaic River a major Superfund site.
In March 2016 the USEPA issued its Record of Decision ROD on the likely cost for the remediation of the lower eight mile section of the river the most contaminated.
Whilst Tate and Lyle will c ontinue to vigorously defend itself in this matter in light of the publication of the ROD the Group took an exceptional charge of 6 mil lion in the year ended 31 March 2016.
The Group continues to be unable to estimate a reasonably possible range of loss in respect of the remaining nine mile section of the river and therefore has not recognised a provision in this regard.
Other claims The Group is subject to claims and litigation generally arising in the ordinary course of its business some of which are for substantial amounts.
All such actions are st renuously defended but provision is made for liabilities that are considered likely to arise on the basis of current information and legal advice.
While there is always uncertainty as to the outcome of any claim or litigation it is not expected that claims and litigation existing at 31 March 2017 will have a material adverse effect on the Groups financial position.
168 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 169
Capital commitments At 31 March Commitments for the purchase of intangible assets Commitments for the purchase of property plant and equipment 25 Total 25 In addition commitments in respect of retirement benefit obligations are detailed in Note 30.
Operating lease arrangements Operating lease payments represent rentals payable by the Group for certain of its land buildings plant and equipment.
Certai n operating lease agreements allow for renewal at the end of the original term at the option of the Group.
At the yearend date the Group has outstanding commitments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows At 31 March Within one year 34 Between one year and five years 116 After five years 168 Total 318 Acquisitions and disposals Completion of Moroccan disposal On 1 June 2016 the Group completed the sale of its corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco to ADM receiving gross cash proceeds of 4 million 3 million net after cash disposed.
The investment had previously been classified as held for sale at 31 March 2016 .
The
Group recognised an operating exceptional impairment charge of 4 million in the year ended 31 March 2016 aligning book value with expected proceeds after allowing for working capital and cash extracted from the business before completion.
In the curren t financial year the Group recognised a 1 million exceptional gain resulting from the recycling of cumulative foreign exchange translation gains from reserves to the income statement upon disposal of the subsidiary.
During the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group recognised an exceptional tax charge of 5 million within discontinued operation s in respect of historical tax matters in Morocco.
Completion of Howbetter disposal On 23 December 2016 the Group completed the disposal of Jian gsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd its Food Systems subsidiary in China recognising a 7 million operating exceptio nal charge within other expenses in respect of impairing and deconsolidating the entity prior to disposal and associated costs see Note 7.
Eaststarch realignment Update in current financial year During the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group concluded its pu rchase price allocation in respect of the acquisition of the remaining 50% of the plant in Slovakia Amylum Slovakia s. subsequently renamed Tate and Lyle Boleraz s.
The Group recognised a 1 million increase to the provisional goodwill that was recognised at 31 March 2016 following a remeasurement of net assets acquired.
Eaststarch realignment made during the year ended 31 March 2016 On 31 October 2015 the Group completed the realignment of its Eaststarch joint venture with ADM.
Under the realignment the Group disposed of the predominantly bulk ingredients plants in Bulgaria Turkey and Hungary and acquired the remaining 50% interest in the more speciality food ingredients focused plant in Slovakia not already owned by the Group.
The Group received n et cash consideration of 173 million 240 million at closing.
Although the cash consideration was received as a single net am ount IFRS required this consideration to be grossedup to determine the cash effectively paid to acquire the 50% interest in the Slovakia business and the cash received for the disposal of the Groups interests in the plants in Bulgaria Turkey and Hungary.
In addition as the acquisition of the Slovakian business was a step acquisition the Groups existing interest in this plant was required to be remeasured to its fair value which was then included as a component of the consideration paid for the acquisition.
This grossup of the net cash consideration was done at fair valu e.
The result was that consideration of 112 mi llion 156 million was deemed to be paid for the acquired business comprising 56 million 78 million of cash consideration and 56 million 78 million for the fair value of the Groups existing interest in
Each of the components of the Eaststarch realignment comprising the acquisition accounting for the Slovakia busines s the gain on remeasurement of the Groups existing interest in that plant and the disposal of the plants in Bulgaria Turkey an d Hungary are set out on pages 170 and 171.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 169 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 170 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Acquisitions and disposals continued Acquisition of Amylum Slovakia s.
As noted on the previous page as part of the realignment of the Eaststarch joint venture the Group acquired the remaining 50 % of the more speciality focused plant in Slovakia Amylum Slovakia s. and subsequently renamed it Tate and Lyle Boleraz s.
Total consideration in respect of the Slovakian acquisition was 115 million.
The fair value of identifiable net assets acquire d was 80 million resulting in provisional goodwill as at 31 March 2016 of 35 million which was not deductible for tax purposes.
The plant in Slovakia provides a solid base from which to grow the Groups Speciality Food Ingredients business in Europe and an opportunity to increase production at the plant over time.
Prov isional goodwill of 35 million primarily represented the premiu m paid to acquire an established business with a proven workforce and growth potential in the speciality food ingredients market.
At the same time two longterm distributi on agreements were also put in place under which the Group distributes crystalline fructose a speciality sweetener produced by ADM in Turkey an d ADM acts as exclusive distributor for bulk ingredients produce d in the Groups Slovakia and Netherlands facilities.
The acquired business in Slovakia contributed sales of 52 million and an operating profit of 2 million for the period from acquisition on 31 October 2015 until the end of the 2016 financia l year including the amortisation of acquired intangibles rec ognised from the acquisition.
Had the business been acquired at the beginning of the 2016 financial year it would have contributed sa les of 130 million and an operating profit of 5 million in the 2016 financial year.
Acquisition related costs were recognised as part of the overall Eaststarch realignment transaction costs within exceptiona l items and in cash flows from operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
The following tables provide a summary of the acquisition accounting
Non cash consideration fair value of existing interest in Slovakian joint venture Purchase price adjustments Total consideration Less fair value of net assets acquired Provisional goodwill Cash flows Total consideration including purchase price adjustments Less net cash and working capital adjustments Acquisition of business net of cash acquired The fair value of net assets acquired is comprised as follows Book value on acquisition Fair value adjustments Intangible assets customer relationships 20 million distribution agreement 9 million Property plant and equipment 48 1 Inventories 9 Trade and other receivables 9 Cash and cash equivalents 6 Trade and other payables 10 Tax liabilities deferred tax liability 6 million 4 6 Net assets on acquisition 58 22 Subsequently amended in the year ended 31 March 2017 see Eaststarch realignment earlier in this note.
170 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 171 Acquisitions and disposals continued Disposals made during the year ended 31 March 2016 As a result of the Eaststarch realignment the Group exited the predominantly bulk ingredient plants in Bulgaria Turkey and
The realignment of the Groups interest in Eaststarch resulted in a gain on remeasurementdisposal of 73 million.
Note
50% Interest in Slovakia Other Eaststarch plants Consideration 56 229 Purchase price adjustments 2 11 Total consideration 58 240 Total assets disposed Foreign exchange recycled from other comprehensive income  34 Disposal cost 1 5 Gain on remeasurementdisposal  reported within exceptional items Cash flows Disposal of joint ventures Transaction costs within exceptional cash flow Net cash inflow on disposals Exceptional gain on remeasurementdisposal reported as follows
Remeasurement of interest in Slovakia  continuing operations 7 Disposal of other Eaststarch joint ventures  discontinued operations 7 Total gain on remeasurementdisposal  exceptional items Events after the balance sheet date There were no post balance sheet events requiring disclosure in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 171 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 172 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Related party disclosure Identity of related parties The Group has related party relationships with its joint ventur es and associates the Groups pension schemes and with key management being its Directors and executive officers.
No relate d party transaction with close family members of the Groups k ey management occurred in the current or comparative year.
Subsidiaries joint ventures and associates Transactions entered into by the Company Tate and Lyle PLC with subsidiaries and between subsidiaries as well as the resultant balances of receivables and payables are eliminated on consolid ation and are not required to be disclosed.
Transactions and balances with and between joint ventures are as shown be low.
There are no such transactions with associates.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group disposed of and therefore ceased to have related party transactions with two of its subsidiaries.
The Group disposed of its equi ty interest in Jiangsu Tate and Lyle Howbetter Food Co.
Ltd. its Food Systems busin ess in
The Group also completed the disposal of its interest in its corn wet mill in Casablanca Morocco.
There were no other material changes in related parties or in the nature of relate d party transactions during the year.
Further details can be foun d in Note 34.
In the year ended 31 March 2016 the Group realigned its Eaststa rch joint venture and therefore ceased to have related party transactions with it.
Year ended 31 March Sales of goods and services to joint ventures 133 Purchases of goods and services from joint ventures At 31 March
Payables due to joint ventures The Group had no material related party transactions containi ng unusual commercial terms in the current or prior year.
Key management compensation is disclosed in Note 10.
There were no other related party transactions with key management.
Currency exchange rates The principal exchange rates used to translate the results asse ts and liabilities and cash flows of the Groups foreign operations into pounds sterling were as follows Year ended 31 March Average rate US dollar 1.30 Euro 1.19 At 31 March Yearend rate US dollar 1.25 Euro 1.17 172 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 173 Full listing of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates Subsidiaries based in the United Kingdom Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address Astaxanthin Manufacturing Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Cesalpinia UK Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom
Hahn and Company Limited Blending 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Hahntech International Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Harvey Steel Sugars Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Histonpark Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Robinson Milling Systems Tewkesbury
Dormant 100 100 1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom
Pension Nominees Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Export Holdings Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Group Services Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Holdings Americas Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Holdings Limited Dormant 100 100 1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Industrial Holdings Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Industries Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle International Finance PLC Inhouse treasury company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Investments Gulf States
Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Investments America Limited Holding comp any 100 100 1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Investments Brazil Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Investments Limited Holding company 100 100 1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle L.
Investment
100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Overseas Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Pension Trust Limited Pension company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Share Shop Limited Dormant 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Technology Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle UK Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Ventures II LP
100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Ventures Limited Holding company 100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom Tate and Lyle Ventures LP
100  1 Kingsway London WC2B 6AT United Kingdom 1 Registered in England and Wales except Tate and Ly le L. which is registered in Delaware USA.
2 Direct subsidiaries of Tate and Lyle PLC.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 173 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 174 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Full listing of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates continued Subsidiaries operating overseas Country of incorporation or registration
Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address
Tate and Lyle Argentina SA SFI distribution and sales support 100  San Martn 140 14th Floor City of Buenos Aires
Australia
Tate and Lyle ANZ Pty Limited Food Systems production and SFI distribution 100  Building 2 1425 Boundary Road Wacol QLD 4076
Belgium
Tate and Lyle Services Belgium N.
Internal service provider and sales support 100  Industrielaan 4 box 101 9320 Aalst Belgium
Tate and Lyle Management and Finance Limited Reinsurance 100  Canons Court 22 Victoria Street Hamilton Bermuda
Tate and Lyle Brasil S.
Citric acid production and SFI distribution 100  Santa Rosa do Viterbo State of So Paulo Fazenda Amlia So Paulo 14270000 Brazil
Hahn and Co.
Estabilizantes e Tecnologia para Alimentos Ltda.
Dormant 100  Rua Sapetuba N 211 CEP 001 Vila Pirajussara Estado de So Paulo Brazil Tate and Lyle Brasil Holdings
Holding company 100  Rodovia Santa Rosa Cajuru Km 6 Fazenda Amalia Santa Rosa de Viterbo Sao Paulo 14270000 Brazil Tate and Lyle Gemacom Tech Indstria e Comrcio S.
Food Systems production and support 90  No.
380 Distrito Industrial City of Juiz de Fora State of Minas Gerais at Rua B 36092 050 Brazil
Tate and Lyle Ingredients Canada Limited SFI sales support 100  Suite 400 Phoenix Square 371 Queen Street Fredericton NB E3B 1B1 Canada
Tate and Lyle Chile Commercial Ltda SFI distribution and sales support 100  Isidora Goyenechea 2800 Piso 43 Las Condes Santiago
China
Tate and Lyle Trading Shanghai Co.
Ltd
SFI distribution and sales support 100  Room 201 2F XingLian Scientific Research Building 2 1535 Hong Mei Road Shanghai  China
Hahn and Co.
Food
Stabiliser Business Shanghai Ltd Food Systems sales 100  Room 201 2F XingLian Scientific Research Building 2 1535 Hong Mei Road Shanghai  China Tate and Lyle Food Ingredients Nantong Company Limited Polydextrose production 100  New and HiTech Industrial Development District Rudong county Nantong city China
Tate and Lyle Colombia S.
SFI distribution and sales support 100  Calle 11 100121 Off 309 Cali Colombia
G.
Hahn and Co. d.
Za distribuciju stabilizacionih sistema Food Systems sales 100  Donji Banovec 15 Koprivnica 48000 Croatia
Republic
G.
Hahn and Co. technika s.
Food Systems sales 100  Ostravsk 169 339 01 Klatovy IV Czech Republic
Tate and Lyle Egypt LLC Dormant 100  87 Street 9 Maadi  Cairo
France
G.
Hahn and Cie.
SARL
Food System s sales 100  113 Chemin de Ronde Croissy III  Batiment 3 78290 CroissySurSeine France 174 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 175 Full listing of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates continued Subsidiaries operating overseas continued Country of incorporation or registration
Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address Tate and Lyle Ingredients France S.
Research and development centre and SFI sales support 2 Avenue de LHorizon 59650 VilleneuveDAscq France
G.
Hahn and Co.
Stabilisierungstechnik
GmbH
Food Systems research and development and SFI sales support Roggenhorster Strasse 31 23556 Lbeck Germany
Hahn and Co.
Cooperationsgesellschaft mbH Holding company 100 Roggenhorster Strasse 31 23556 Lbeck Germany HAHN International GmbH Dorman t 100 Roggenhorster Strasse 31 23556 Lbeck Germany HL Handelskontor GmbH Dorman t 100 Roggenhorster Strasse 31 23556 Lbeck Germany Tate and Lyle Germany GmbH SFI sales support 100 Roggenhorster Strasse 31 23556 Lbeck Germany
Tate and Lyle Insurance Gibraltar Limited Reinsurance 100 Suite 913 Europort Gibraltar
Tate and Lyle Greece A.
SFI sa les support 95 54248 Thessaloniki K.
Papadaki 69 Greece
Tate and Lyle Investments India Private Ltd Dormant 100 C367 Defense Colony New Delhi 110 024 India
Tate and Lyle Israel Limited Dorm ant 100 16 Hatidhar st Raannana Raanana 4088 Israel Gamtal Foods Ltd Dormant 65 7 Anatot Tel Aviv Jaffa
Italy
Tate and Lyle Italia S.
Food Systems production and SFI sales support Via Verdi 1Ossona Milano
Japan
Tate and Lyle Japan KK SFI distribution 100 2F Oak MinamiAzabu Building 31923 MinamiAzabu Minatoku Tokyo Japan
UAB G.
Hahn and Co.
Food Systems sales 100
Simkunaites Str.
Vilnius LT04130 Lithuania
Tate and Lyle Mxico S.
R. de C.
SFI distribution and sales support Insurgentes Sur 863 Piso 12 Colonia Npoles 03810
Mexama S. de C.
Dormant 65 Calle lago de tequesquitengo No 111 Col.
Cuahutemoc C.
62430  Morelos Mxico Talo Services Internal service provider 100 Insurgentes Sur 863 Piso 12 Colonia Npoles 03810 D.
Mxico
Morocco
TandL Casablanca S.
SFI sales support 100 22 Rue du Parc Casa Thtre Centre Anfa Casablanca
Netherlands
Nederlandse Glucose Industrie B.
Holding companytel KA Kong aan de Zaan Lage dijk 5 The Netherlands Tate and Lyle Netherlands
BI and SFI production 100 1541 KA Kong aan de Zaan Lage dijk 5 The Netherlands
G.
Hahn and Co.
Technika stabilizowania Sp. o.
Dormant 100 ul.
Bagienna 1 Chyby k.
Poznania 62081 Przezmierowo Poland STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 175 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued 176 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Full listing of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates continued Subsidiaries operating overseas continued Country of incorporation or registration
Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address Tate and Lyle Global Shared Services Sp. o.
Internal service provider 100  Sterlinga 8A 91425 d  Poland Tate and Lyle Poland o.
SFI sales support 100  Sterlinga 8A 91425 d  Poland
Federation
Tate and Lyle CIS LLC Food Systems sales 100  Leninskaya Sloboda26 Area 2 Room 100  Moscow Russian
Singapore
Tate and Lyle Asia Pacific
Ltd.
SFI sales and ASPAC regional head office 100  3 Biopolis Drive 0511 Synapse
Tate and Lyle Singapore Pte Ltd Sucralose production now decommissioned 100  One Marina Boulevard 2800
Tate and Lyle Singapore Holdings Pte Ltd Holding company 100  One Marina Boulevard 2800
Slovakia
Tate and Lyle Boleraz s.
BI and SFI prod uction 100  Boleraz 114 91908 Boleraz Slovakia Tate and Lyle Slovakia s.
Internal service provider 100  Boleraz 114 91908 Boleraz Slovakia South Africa Tate and Lyle South Africa Proprietary
Food Systems production and SFI distribution 100  1 Gravel Drive Kya Sands Business Park Kya Sands 2163 South Africa
G.
Hahn Estabilizantes y Tecnologia para
Food Systems sales 100  Av.
Valencia 15 46171 Casinos Valencia Spain Ebromyl S.
Dormant
100  Paseo Independencia 6 PLT 3 50004 Zaragoza Zaragoza Spain Talan Iberica SA
100  28 Raimundo Fernndez Villaverde 28003 Madrid Spain
Tate and Lyle Sweden AB Oat protein and Beta Glucan production 100  lvsvgen 1 610 20 Kimstad Sweden
Tate and Lyle Turkey Gda Hizmetleri Anonim irketi SFI sales support 100  Esentepe Mah.
Bykdere Cad.
Plaza Kat 2 193  235A14 i li stanbul
Ukraine
PII G.
Hahn and Co.
Kiev
Food Systems sales 100  Mala Olexandriwka ZentralnaStr.
2B Borispol 08320KIEW UKRAINE United Arab
Tate and Lyle DMCC Food Systems and SFI sales support 100  Cluster X Tower X3 Office n.
3805.
Jumeira Lake Towers Dubai United Arab Emirates
Staley Holdings LLC Holding company 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Custom Ingredients LLC Food Systems production 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Finance LLC Inhouse finance 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States TLHUS Inc.
Holding company 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Ingredients Americas LLC BI and SFI production 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Sucralose
Sucralose production 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States TLI Holding LLC Inhouse finance 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Domestic
Sales Corporation Internal service provider 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States 176 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 177 Full listing of subsidiaries joint ventures and associates continued Subsidiaries operating overseas continued Country of incorporation or registration
Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address Tate and Lyle Grain Inc.
Grain products 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Malic Acid
Dormant
100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Sugar Holdings Inc.
Holding company 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Americas
Internal service provider 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Tate and Lyle Citric Acid
Citric acid production 100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States Staley International Inc.
Cereal sweeteners and starches LaSalle Street Suite 814 Chicago IL  United States
C.
Hahn USA LLC
100  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States 1 Noncoterminous yearend.
2 Direct subsidiaries of Tate and Lyle PLC.
Joint ventures Country of incorporation or registration
Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address
Almidones Mexicanos
BI and SFI production 50  Calle 26 No.
2756 Zona Industrial Guadalajara Jal.
44940 Mexico Promotora de Productos y Mercados Mexicanos de C.
BI and SFI production 50  Calle 26 No.
2756 Zona Industrial Guadalajara Jal.
44940 Mexico
Eastern Sugar B.
Holding company 50  Zwanebloem 31 4823 MV Breda The Netherlands
DuPont Tate and Lyle Bio Products Company LLC Industrial ingredients 50  1209 North Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 United States 1 Noncoterminous yearend.
Associates
Country of incorporation or registration
Type of business Percentage of ordinary shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Percentage of preference shares attributable to Tate and Lyle PLC Registered address
Tapioca Development
Starch production 33.3  8th floor Thai Wah Tower 1 2119 South Sathorn Rd.
Tungmahamek
Sathorn Bangkok 10120 Thailand 1 Direct associate of Tate and Lyle PLC.
The results assets and liabilities and cash flows of those enti ties whose financial years are not coterminous with that of the Group are consolidated or equity accounted in the Groups financ ial statements on the basis of management accounts for the year to 31 March.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 177 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Tate and Lyle PLC 178 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Report on the Parent Company financial statements Our opinion In our opinion Tate and Lyle PLCs Parent Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 March have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
What we have audited The financial statements included within the Annual Report comprise the Parent Company Balance Sheet as at 31 March 2017 the Parent Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These are crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Other required reporting Consistency of other information and compliance with applicable requirements Companies Act 2006 opinion In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
ISAs UK and Ireland reporting Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Parent Company acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Adequacy of accounting records and information and explanations received Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Directors remuneration
Directors Remuneration Report
Companies Act 2006 opinion In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Other Companies Act 2006 reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Our responsibilities and those of the Directors As explained more fully in the Directors Statement of Responsibilities set out on page 99 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and ISAs UK and
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Parent Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
What an audit of financial statements involves We conducted our audit in accordance with ISAs UK and Ireland.
An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Parent Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
Other matter We have reported separately on the Group financial statements of Tate and Lyle PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017.
John Waters Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
24 May 2017 The maintenance and integrity of the Tate and Lyle PLC website site is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
178 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Parent Company Balance Sheet site 179 At 31 March
ASSETS
Fixed assets Tangible fixed assets 2 2 Intangible assets 3 3 Investments in subsidiary undertakings Investments in associates 5 4 Total Current assets
Cash at bank Creditors  amounts falling due within one year 7 1 314 Net current assets 240 Total assets less current liabilities Creditors  amounts falling due after more than one year 8 2 Net assets Capital and reserves Called up share capital Share premium account 406 Capital redemption reserve 8 Retained earnings 744 Total shareholders funds The Company recognised profit for the year of 298 million 2016  260 million.
The Parent Companys financial statements on pages 179 to 186 were approved by the Board of Directors on 24 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Javed Ahmed Nick Hampton
The notes on pages 181 to 186 form part of these financial statements.
Tate and Lyle PLC Registered number 76535 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 179 Parent Company Statement of Changes in Equity 180 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Called up share capital
Capital redemption reserves
Total equity At 1 April tel8 446 Year ended 31 March 2016 Profit for the year Purchase of own shares Sharebased payments Ordinary dividends paid At 31 March telYear ended 31 March 2017 Profit for the year Purchase of own shares Sharebased payments Ordinary dividends paid At 31 March telAt 31 March 2017 the Company had realised profits available for distribution in excess of 625 million.
180 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements site 181 Principal accounting policies Basis of preparation Tate and Lyle PLC the Company is a public limited company incorporated in the United Kingdom and registered in England.
The Companys ordinary shares are listed on the London Stock
The Companys financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and with UK accounting presentation as at 31 March 2017 with comparative figures as at 31 March 2016.
For the reasons set out on page 111 the Companys financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis.
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Companys profit and loss account is not presented in these financial statements.
Profit and loss account disclosures are presented in Note 13.
The results of the Company are included in the preceding Group financial statements.
The following exemptions from the requirements of IFRS have been applied in the preparation of these financial statements in accordance with FRS 101 the requirements of IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows the requirements of paragraph 17 and 18a of IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures the requirements in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group provided that any subsidiary which is a party to the transaction is wholly owned by such a member the requirement in paragraph 38 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements to present comparative information in respect of paragraph 79aiv of IAS 1 the requirements of IFRS 7 Financial Instruments
Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors the requirements of IFRS 2 Share Based Payments the requirements of paragraphs 91 to 99 of IFRS 13 Fair Value
111 statement of cash flows and 134 to 136 capital management of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements.
The Company intends to maintain these disclosure exemptions in future years.
Judgements and key sources of uncertainty Estimating fair value for sharebased transactions requires determination of the most appropriate valuation model which depends on the terms and conditions of the grant.
This estimation also requires determination of the most appropriate inputs to the valuation model.
Tangible fixed assets Tangible fixed assets are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment.
Historical cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the expenditure will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
All repairs and maintenance expenditures are charged to the income statement during the period in which they are incurred.
Depreciation is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost of each asset to its residual value over its useful economic life.
Residual values and useful lives are reviewed at each periodend date and adjusted as appropriate with any resulting changes recognised in the income statement prospectively.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the disposal proceeds with the carrying amount and are included in the income statement.
Intangible assets Other intangible assets comprise certain computer software and the global ISIT system.
Costs incurred on the development design and testing of the software and systems are capitalised only when their technical feasibility has been proven.
Costs associated with maintenance are charged to the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Other
Investments
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Company has control.
The Company controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
An associate is an entity over which the Company has significant influence.
Significant influence is the power to participate in financial and operating policy decisions but not to control or jointly control them.
Investments in subsidiary undertakings and in associates represent interests that are directly owned by the Company and are stated at cost less amounts writtenoff for any permanent diminution in value.
Amounts owed by or to subsidiary undertakings Amounts owed by or to subsidiary undertakings are stated at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings are written off where deemed unrecoverable.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 181 Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements continued 182 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Principal accounting policies continued
Operating lease payments are charged to the profit and loss account on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Retirement benefits The Company participates in a defined benefit pension scheme in which certain of its subsidiaries also participate.
The
Company which is not the principa l employer cannot identify its share of the underlying assets and liabilities of the scheme.
Accordingly as permitted by IAS 19 Employee Benefits the Company accounts for the scheme as a defined contribution scheme and charges its contributions to the scheme to the profit and loss account in the periods in which they fall due.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all temporary differences that have originated but which have not reversed at the balance sheet date where transactions or events have occurred at that date that will result in an obligation to pay more or a right to pay less or to receive more tax.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that they are regarded as recoverable.
Assets are regarded as recoverable when it is regarded as more likely than not there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
Foreign currency translation Transactions denominated in foreign currencies are translated into pounds sterling at the exchan ge rate ruling on the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated into pounds sterling at the exchange rate ruling on the balance sheet date.
Currency translation differences are credited or charged to the profit and loss account.
Nonmonetary assets denominated in foreign currencies and carried at historic al cost are translated using the exchange rate ruling on the date of transaction.
Sharebased payments As described in Note 31 to the consolidated financial statements the Company operates sharebased incentive plans under which it grants awards over its ordinary shares to its own employees and to those of its subsidiary undertakings.
All of the awards granted under the existing plans are classified as equitysettled awards.
For awards granted to its own employees the Company recognises an expense that is based on the fair value of the awards measured at the grant date using the BlackScholes option pricing formula.
Fair value reflects any market performance conditions and all nonvesting conditions.
Adjustments are made to the compensation expense to reflect actual and expected forfeitures due to failure to satisfy service conditions or nonmarket performance conditions.
Generally the expense is recognised in the profit and loss account on a straightline basis over the vesting period and a corresponding credit is recognised in the profit and loss account reserve.
For awards granted to employees of its subsidiary undertakings the Company recognises a capital contribution to the subsidiary and a corresponding credit to equity calculated on the same basis as the expense that it recognises for awards to its own employees.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Company has a present obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that a transfer of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Guarantees
From time to time the Company provides guarantees to third parties in respect of the indebtedness of its subsidiary undertakings and joint ventures.
The Directors consider these guarantees to be insurance arrangements and therefore the Company recognises a liability in respect of such guarantees only in the event that it becomes probable that the guarantee will be called upon and the Company will be required to make a payment to the third party.
Commitments in respect of retirement benefit obligations are detailed in Note 14.
Own shares Own shares represent the Companys ordinary shares that are held by the Company in treasury or by a sponsored Employee Benefit Trust that are used to satisfy awards made under the Companys sharebased incentive plans.
When own shares are acquired the cost of purchase in the market is deducted from the profit and loss account reserve.
Gains or losses on the subsequent transfer or sale of own shares are also recognised in the profit and loss account reserve.
Dividends
Dividends on the Companys ordinary shares are recognised when they have been appropriately authorised and are no longer at the Companys discretion.
Accordingly interim dividends are recognised when they are paid and final dividends are recognised when they are declared following approval by shareholders at the Companys AGM.
Dividends are recognised as an appropriation of shareholders funds.
Details of dividends paid and proposed are set out in Note 12.
Dividend income received from subsidiary companies is recognised when the right to receive the payment is established.
182 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 183 Tangible fixed assets Plant and machinery
At 1 April 2016
At 31 March 2017 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April 2016 Depreciation charge
At 31 March 2017 Net book value at 31 March 2016 Net book value at 31 March 2017 Intangible assets
Cost
At 1 April 2016
At 31 March 2017 Accumulated amortisation At 1 April 2016 Amortisation charge At 31 March 2017 Net book value at 31 March 2016 Net book value at 31 March 2017 Investments in subsidiary undertakings
At 1 April 2016
At 31 March 2017
At 1 April 2016 Reversal of impairment At 31 March 2017 Net book value at 31 March 2016 Net book value at 31 March 2017 Investments in associates The Companys interest of ordinary shares in Tapioca Development Corporation a company incorporated in Thailand is 33.3% 2016  33.3%.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 183 Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements continued 184 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017
At 31 March Due within one year Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings Other debtors 3 Total The effective interest rate applicable to am ounts owed by subsidiary undertakings at 31 March 2017 is 1.8% 2016  2.3%.
Amoun ts owed by subsidiary undertakings are receivable on de mand.
There is no security for nontrading amounts.
Creditors  amounts falling due within one year At 31 March Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings Other creditors 6 Accruals and deferred income 16 Total The effective interest rate applicable to amounts owed to su bsidiary undertakings at 31 March 2017 was 2.3% 2016  2.7%.
Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakin gs are repayable on demand.
There is no security for nontrading amounts.
Creditors  amounts falling due after more than one year At 31 March Total 2 On a return of capital on a windingup the holders of 6.5% cumulative preference shares shall be entitled to 1 per share in preference to all other classes of shareholders.
Holders of these shares are entitled to vote at meetings except on the follow ing matters any question as to the disposal of the surplus profits after the dividend on these shares has been provided for the e lection of directors their remuneration any agreement between the dire ctors and the Company or the alteration of the Articles of Association dealing with any such matters.
Contingent liabilities At 31 March 2017 the Company had given guarantees in respect of longterm bonds bank facilities and a US Commercial Paper Programme of certain of its subsidiaries and joint ventures totalling 2117 million 2016  2227 million against which amo unts drawn totalled 700 million 2016  730 million.
The Company ha d given guarantees in respect of operating lease commitments of certain of its subsidiaries and joint ventures totalling 288 mi llion 2016  270 million.
The Company provides other guarant ees in the normal course of business.
The Company has assessed the prob ability of material loss under these guarantees as remote.
In addition commitments in respect of retirement benefit obligations are detailed in Note 14.
Financial commitments Operating lease rentals payable during the ye ar were 1 million 2016  1 million all in respect of land and buildings.
At 3 1 March 2017 the Company has outstanding commitments under nonca ncellable operating leases which fall due as follows At 31 March Within one year 1 Between one year and five years 6 After five years 6 Total 13 At 31 March 2017 the Company had outstanding capital commitments of nil 2016  nil.
184 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 site 185 Share capital and share premium Allotted called up and fully paid equity share capital 2017 2016
Cost
Number of shares
At 1 April 46tel46telAllotted under share option schemes At 31 March 46tel46telSee Note 22 in the consolidated financial statements for details of treasury shares and shares held in the Employee Benefit Tru st.
Dividends on ordinary shares Dividends on ordinary shares in respect of the financial year Year ended 31 March pence pence Per ordinary share interim dividend paid 8.2 final dividend proposed 19.8 Total dividend 28.0 The Directors propose a final dividend for the financial year of 19.8p per ordinary share that subject to approval by sharehol ders will be paid on 1 August 2017 to shareholders who are on the Register of Members on 30 June 2017.
Dividends on ordinary shares paid in the year Year ended 31 March Final dividend paid relating to the prior year Interim dividend paid relating to the yea r Total dividend paid 130 Based on the number of ordinary shares outstanding at 31 March 2017 and the proposed amount the final dividend for the financi al year is expected to amount to 92 million.
Profit and loss account disclosures The Company recognised a profit for the year of 298 million 2016  260 million.
Fees payable to the Companys external auditors PricewaterhouseC oopers LLP for the audit of the Companys financial statement s amounted to 0.1 million 2016  0.1 million.
The Company employed an average of 149 people including Directors during the year 2016  133.
Staff costs are shown below Year ended 31 March Wages and salaries Social security costs 5 Other pension costs 2 Sharebased incentives 8 Total 41 Directors emoluments disclosures are provided in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 74 to 97 and in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements.
No deferred tax assets have been recognised in respect of tax losses of 341 million as there is uncertainty as to whether taxa ble profits against which these assets may be recovered will be available.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 185 Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements continued 186 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Employee benefits Plan information The Company participates in a defined benefit plan together with another subsidiary company Tate and Lyle Industries Ltd.
Paymen ts made by contributing companies principally comprise funding contributions agreed with the trustees that are determined to ensur e that appropriate funding levels are maintained and funding defici ts are eliminated over a reasonable period of time.
The plan is closed to new entrants and future accruals.
The Company has 342 pensioners and deferred pensioners out of a total membership of circa 5800 excluding dependent beneficiaries.
The Company also operates a defined contribution pension plan.
Contributions payable by the Company to the plan during the year amounted to 2 million 2016  1 million.
The Company has provided a full liability guarantee in respect of the pension obligations of Tate and Lyle Industries Ltd the ot her participating employer.
Whilst there is no agreed allocation of deficit or surplu s the trustees have discretion to distribute any surplus on winding up as they consider appropriate after increa se of benefits consistent with Inland Revenue Limits which appl ied up to 5 April 2006.
Funding commitments of the plan As required by UK regulations actuarial valuations are carried out at least every th ree years.
Core funding contributions are 12 million per annum 2016  12 million.
In addition supplementary contributions of 6 million 2016  6 million will be made into a secured funding account until March 2023.
The deficit or surplus in the plan impacts the future contributions which are determined with reference to the triennial actuarial valuations.
For further details on the defined benefit plan see Note 30 in the consolidated financial statements.
186 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Group Fiveyear Summary site 187 Pre IFRS 11 Post IFRS 11 At 31 March Employment of capital Goodwill and intangible assets 35tel401 Property plant and equipment 95tel1 061 Other assets Working capital including provisions and nondebt derivatives 49tel394 Net pension deficit 265 220 227 Net assets held for sale excluding cash included in net debt 1 Net operating assets Investment in joint ventures and associates  Net debt 479 385 555 Net tax liability 65 75 71 Total net assets Capital employed Called up share capital 11tel117 Reserves 91tel Noncontrolling interests  1 1 Pre IFRS 11 Post IFRS 11 Year ended 31 March Results summary Continuing operations Sales Adjusted operating profit 35tel264 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 10 10 9 Exceptional items 12 14 142 Operating profit Adjusted net finance expense 29 27 23 Net retirement benefit interest expense 4 8 8 Net finance expense 33 35 31 Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates  Profit before tax Income tax expensecredit 46 32 21 Profit for the year from continuing operations Profit for the year from discontinued operations Noncontrolling interests 1 Profit for the year attributable to owners of the Company Adjusted profit before tax 32tel271 Year 2013 presented on a proportionate consolidatio n basis for both statutory and adjusted metrics.
Years 20142017 prepared on an equity accounted basis for statutory and adjusted metrics.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 187 Group Fiveyear Summary continued 188 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Pre IFRS 11 Post IFRS 11 Year ended 31 March Per share informationtel Earnings per share continuing operations basic pence 54.9p 44.2p 0.9p diluted pence 53.8p 43.6p 0.8p Earnings per share total operations basic pence 58.6p 58.8p 6.6p adjusted basic pence 55.8p 56.5p 38.0p Earnings per share total operations diluted pence 57.4p 58.0p 6.5p adjusted diluted pence 54.7p 55.7p 37.7p Dividends per ordinary share pence 26.2p 27.6p 28.0p Closing share price at 31 March pence 850.0p 667.5p 597.5p Closing market capitalisation at 31 March million Business ratios Interest cover times Operating profit before exceptional items and amortisation of intangible assets divided by net finance expense Net debt to EBITDA times Net debt divided by preexceptional EBITDA Gearing 46% 37% 59% 42% 34% Net debt as a percentage of total net assets Adjusted operating margin 10.7% 10.0% 7.8% 7.9% 9.6% Adjusted operating profit as a percentage of sales Return on net operating assets 21.5% 21.7% 14.4% 13.1% 15.7% Profit before interest tax and exceptional items as a percentage of average net operating assets Dividend cover times Basic earnings per share divided by dividends per share Adjusted basic earnings per share divided by dividends per share Year 2013 presented on a proportionate consolidatio n basis for both statutory and adjusted metrics.
Years 20142017 prepared on an equity accounted basis for statutory and adjusted metrics.
1 Interest cover and net debt to EBITDA have been calculated usin g the same basis as set out in the Groups external financial co venants.
2 These metrics have been calculated using the results of both continuing and discontinued operations.
188 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Additional Information site 189 Calculation of changes in constant currency Where changes in constant currency are presented in this statement they are calculated by retranslating current year results a t prior year exchange rates.
This represents a change to the methodology applied in previous years which involved retranslating prior year results at current year exchange rates.
This change which has not had a material impact has been made to align with how the majority of external stakeholders view constant currency perfor mance comparisons.
The following tables provide reconciliation between 2017 performance at actual exchange rates and at constant currency exchange rates.
Absolute numbers presented in the tables are rounded for presentational purposes whereas the growth percentages are calculated on unrounded numbers.
Adjusted performance Continuing operations
2017 at constant currency
Change % Change in constant currency %
17% 2% Speciality Food Ingredients 21% 5% Bulk Ingredients 54% 32%
1% Adjusted operating profit 40% 18% Adjusted net finance expense 9% 2% Share of profit after tax of joint ventures and associates 16% 13% Adjusted profit before tax 40% 20% Adjusted income tax expense 55% 33% Adjusted profit after tax 37% 17% Adjusted diluted EPS pence 37% 16% STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 189 Information for Investors Shareholder enquiries Ordinary shares Equiniti Limited Information on how to manage your shareholdings can be found at site The website also provides answers to commonly asked shareholder questions and has links to downloadable forms guidance notes and Company history fact sheets.
You can also send your enquiry via secure email from the Shareview website.
Telephone enquiriestel for UK calls 44 0tel for calls from outside the UK 1 Lines open 8.30am to 5.30pm UK time Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Written enquiries Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA.
American Depositary Shares
The Bank of New York Mellon The Companys shares trade in the US on the overthecounter OTC market in the form of ADSs and these are evidenced by American Depositary Receipts ADRs.
The shares are traded under the ticker symbol TATYY.
Telephone enquiries 1tel for US calls 1tel for calls from outside the US Written enquiries BNY Mellon Shareowner Services PO Box 30170 College Station TX 778423170
Tate and Lyle website and share price information Tate and Lyles website provides direct links to other Group company sites and to sites providing financial and other information relevant to the Company.
The share price is available on the website with a 20minute delay.
Financial calendar 2017 Annual General Meeting 27 July 2017 Announcement of halfyear results for the six months to 30 September 2017 2 Nov 2017 Announcement of fullyear results for the year ending 31 March 2018 24 May 2018 2018 Annual General Meeting 26 July 2018 Dividends paid on ordinary shares during the year ended 31 March 2017 Payment date
Dividend per share 29 July 2016 Final 2016 19.8p 3 Jan 2017 Interim 2017 8.2p Dividend calendar for dividends on ordinary shares 2017 final 2018 interim 2018 final Announced 25 May 2017 2 Nov 2017 24 May 2018 Payment date 1 August 2017 5 Jan 2018 1 August 2018 1 Provisional date.
2 Subject to approval of shareholders.
Dividends paid on 6.5% cumulative preference shares Paid each 31 March and 30 September.
Capital gains tax The market values on 31 March 1982 for the purposes of indexation up to April 1998 in relation to capital gains tax of Tate and Lyle PLC shares then in issue were Ordinary share of 1 each 201.00p Equivalent value per ordinary share of 25p 50.25p 6.5% cumulative preference share 43.50p Electronic communications Shareholder documents are only sent in paper format to shareholders who have elected to receive documents in this way.
This approach enables the Company to reduce printing and distribution costs and the impact of the documents on the environment.
Shareholders who wish to receive email notification should register online at site using their shareholder reference number that is on either their share certificate or other correspondence.
Dividend payments Dividend reinvestment plan The Company operates a Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP which enables shareholders to use their cash dividend to buy additional shares in Tate and Lyle PLC.
Further information can be obtained from Equiniti.
Direct into your bank account We encourage shareholders to have their dividends paid directly into their bank or building society account dividend confirmations are then mailed to shareholders separately.
This method avoids the risk of dividend cheques being delayed or lost in the post.
If you live outside the UK Equiniti also offers an overseas payment service whereby your dividend is converted into your local currency.
Further information on mandating your dividend payments and the overseas payment service can be obtained from Equiniti.
Beware of share fraud Shareholders should be very wary of any unsolicited calls or correspondence offering to buy or sell shares at a discounted price.
These calls are typically from fraudsters operating boiler rooms.
Boiler rooms use increasingly sophisticated means to approach investors and often leave their victims out of pocket.
If you are concerned that you may have been targeted by fraudsters please contact the Financial Conduct Authority FCA Consumer Helpline ontel.
190 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 A
Ingredients such as citric acid that are used to add a sour taste to food and soft drinks and to act as a preservative.
Adjusted operating cash flow Adjusted operating cash flow is defined as adjusted free cash flow from continuing operations adding back net interest paid tax paid and retirement cash contributions and excluding derivative and margin call movements within working capital.
Adjusted operating profit
Operating profit as defined separately adjusted for amortisation of acquired intangible assets and net exceptional items.
Adjusted profit before tax
Profit before tax as defined separately adjusted for amortisation of acquired intangible assets net exceptional items and net retirement benefit interest.
BI
Bulk Ingredients division.
BioPDO
TM
Multipurpose monomer propanediol made from corn sugar as opposed to being made from a petrochemical source.
Used in cosmetics detergents carpets and textiles.
Capex
Capital expenditure.
Carbon dioxide equivalent
One metric tonne of carbon dioxide or an amount of any other greenhouse gas with an equivalent global warming potential calculated consistently with international carbon reporting practices.
CDP
CDP is an international environmental reporting and benchmarking organisation that holds and publishes the largest collection globally of selfreported climate change water and forestrisk data from companies and cities worldwide.
Through CDP investors companies and cities are better able to mitigate risk capitalise on opportunities and make investment decisions that drive action towards a more sustainable world.
CLARIA
Functional CleanLabel Starches.
Clean label A term used in the food and beverage industry generally to refer to shorter or simpler ingredient lists that appeal more to some consumers than those containing complex ingredients.
Interpretations may vary.
Commodities
Commodities include US ethanol and coproducts.
Constant currency Where changes in constant currency are presented they are calculated by retranslating current year results at prior year exchange rates.
This represents a change to the methodology applied in previous years which involved retranslating prior year results at current year exchange rates.
This change which has not had a material impact has been made to align with how the majority of external stakeholders view constant currency performance comparisons.
Reconciliations of the movement in constant currency have been included in the additional information on page 189.
Continuing operations Operations of the Group excluding any discontinued operations as defined separately.
Coproducts
Corn gluten feed corn gluten meal and corn oil.
Core Bulk Ingredients Bulk Ingredients excluding Commodities.
Corn gluten feed The largest Tate and Lyle coproduct used by dairy and beef cattle markets.
CSDs
Carbonated soft drinks.
Discontinued operations An operation is classified as discontinued if it is a component of the Group that i has been disposed of or meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale and ii represents a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations or will be disposed of as part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations.
DOLCIA PRIMA
Lowcalorie sugar that offers a superior new taste experience.
Food Systems The Tate and Lyle blending business which is part of SFI and which sources ingredients and uses them to develop bespoke combinations of ingredients for customers.
Greenhouse gas GHG Any of the following carbon dioxide
HFCS
High fructose corn syrup also called isoglucose in Europe.
ICD
Innovation and Commercial Development group supporting our two business divisions SFI and BI.
Glossary
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS USEFUL INFORMATION site 191 K
Crystalline
Fructose
A nutritive corn based sweetener.
Label friendly Denotes ingredients that when listed on product ingredient labels may appeal more to some consumers who show a preference for ingredients in food products which they feel are more transparent authentic simpler or easier to understand than alternatives which may be perceived by some consumers as being artificial chemical or in some way less authentic.
MULTIVANTAGE
Syrup
A lowsugar lowviscosity sweetener.
Natural
A natural description usually refers to a food ingredient that is present in nature and has been minimally processed.
However interpretations vary according to the different legal and regulatory landscape in different countries.
New Products New Products are products in the first seven years after launch.
Operating profit also referred to as profit before interest and tax PBIT Sales less net operating expense.
Primary capacity The processing capacity at the first stage of production in which the agricultural raw material enters the production process.
Profit before tax PBT Sales less net operating expense less net finance expense and including the Groups share of profit after tax of joint ventures.
PROMITOR
Soluble Fibre A prebiotic soluble fibre.
PromOat
Beta Glucan A soluble fibre made from wholegrain oats used to bring the health benefits of oat beta glucan to food and beverages.
REZISTA speciality food starch A modified starch made from waxy corn which builds and protects texture in foods.
SFI
Speciality Food Ingredients division.
SPLENDA
Sucralose
A zerocalorie sweetener the manufacturing process for which starts with sugar.
STALITE
Polydextrose
A soluble fibre with prebiotic properties made from corn and used to provide body and texture in reduced calorie noadded sugar and highfibre foods.
TASTEVA
Stevia Sweetener A zerocalorie sweetener made from stevia.
USDA
US Department of Agriculture.
Glossary continued 192 Tate and Lyle PLC Annual Report 2017 Definitionsexplanatory notes Nonreliance statement This Annual Report has been prepared solely to provide additional information to shareholders to assess the Groups strategy and the potential of that strategy to succeed and should not be relied upon by any other party or for any other purpose.
Cautionary statement This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements with respect to the financial condition results operations and businesses of Tate and Lyle PLC.
These statements and forecasts involve risk and uncertainty because they relate to events and depend upon circumstances that may occur in the future.
There are a number of factors that could cause actual results or developments to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements and forecasts.
Tate and Lyle PLC Tate and Lyle PLC is a public limited company listed on the London Stock Exchange and is registered in England and Wales.
More information about Tate and Lyle can be found on the Companys website site Basis of preparation Unless stated otherwise the Groups financial statements are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Amortisation
Unless stated otherwise the use of the word amortisation on pages 1 to 99 in this Annual Report relates to the amortisation of intangible assets acquired through business combinations.
Continuing operations Unless stated otherwise all comments in this Annual Report refer to the continuing operations adjusted to exclude exceptional items amortisation of intangible assets acquired through business combinations net retirement benefit interest and tax on the above items and tax items that themselves meet these definitions.
A reconciliation of reported and adjusted information is included in Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements.
Definitions
In this Annual Report Company means Tate and Lyle PLC Tate and Lyle Group we us or our means Tate and Lyle PLC and its subsidiaries Gemacom means Tate and Lyle Gemacom Tech Indstria e Comrcio
Almex means Almidones Mexicanos SA BioPDO means DuPont Tate and Lyle Bio Products Company LLC review during the year means review during the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
Environmental statement This Annual Report has been printed on UPM Fine offset a paper produced using wood fibre from fully sustainable forests with Forest Stewardship Council certification.
All pulps used are elemental chlorine free and the manufacturing mill holds the ISO 14001 and the EMAS accreditations for their environmental management systems.
Printed in the UK by Pureprint using vegetable inks and its Alcofree and Pureprint environmental printing technology.
Pureprint is a
System Standard ISO 14001 and is FSC chainofcustody certified.
If you have finished with this Annual Report and no longer wish to retain it please pass it on to other interested readers or dispose of it in your recycled paper waste.
The CO emissions from the production and distribution of this Annual Report have been offset through the purchase of carbon credits in the Pureprint Gold programme.
The offsets are always in Gold Standard accredited projects and currently come from the Basa Magogo project in South Africa.
The first Gold Standard project of its kind in the world this innovative behaviourchange programme teaches local communities in South Africa to burn coal more efficiently thereby reducing carbon emissions and reducing health risks by producing less smoke.
