REPORT AND ACCOUNTS YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 TELELCOM PLUS PLC NETWORK HQ  508 EDGWARE ROAD THE HYDE LONDON NW9 5AB REPORT AND ACCOUNTS YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 HOME PHONE BROADBAND MOBILE GAS ELECTRICITY HOME PHONE BROADBAND MOBILE GAS ELECTRICITY Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2015 2 COMPANY NUMBER REGISTERED OFFICE Network HQ 508 Edgware Road The Hyde London NW9 5AB
David Baxter ACA
Peel Hunt Ltd Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET JP Morgan Cazenove 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf London E14 5JP
Nabarro LLP 125 London Wall London EC2Y 5AL
KPMG LLP 15 Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5GL
Barclays Bank PLC 1 Churchill Place London E14 5HP Lloyds Bank PLC 25 Gresham Street London EC2V 7HN
Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU
Strategic Report Financial and Operating Highlights Our Values and Services 2
Chairmans Statement 4
Chief Executives Review 12
Markets 12 Business model 12 Strategy 13 Operational performance and nonfinancial KPIs 14
Financial Review 20
Principal Risks and Uncertainties 25 People and Organisation 31 Corporate Responsibility 34
Board of Directors 36
Corporate Governance Statement 38
Nomination Committee Report 45 Audit Committee Report 47
Directors Remuneration Report 51
Directors Report 74 Directors Responsibilities 80 Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report 82
Financial Statements 88 Notes to the Financial Statements 94 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 1 Revenue down 0.6% to 740.3 million due to lower energy prices 71.1m proceeds from sale of Opus shareholding Adjusted pretax profit continuing operations up 9.1% to 53.3 million Statutory pretax profit continuing operations up 16.5% to 40.9 million Adjusted EPS continuing operations up 7.2% to 53.3p Statutory EPS continuing operations up 15.9% to 38.0p Full year dividend up 4.3% to 48p Further organic growth in both services and Members Service numbers increase by 4.9% to 2.3 million Over 600000 Members Encouraging launch of Home
Over 1.7m LED bulbs provided and installed free of charge in over 40000 households throughout the UK Which 2017 Best Telecom Services Provider Awardtelteltel 2015 80% Increase on 2011 160% Increase on 2011 101% Increase onteltel Revenuetelteltel 2015 80% Increase on 2011 160% Increase on 2011 101% Increase onteltel Adjusted pretax profittelteltel 2015 80% Increase on 2011 160% Increase on 2011 101% Increase onteltel Services provided FINANCIAL AND OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS Financial years 2011  2014 are restated.
Adjusted pretax profit and EPS exclude share incentive scheme charges and the amortisation of intangible assets.
FY17 adjusted pretax profit 53.3m and EPS exclude share incentive scheme charges 1.2m amortisation of the energy supply contract intangible asset 11.2m and any contribution from the Companys former 20% shareholding in Opus Energy Group Limited Opus which was sold in February 2017 as a discontinued operation and for ease of comparability the contribution from Opus has therefore been excluded from profit before tax and EPS for FY17 and historic accounting periods.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 2 OUR VALUES AND SERVICES
ONE MONTHLY BILL FIXED TELEPHONY Our fixedline telephony service gives Members guaranteed savings on the cost of their line rental and call costs compared with all the major providers.
BROADBAND
A choice of highquality broadband services offering great value fast speeds and outstanding technical support for the vast majority of domestic internet users.
INSURANCE
We have recently started providing a branded home insurance service to Members offering competitive pricing and the convenience of paying their premiums monthly at no extra charge alongside all the utility services we are providing to them.
MOBILE
With a wide choice of handsets and competitive price plans our mobile phone service provides outstanding value and great savings.
We also offer a unique budget control option a loyalty discount free handset protection against loss or damage and a range of other benefits.
ONLINE SHOPPING We have over 3000 online shopping partners offering attractive extra savings of up to 20%.
Members choosing to take advantage of these offers by purchasing through our online Clubhouse will receive the extra discount as CashBack on their bill  irrespective of the means of payment they have chosen.
CASHBACK CARD An exclusive prepaid Mastercard giving our Members between 3% and 7% CashBack at a wide range of leading national retailers.
GAS AND ELECTRICITY We provide consistently fair prices with guaranteed savings for Members in residential properties compared with the average of the cheapest standard variable tariffs charged by the Big 6.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 3 OUR APPROACH Our lowest prices and most attractive benefits are reserved for Members who switch all their services to us with most new Members taking one of the following Gold bundles Double Gold Energy Broadband and Mobile Gold Energy Energy and Broadband Gold Talk Broadband and Mobile
Where a customer uses both Gas and Electricity in their home approximately 80% of UK households then they will almost invariably switch both of these to us i.
Dual Fuel otherwise Energy will generally consist of Electricity alone.
Broadband includes landline rental.
Mobile consists of at least one connected mobile handset.
Our mission is to be the Nations most trusted utility supplier the one you d recommend to your Mum Welcome to the Club Although were a major British business were not like other utility suppliers.
Were a Discount Club 100% focused on helping our Members save money on energy telecoms and other household bills.
Switch more save more By bundling different services together and cutting out expensive overheads we can pass savings directly onto our Members.
The more services you take the more you can save.
One bill one contact We make life easier for you  with one clear simple monthly bill for all the services you take.
It shows you where you make extra savings and get more value.
And with only one supplier you have a single contact to deal with.
CashBack card It really does pay to be a Member of Utility Warehouse.
Not only can you save on energy and phone bills but there are lots of other exclusive Member benefits  like our CashBack card that saves you money on your everyday shopping.
5 star customer service We really care about our Members.
In fact great customer service is at the heart of everything we do.
When you switch your services to us we handle it all for you.
And our awardwinning UK call centre is always here when you need us.
Which 2017 Best Telecom Services Provider Friendly fair ethical  with an absolute commitment to being the Nations most trusted utility provider.
People come to us because their family and friends recommend us.
Which recommend us too  time and time again.
Y ou re a Member not a number
Making life simple
Taking care of you Trusted and recommended Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 4
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
I am delighted to report another successful year for the Company with adjusted profits earnings and dividends all reaching record levels.
Looking at the figures from continuing operations adjusted pretax profits increased by 9.1% to 53.3m 2016 48.8m and statutory pretax profits reached 40.9m 2016 35.1m on revenue down by 0.6% to 740.3m 2016 744.7m adjusted earnings per share for the year rose by 7.2% to 53.3p 2016 49.7p and statutory EPS increased to 38.0p 2016 32.8p.
This performance was achieved in the face of challenging market conditions with the strong headwinds we have seen over the last few years persisting during the first half of the year.
And while the record gap between standard variable energy tariffs and aggressively priced introductory deals started to narrow during the autumn this happened too late to provide any positive impact on our service and customer numbers for Q3.
As previously reported we responded to this more favourable environment by making a change to our Partner compensation plan at the beginning of Q4 this gave Partners the opportunity to accelerate some of the residual income they would earn on new Members who switched all their utilities to us.
This enhancement combined with our more competitive market position led to an increase in Partner activity as we progressed through Q4 taking full year customer and service numbers to 607802 2016 598613 and 2288918 2016 2181704 respectively an increase of more than 107000 services during the year.
Within this total there has once again been a significant improvement in customer quality with 102126 2016 76764 residential Members now taking all our core services landline broadband mobile gas and electricity.
We received a number of further endorsements from Which during the year recognising both the value we offer and the quality of service provided by our UKbased membership support teams.
In addition to being ranked amongst the top suppliers for all our core services Energy BroadbandTelephony and Mobile in each of their sector surveys we received Recommended Provider awards for both our Broadband and Mobile services.
Further to this we were delighted to receive the accolade of Best Telecom Services Provider at the recent Which 2017 Annual Awards ceremony.
In addition we received four awards from Moneywise and were voted UK National Public Champion and named as a finalist in the Business of the Year category for companies with a turnover of 150m or higher in the European Business Awards.
These third party independent endorsements are a testament to our customercentric approach our commitment to treating our members fairly our ongoing mission to be the Nations most trusted utility provider and the significant resources invested in delivering the best possible customer service.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 5 RESULTS OVERVIEW Our adjusted profit from continuing operations i. primarily due to Daffodil continued investment in headcount and increased spending on IT.
We also generated an exceptional profit of 62.3m during the year from the sale of our 20% shareholding in Opus see below taking our total posttax profit to 95.0m 2016 31.8m.
Revenues fell slightly due to lower average energy prices following an industry wide reduction in retail gas prices during the spring of 2016 and an increasing proportion of our customer base taking our cheapest Double Gold tariffs a reduction in average energy usage reflecting the progressive impact of the energy efficiency measures that have been delivered by the industry over the last few years and the success of our own LED light bulb replacement service partially offset by an increase in telephony revenues due to higher prices more services and a greater proportion of customers taking fibre broadband.
We received 71.1m in cash for our 20% stake in Opus Energy Group Limited Opus following its acquisition by Drax Plc in February 2017 this transaction generated an exceptional profit of 62.3m which is included in our results for the year alongside a contribution of 2.2m from our share of its profit up to the date of disposal.
Dividend
In line with previous guidance we are proposing a final dividend of 25p 2016 24p bringing the total for the year to 48p 2016 46p this represents an increase of 4.3% compared with last year and will be paid on 28 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 7 July 2017 subject to approval by shareholders at the Companys AGM which will be held on 20 July 2017.
We remain committed to a progressive dividend policy consistent with the underlying strong cash generation of our business.
Proposed Share Buyback We previously announced our intention to carry out a tender offer this summer under which we would seek to return to shareholders the cash we received from the sale of our stake in Opus we have now decided to reduce the maximum size of this tender offer to 25m.
This will provide greater flexibility for the Company to take advantage of the strategic opportunities that we expect to arise over the next few years resulting from the rapidly changing political and regulatory environment for the services we supply.
Full details of the tender offer will be included with the AGM documents which will be sent to all shareholders shortly.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 6
Our churn remains significantly below prevailing industry levels and we are encouraged by the clear downward trend that has started to develop since last autumn.
We attribute this to a combination of factors including a reduction in the gap between standard variable tariffs and introductory deals increased investment by us in retention activities and the steadily improving quality of our customer base.
It is particularly encouraging that this has been achieved against an industry background which has seen record numbers of households switching their energy supplier over recent months.
Proposed Energy Price Cap It is encouraging that both the major political parties included a commitment in their recent General Election manifestos to address one of the main issues within the energy industry namely the practice by many large suppliers of using the higher margins earned on disengaged legacy customers to offer significantly cheaper deals which are only available to those who switch.
If implemented we believe these manifesto proposals will create a fairer energy market with lower energy bills for millions of disengaged households who are currently paying more than they should simply because for whatever reason they are not switching supplier on a regular basis.
In particular we do not share the view widely expressed by some of the other large suppliers that a widespread cap on standard variable tariffs will be damaging to competition as the wide choice of attractively priced tariffs from the vast majority of independent suppliers who do not exploit their customers in this way would remain available.
Indeed the only tariffs that might cease to be available will be the relatively small number which are being unfairly crosssubsidised by those who are shouting the loudest against this proposal.
In our view the protection of disengaged consumers requires such an absolute cap to be retained over the medium term albeit that it will need to be reviewed on a regular basis and set at a level which enables efficient suppliers not engaged in predatory pricing to earn a reasonable margin or replaced in due course by a longterm relative price cap as suggested recently by John Penrose MP and endorsed by many independent suppliers.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT We are encouraged by the results from the soft launch of our Home Insurance service.
We anticipate volumes will start to improve from their current low levels as we start marketing this new service more proactively and remain confident that Insurance has the potential to make a material contribution to the financial performance of the group in due course.
The downward trend in energy prices which has prevailed for over three years has started to reverse with rising commodity prices being accompanied by higher regulatory distribution and policy costs.
This has led to higher retail prices for both standard variable tariffs and fixed price introductory deals albeit that the gap between them has narrowed.
Although undoubtedly positive for us this gap still remains significantly wider than we would have liked due partly to the continuing practice by some suppliers of simultaneously offering both an expensive Standard Variable Tariff SVT and a cheap introductory fixed price deal and also the decision by a number of new suppliers to price their energy at near zero gross margin in order to attract market share.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
CONTINUED
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 7 The energy market remains polarised between the Big 6 who are broadly maintaining or increasing profitability whilst losing customers and a rapidly increasing number of independent suppliers at the other end of the spectrum who are largely gaining market share but almost without exception incurring significant losses whilst doing so.
All of these market participants are reliant on the same wholesale costs and use similar distribution channels namely price comparison sites and bulk switching initiatives to attract customers who generally choose their new supplier based predominantly on price and in many cases will switch again as soon as they reach the end of their introductory fixedprice period.
And although new suppliers enjoy a significant initial cost advantage by being exempt from certain policy costs these cease to apply as they gain scale.
We find it difficult to understand how in the face of these market dynamics this multitude of subscale competitors can develop a viable longterm business model.
Project Daffodil our innovative free LED light bulb replacement service has gathered momentum over the course of the year and has now been provided in over 40000 households.
We are now installing free light bulbs in around 3500 households each month this is available to both new and existing Members who have switched their energy and telephony services to us.
Daffodil reduces household electricity usage for the vast majority of Members receiving this benefit which goes a long way towards narrowing the gap between our energy prices and the introductory tariffs available elsewhere this has been a major factor behind the improvement in the quality of new Members joining the Club as well as encouraging existing Members to add additional services in order to take advantage of this valuable benefit.
In March we launched a number of films featuring Joanna Lumley as the new face of Utility Warehouse explaining who we are and the benefits we provide to those looking to save money by joining as a new Member or make money by becoming a Partner.
These new tools were well received and we have since seen an encouraging increase in the number of new Partners joining the business.
We have also taken steps to simplify our customer proposition replacing the previous choice of benefits available to Double Gold Members with an extra 10% discount on the fixed monthly cost of their broadband including landline rental worth between 31.80 and 46.79 per year.
The mobile app we launched around 12 months ago has gained widespread acceptance with around 65000 Members using it each month to submit meter readings topup their mobile andor CashBack card track their mobile usage and find their nearest CashBack retail outlets further functionality will be added in due course including being able to manage their insurance cover.
Our smart meter rollout programme has been hampered by the persistent failure of one of our meter operators MOP to meet their agreed service levels in addition to slowing our rollout programme this also affected our ability to install prepayment meters in a significant part of the country during the second half of the year leading to a temporary small rise in delinquency levels.
Notwithstanding these challenges we have now appointed a new MOP to take over this work and successfully installed over 100000 meters around 10% of our current base.
We continue to increase our investment in IT and have completed a number of important IT projects during the year including strengthening our cyberdefences PCI compliance launching Home Insurance and preparing for the mass rollout of smart metering.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 8 By virtue of our unique route to market and focus on treating our Members fairly we have found a balance which combines sustainable growth in both service numbers and profitability thus creating real long term value for all our stakeholders.
We remain focussed on growing our business to one million households and beyond over the medium term.
ROUTE TO MARKET Significant numbers of new Partners continued to join the business during the year with an improvement in both the quality and quantity of new recruits since our annual sales conference in March.
At the year end we had 41717 registered Partners this was below the level we reported 12 months ago largely due to our decision last autumn to start providing automatic refunds to many of those who join the business but find themselves unable for whatever reason to take advantage of the opportunity we offer to build an attractive and secure parttime additional income.
These early automatic refunds combined with the natural underlying level of cancellations we would normally expect to see after 12 months led to a larger reduction in the total number of registered partners over the period than would otherwise have occurred.
Whilst it is more challenging for Partners to gather new Members and build their Utility Warehouse businesses when there are such large pricing differentials in the energy markets we have been pleased to see many of them still achieve significant success during the year by focussing on the unique strengths of our proposition and the exclusive benefits we offer.
We have invested in providing them with new tools to help them meet this challenge including the new suite of films featuring Joanna Lumley as well as continuing to improve the personal development and training programmes we make available free of charge to both new and existing Partners.
It is encouraging that despite the absence of loss leader introductory deals for new Members the combined impact of our improved training courses effective Partner incentive structure the unique multiservice proposition and attractive benefits we offer to our Members means we are continuing to see a consistently high proportion of new Partners making a successful start to building their Utility Warehouse business.
BOARD CHANGES We were delighted to welcome Andrew Blowers as a new independent nonexecutive director who joined the Board in November.
Andrew is currently a nonexecutive director of AA PLC the UKs leading provider of roadside assistance and of CETA Insurance Limited a specialist online insurance provider.
His career spans over 25 years in the UK financial services industrysite Chairman of IIC NV and an executive director of Churchill Insurance.
He is already bringing a valuable new perspective to the Board.
As previously reported Julian Schild became Chairman of the Audit Committee following the retirement of Michael Pavia at last years AGM.
Andrew Blowers has replaced Julian as Chair of the Remuneration Committee and Beatrice Hollond has become Chair of the Nomination Committee.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
CONTINUED
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 9 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The UK Corporate Governance Code the Code encourages the Chairman to report personally on how the principles in the Code relating to the role and effectiveness of the Board have been applied.
As a Board we are responsible to the Companys shareholders for delivering sustainable shareholder value over the long term through effective management and good governance.
A key role of mine as Executive Chairman is to provide strong leadership to enable the Board to operate effectively.
We believe that open and rigorous debate around key strategic issues and risks faced by the Company is important in achieving our objectives and the Company is fortunate to have nonexecutive directors with diverse and extensive business experience who actively contribute to these discussions.
Further detail of the Companys governance processes and compliance with the Code is set out in the
Corporate Governance Statement.
OUTLOOK
Recent Trading Our annual sales conference took place on 1819 March 2017 and was attended by over 5000 Partners.
At the event we announced the launch of our Home Insurance service to Members the introduction of new films featuring Joanna Lumley and a simplification to our Double Gold bundle making it more competitive and easier to promote.
Since making these changes the quality of new Members being gathered by Partners has remained exceptionally high with over 50% switching all their services to us.
The number of new Members is running slightly ahead of the levels we saw during the corresponding period last year and we are also seeing encouraging numbers of new Partners joining the business.
Energy Prices Following an extended period in which falling energy commodity prices outweighed the additional costs of renewing and extending the distribution network replacing nuclear and coalfired generating plants that are approaching the end of their useful lives rollingout smart meters funding capacity incentives and paying for the various renewable energy programmes which have been introduced wholesale energy prices have increased significantly since last autumn.
This has exerted significant upward pressure on retail energy prices with both standard variable prices and the cheapest introductory deals having increased by around 90 and 140 respectively for a typical domestic customer.
It appears that the incoming Government is committed to introducing a widespread cap on standard variable tariffs.
Whilst the timing of implementation the level at which the cap would be set and the specific details of whom it would affect are unclear we strongly welcome this proposal as we believe it will create a fairer energy market and make it more difficult for suppliers with large legacy bases to use the profits they are earning from disengaged customers to fund cheap introductory deals to those who are switching.
Whilst the gap between SVTs and the cheapest introductory deals is likely to narrow the market will remain highly competitive and there are many suppliers who will be unaffected by the proposed price cap who will be able to continue offering attractive tariffs to those looking to switch.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 10 Our wholesale arrangements retail pricing structure and low cost base mean the impact of this price cap when implemented on our profitability is likely to be significantly less than other major suppliers.
Regulatory
The Competition and Markets Authority published their final report on the domestic energy market during the year.
Whilst we welcomed their proposals to remove the current restrictions on discounts bundling and the number of tariffs each supplier can offer we believe they are fundamentally misconceived in believing their proposed database of disengaged customers will achieve anything other than greater bureaucracy more costs and increased confusion.
We hope this proposal will be quickly abandoned once the mooted price cap on standard variable tariffs takes effect.
Our programme to roll out smart meters for all our Members is well underway with around 100000 largely dual fuel meters having been installed by the beginning of June 2017.
The programme is expected to gather pace over the coming months and we anticipate making good progress this year towards the 2020 target date.
As previously highlighted the financial benefits from this programme excluding any timing differences which may arise between when costs are incurred and when they are recovered will depend on the speed and efficiency of our rollout relative to other suppliers.
However the continuing delays in finalising the specification of SMETS2 meters in getting them certified and in the smart Data Communications Company DCC testing schedule have led many commentators to question whether the original target completion date for this programme is still achievable and the level of fulfilment costs which will ultimately be borne by consumers from trying to do so.
We remain concerned at the high and increasing costs imposed on the industry in order to comply with government policy much of which seems to be imposed with inadequate thought given to delivering such initiatives in a way that will minimise costs which ultimately get passed on by suppliers to customers through higher bills.
Examples include the current faster switching initiative the Green Deal programme the establishment of Smart Energy GB the structure of the smart meter rollout programme the overengineering of the specification for the DCC and the unrealistic timeframes which are invariably adopted for any industry change.
Regulation has an important role to play in ensuring the energy markets are operating in a transparent manner creating a framework which encourages real competition protecting the rights of consumers and ensuring they receive a fair deal for their energy.
However it is not clear that the right balance has recently always been struck.
There needs to be a clearer understanding of the need to reduce the burden of regulation which ultimately falls on those least able to afford it  namely domestic customers.
We are disappointed that deregulating the domestic water supply market was absent from the new Governments manifesto this would have created an exciting new opportunity for us to add the supply of water to the existing range of utilities we offer further extending the benefits to consumers of our integrated multiutility approach.
We urge the Government not to miss the chance to introduce competition into this market which would ultimately lead to more choice lower prices and better service for over 27 million households who are currently forced to buy from a local monopoly water supplier.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
CONTINUED
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 11
Successfully navigating the constant stream of changes flowing across all the sectors in which we operate is challenging however our experienced senior management team have demonstrated a consistent ability to do so in a way which creates significant and growing value for all our stakeholders.
Our mobile proposition is currently more competitive than ever before due to the imminent abolition of EU roaming charges and the recent improvements we have made to data allowances for some Double Gold members.
Combined with our recent award from Which as the UKs best provider of Broadband and Mobile services these are expected to further reduce mobile churn and increase penetration over the coming year.
Sales of Home Insurance policies are expected to increase as we add further underwriters to our panel and progressively start marketing this service to both new and existing Members over the course of the year.
Whilst our ambitions for the current year are extremely modest this service has the potential to make a material contribution to the business in due course.
Our strategy of achieving consistent high quality growth through delivering savings simplicity and exceptional customer service continues to bear fruit.
We have seen a significant improvement in the proportion of new Members who are switching all their services to us over the course of the last two years from c.35% to over 50% these better quality customers have the highest expected lifetime value although they cost significantly more to acquire.
Based on recent levels of Partner activity and membership churn we anticipate the number of services we supply will increase by between 5% and 10% over the coming year.
From a financial perspective the modest growth in the number of services added over the last few years combined with higher customer acquisition costs due to both faster growth and better quality new Members and an increasing investment in IT mean that our adjusted pretax profits from continuing operations for the current financial year as previously announced are likely to be at a similar level to the year just ended.
The benefit from faster organic growth will if current trends continue be reflected in our reported results for the following financial year.
In the meantime and in the absence of unforeseen circumstances the steadily improving quality of our membership base and the good visibility it provides over future revenues and margins means that we expect to increase our dividend to 50p per share for the current year.
Our intention going forward is to bring our dividend payout ratio back to around 85% of adjusted EPS over the medium term whilst maintaining our progressive dividend policy.
It only remains for me to thank my boardroom colleagues for their support and all our staff and Partners for their loyalty and hard work during the past year and to wish each and every one of them success in the years to come.
Charles Wigoder Executive Chairman 12 June 2017 CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2015 12
We supply a wide range of essential services under the Utility Warehouse brand gas electricity landline broadband and mobile to both domestic and small business Members throughout the UK these are all substantial markets and represent a vast opportunity for further organic growth.
The markets we operate in are dominated by a relatively small number of former monopoly suppliers and other owners of infrastructure assets although in each there are also a number of independent suppliers carving out their own niches generally based on offering highly competitive introductory deals promoted through price comparison sites.
BUSINESS MODEL We have a fundamentally different business model to any other utility provider in the UK in three key respects we operate our business as a Discount Club each of our customers becomes a Member receiving a level of service commensurate with that status we are the only fully integrated provider of both energy and communications services in the country.
This enables us to enjoy unparalleled levels of operating efficiency as we are able to spread a single set of overheads across the multiple revenue streams that we derive from each of our Members and we have a unique route to market with an army of around 40000 parttime selfemployed Partners rather than seeking to attract new Members through expensive advertising or price comparison sites we instead benefit from personal recommendations by both our Partners and our existing Members.
Partners can earn a small percentage of the monthly revenues generated by any Members gathered either personally or by someone in their team.
On a similar basis we reward our existing Members with shopping vouchers when they introduce a new Member to the Club.
We continue to follow a different strategy to that of our competitors in both the energy and communications markets focussing on delivering an integrated multiutility proposition that includes three key benefits Savings compared with the prices they were previously paying Simplicity just one convenient monthly bill making it easier to manage a significant part of their monthly household budget and Service delivered by our awardwinning UKbased support teams.
These benefits are supported by our commitment to treating our Members fairly avoiding the typical marketing strategy adopted by our competitors of combining cheap introductory deals for new customers with much higher tariffs charged to their legacy customer bases.
We believe their approach is not only fundamentally unfair on loyal customers but less likely to create a sustainable long term business as customers who have chosen to switch once based solely on the headline price on a comparison site will have a higher propensity to do so again when their introductory deal expires this view is supported by recent switching data within the electricity market for domestic customers where reported churn amongst small and medium suppliers excluding ourselves is now running at an annualised rate of over 30%.
Our alternative approach is to focus on treating all our Members in a fair manner and to give everyone consistently good value on all their services rewarding loyalty and commitment with additional discounts and benefits available to our most valuable and longstanding Members.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2015 13 The delivery of these core values is critical to our route to market giving our Partners the confidence to promote our services to their friends and family  as well as generating recommendations from existing Members who in many cases also become advocates for our brand.
The Net Promoter Scores NPS of around 50 that we consistently achieve reflect our relentless focus on this goal and are in stark contrast to the negative NPS scores prevalent within the utility and telecoms markets.
Against a backdrop where most of our competitors seem focussed almost solely on price we believe that genuinely earning the Trust of our Members is the key point of differentiation that will enable us to achieve our mediumterm growth objectives and help us maximise long term shareholder value.
By treating our Members fairly as we would like to be treated ourselves we aim to earn both their loyalty which delivers long term sustainable revenues and their enthusiasm for our business model which creates growth through referrals.
Examples of this approach include not offering shortterm discounts to new Members as an inducement to switch and always allowing existing loyal Members to benefit from any new tariffs we introduce.
And keeping our best deals and lowest prices for those who have switched the most services to us.
We continue to invest in our IT systems which enable us to integrate all the services we supply into a single monthly bill supported by just one set of central overheads including all administrative and membership support functions.
This highly efficient cost base is a key factor in enabling us to offer attractive pricing and a wide range of valuable benefits to our Members a secure residual income to our Partners and a growing dividend stream to shareholders.
We have embarked on a programme to enhance and update these systems over the course of the next three to five years and look forward to the greater business efficiency and flexibility this will deliver in due course.
We have strong commercial relationships with all our key suppliers who recognise the value of our unique route to market and the importance of maintaining our competitive market position.
To this end there are ongoing discussions with each of them about how the market dynamics for each of our services are changing and the best way to ensure these are appropriately reflected in our wholesale pricing structure.
We are extremely pleased with the further progress we have made this year in taking advantage of our multiple key points of differentiation and towards securing our position as the Nations most trusted utility provider.
STRATEGY
Our strategy is to progressively increase our share of the markets in which we operate through organic growth and to build a robust sustainable and profitable business.
We will achieve this by maintaining our focus on delivering bestinclass service and support to our Members treating them fairly and investing in our systems and staff.
We will seek to simplify and where possible improve the competitiveness of our services even further encouraging existing Members to talk about the unique benefits we offer to their friends and acquaintances and making it easier for our Partners to promote our services more effectively.
We continue to explore the possibility of expanding our current range of core services into areas where we can build upon our existing strong relationship with our Members by offering them both a better experience and better value on services they currently obtain from other suppliers whilst also delivering a satisfactory return for our shareholders.
This approach is demonstrated by the recently announced launch of Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 14 our new Home Insurance service which we anticipate will be accompanied by a range of other insurance products in due course in the medium term we look forward to supplying water and in the longer term other potential new services might include television and home emergency cover including boiler cover and combining the national rollout of smart meters with other connected home products and services to leverage our position as the only fully integrated multiutility supplier in the country.
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE AND NONFINANCIAL KPIS Despite a challenging competitive environment our overall performance for the year has been encouraging in a number of key respects continuing strong organic growth with service numbers up by 107214 2016 88257 materially higher proportion of Members taking our Double Gold bundle launch of our new Home Insurance service successful rollout of Project Daffodil  our free LED light bulb replacement service introduction of new films featuring Joanna Lumley winner of 2017 Best Telecom Services Provider at annual Which awards Which Recommended Provider for Mobile April 2017 Which Recommended Provider for Broadband March 2017 consistently high Net Promoter Scores Against the background of a slow growing economy and with household incomes remaining under pressure our valuebased consumer proposition and the parttime income opportunity we offer remain extremely attractive to both Members and Partners respectively.
Our continuing organic growth is underpinned by high levels of confidence amongst our Partners in our brand and financial strength the good value we provide through our fair pricing policies and our commitment to delivering bestinclass service and support to our Members.
Members
MEMBERS 2017 2016 Residential Club 578799 568986 Business Club 29003 29627 TOTAL CLUB 607802 598613 Whilst we continue to regard our Business Club as an exciting longterm opportunity the dynamics of this market make it extremely difficult to grow in the current energy wholesale pricing environment.
Our focus will therefore remain on the domestic market until market conditions become more favourable.
Within the residential Club there is a significant difference in average expected customer lifetimes between Members and therefore in the revenues and profits they will generate depending on whether they are an owneroccupier and on the number of services we are providing to them.
The most attractive category are owneroccupiers taking our Double Gold bundle.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
CONTINUED
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 15 Our focus on attracting this type of Member has been reflected in an increasing proportion of new Members switching all their services to us landline broadband mobile electricity andor gas over the last two years as can be seen from the following figures PERCENTAGE OF NEW MEMBERS TAKING DOUBLE GOLD BUNDLE 35.1% Q1 FY16 35.3% Q2 FY16 46.3% Q3 FY16 51.5% Q1 FY17 44.7% Q2 FY17 46.6% Q3 FY17 55.1% Q4 FY17 47.7% Q4 FY16 Individual energy supply point churn remained at around 1.1% per month driven by collective switching initiatives and a record gap during the first half of the year between the introductory fixed price deals available from other suppliers and the range of tariffs we offer.
In the context of higher levels of switching activity throughout the industry it is pleasing that the proportion of energy customers leaving us remains on average significantly below other suppliers ENERGY SUPPLY POINT CHURN 10.4% FY14 11.2% FY13 13.3% FY12 16.3% FY11 11.2% FY15 13.1% FY16 13.2% FY17 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 16
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
CONTINUED
Average revenue per Member has once again fallen slightly as the combined impact of falling average energy consumption and lower retail energy tariffs outweighed the benefit from the higher penetration of communications services particularly mobile that we are now seeing AVERAGE REVENUE PER MEMBER teltelteltelteltel 2016 1226 These revenue figures relate solely to our Customer Management operating segment the figures for 2008 to 2014 inclusive are restated as detailed in the 2015 Annual Report Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 17
The full range of services we offer includes landline telephony calls and line rental broadband mobile gas electricity and our CashBack card.
At the year end we supplied a total of 2288918 services to Club Members 2016 2181704 an increase of 4.9% during the year.
SERVICES 2017 2016 Electricity 551622 542430 Gas 446394 440872 Fixed Telephony calls and NGN 320269 306087 Fixed Telephony line rental 303787 286763 Broadband 276721 256777 Mobile 201372 169136 CashBack card 188753 179639 TOTAL 2288918 2181704 Residential Club 2205462 2096730 Business Club 83456 84974 TOTAL CLUB 2288918 2181704 All the core services we provide landline broadband mobile gas and electricity grew during the year with the highlight being a 19% rise in the number of mobile services.
This increase means that penetration of mobile within our residential Club has now reached 35% and is starting to catch up with our other services this is due to a strategic decision to place mobile at the heart of our retail proposition and to improve its competitive position.
We made 4G available to our Members last Autumn and have just increased the data allowance for Double Gold members on our ValueMax tariff to 10GB at no extra cost.
CashBack
Our exclusive CashBack card has proven an important Member acquisition and retention tool.
It gives our Members the opportunity to achieve additional savings of between 3% and 7% on their shopping at a wide range of participating retailers which they receive as an automatic credit on their next monthly bill from us.
Since launching the programme the total value of CashBack funded by participating retailers and credited to Members now exceeds 33m 2016 28m.
We saw a 5% increase during the year in the number of cards in issue to 188753 2016 179639 with the c.50% of new residential Club Members gathered directly by our Partners applying for a card being partially offset by those with inactive cards choosing not to renew when their card expired.
We believe this continuing strong demand demonstrates the attractiveness of this unique membership benefit and would be even higher were it not for the difficulties faced by some new Members in funding the switch from paying in arrears on their credit card to paying for their purchases in advance with our prepayment card.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 18
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
CONTINUED
Many Members continue to use our online shopping portal to reduce their bills receiving in aggregate around 0.5m of CashBack over the course of last year this is in addition to any savings from using their CashBack cards.
The CashBack that we pay to our Members each month is funded entirely by the retailers in the programme and many Members achieve a reduction of 20% to 30% on the amount they pay for their utilities simply by using their CashBack card instead of an alternative payment card for most of their regular household shopping andor our online shopping portal.
Member Service and Support We pride ourselves on delivering firstclass service to our Members through a single support centre based in the UK.
We try to ensure where possible that the first person a Member speaks to is able to resolve any issues they may have with their multiutility account.
We have a relentless focus on improving the service experience we deliver to our Members we readily invest in technology that we believe will genuinely achieve this objective and continually assess the numerous qualitative and quantitative performance measurement tools that we employ to monitor all aspects of our Members interactions with us to improve the overall quality of their experience.
We have been delighted at the consistently high ratings awards and recognition we receive from Moneywise and in Which magazine for the quality of the service and support provided to our Members and the overwhelmingly positive feedback we receive from Members in our own surveys.
We were particularly proud to win Best Telecommunications Services Provider at the 2017 Which Awards Ceremony a few weeks ago alongside being voted UK National Public Champion in the European Business Awards.
These are clear independent third party endorsements of our commitment to looking after our customers and treating them as we would wish to be treated ourselves.
Partners
Our Partners are one of the key strengths of our business.
In contrast to the routes to market adopted by other suppliers of similar household services the alignment of financial interest provided by our revenue sharing model the structure of our compensation plan and the substantial number of Partners who hold equity or share options in the Company incentivise them to focus their activities on finding creditworthy higherspending Members who will reap the maximum savings from using our services and will thus be least likely to churn by doing so they maximise their own longterm income.
This ensures that cases of mis selling are both inadvertent and extremely rare.
We provide a variety of training and personal development courses both online and classroombased designed to provide the skills and knowledge they need to gather Members and recruit other Partners effectively and successfully all of these courses are free to attend.
In addition we offer a hire purchase scheme which gives Partners access to a Tablet so they can present the benefits of our unique Discount Club more effectively.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 19 We introduced a new Quick Income Plan on 1st January 2017 giving Partners the opportunity to accelerate some of their residual income.
This has been well received and enables any Partner who wants to develop their Utility Warehouse business on a fulltime basis to earn a fulltime income whilst they do so.
As such it has the potential to transform the way potential new recruits look at this opportunity.
Our Car Plan which provides eligible Partners with a subsidised Utility Warehouse branded BMW Mini or in some cases a BMW X5 remains extremely popular with around 900 vehicles now delivered 2016 Owners inform us that they find these helpful in raising their local profile resulting in enquiries from both potential new Members and Partners.
Smart Meter rollout We have installed around 100000 smart meters to date notwithstanding operational challenges with one of our MOPs which meant we were unable to achieve the number of installations that we had forecast last year.
Having addressed these issues our rollout this year is currently running ahead of forecast.
The industry anticipates the transition from first generation SMETS1 smart meters to second generation SMETS2 smart meters will occur this autumn and we look forward to further accelerating our rollout programme thereafter.
In addition to muchdebated efficiency benefits smart meters have the potential to materially improve the relationship between customers and energy suppliers.
We are therefore broadly supportive of the nationwide smart meter programme albeit we remain concerned over the significant additional costs that are being incurred as a result of an illconceived and suboptimum rollout strategy  a cost that will ultimately be met by consumers.
IT Systems The journey we embarked on last year to start reviewing the systems and processes which have evolved over the course of the last 20 years and to prepare for the introduction of new services is gathering steam.
And while this is creating significant additional costs in the short term with benefits that may take many years to arrive I am confident that making this investment is the right decision for the business.
In the meantime our operating costs remain lower than those of any of our peers on a likeforlike basis and we look forward to the operating efficiencies and performance improvements which our new systems are expected to deliver in due course.
Andrew Lindsay MBE
Chief Executive Officer
12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 20 OVERVIEW OF RESULTS Continuing operations ADJUSTED
2017 2016 CHANGE 2017 2016 CHANGE Revenue 740.3m 744.7m 0.6% 740.3m 744.7m 0.6% Profit before tax 53.3m 48.8m 9.1% 40.9m 35.1m 16.5% Basic EPS 53.3p 49.7p 7.2% 38.0p 32.8p 15.9% Dividend per share 48.0p 46.0p 4.3% 48.0p 46.0p 4.3% As a result of the relative size and historical volatility of share incentive scheme charges 1.2m these are excluded from adjusted profit before tax and adjusted basic EPS.
In view of the size and nature of the charge as a noncash item the amortisation of the intangible asset 11.2m arising on entering into the energy supply arrangements with Npower in December 2013 has also been excluded from adjusted profit before tax and adjusted basic EPS.
For ease of comparability following the sale of the Groups 20% shareholding in Opus Energy Group Limited Opus in February 2017 resulting in Opus becoming a discontinued operation the contribution from Opus across all years and the profit from its sale in 2017 have been excluded in the above table.
SUMMARY
The small decrease in revenue during the year has been driven mainly by lower average energy prices as a result of retail gas price reductions in the Spring of 2016 and reduced average energy usage due to the continuing impact of energy efficiency measures across the industry combined with a steadily increasing number of LED light bulbs installed in our Members homes following the progressive successful implementation of Project Daffodil the provision of free LED light bulbs to multiservice Members.
These negative factors were partly offset by an increase in telephony revenues resulting from an increasing penetration of fibre broadband and some higher fixed monthly charges and the overall increase in the number of services provided to Members.
The improvement in adjusted pretax profits continuing operations of 9.1% mainly reflects the continuing modest organic growth over the last two years in the number of services we are providing to our Members an increased proportion of revenues from higher margin telephony services relative to energy services and a oneoff recovery of 4.2m of costs incurred in prior years relating to the smart meter rollout programme under our energy supply agreement of which 70% was credited to cost of sales with the remaining 30% credited to administrative expenses.
These are counterbalanced by recurring higher customer acquisition costs increased investment in staff headcount and higher IT related charges.
We also generated an exceptional profit of 62.3m during the year from the sale of our 20% shareholding in Opus see below taking our total statutory posttax profit to 95.0m 2016 31.8m.
Within our Customer Acquisition operating segment losses increased to 18.3m 2016 14.6m primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of costs from Project Daffodil and an increase in the proportion of new Members switching all their services to us.
Distribution expenses reduced slightly to 21.1m 2016 21.4m mainly reflecting lower energy commissions following the reduction in energy revenues previously highlighted partly offset by increased commissions paid to Partners on the larger number of services being taken by our growing membership base.
FINANCIAL REVIEW Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 21 Administrative expenses increased during the year by 2.8m to 55.2m 2016 52.4m mainly as a result of continued investment in growing staff headcount to sustain our current high standards of customer service as the business grows and higher IT related charges.
Adjusted earnings per share continuing operations increased by 7.2% to 53.3p 2016 49.7p statutory EPS continuing operations 38.0p 2016 32.8p.
In accordance with previous guidance and our strong cash position the Board is proposing to pay a final dividend of 25p 2016 24p per share making a total dividend of 48p 2016 46p per share for the year.
MARGINS
Our overall gross margin for the year was 17.6% 2016 16.6% reflecting the shifting mix from energy towards higher margin telephony services and the recovery of previously incurred smart meter rollout costs mentioned above.
CUSTOMER MANAGEMENT We have continued to achieve steady growth in the number of services we are supplying with an increase of over 107000 services during the course of the year.
This takes the total number of services provided within our Discount Club to almost 2.3 million  an increase of 4.9% compared with the previous year.
We continue to focus on making it easier for Partners to gather new Members by simplifying our processes improving membership benefits making our prices more competitive and improving the quality of service and support we provide to our membership base.
As a result all our core services have continued to see organic growth in a challenging competitive environment.
Revenues decreased slightly overall due to reduced gas pricing and lower average consumption across both types of energy service with growing revenues in all other service areas following increases in the number of services being provided 2017 2016 Electricity 310.4 313.7 Landline and Broadband 106.7 102.1 Mobile 27.5 24.4 Other 12.4 13.8 CUSTOMER ACQUISITION Our Customer Acquisition operating segment loss increased during the year to 18.3m 2016 14.6m mainly due to the inclusion of a full year of costs relating to Project Daffodil our free LED replacement light bulb offer to multiservice Members where the massrollout started in January 2016.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 22 DISTRIBUTION AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES Distribution expenses include the share of our revenues that we pay as commission to Partners together with other direct costs associated with gathering new Members which are included as part of the Customer Acquisition Segment result for the year.
These reduced slightly to 21.1m 2016 21.4m mainly reflecting lower energy commissions following the industry wide gas price reductions at the start of the financial year partly offset by increased commissions paid to Partners from the increase in new Members and services.
Within administrative expenses the bad debt charge for the year fell slightly to 1.1% of revenues 2016 1.2% falling in absolute terms to 7.8m 2016 8.4m.
The number of prepayment meters we installed during the year many of which were provided at the Members own request fell to 5357 2016 6775 partly due to delays in fitting prepayment meters following service level issues with one of our meter operators MOPs in the second half of the year a new MOP has recently been appointed to take on this work.
At the end of the year we had an installed base of 69828 2016 71026 prepayment meters representing approximately 7.0% of the energy services we supply this remains significantly below the average level of prepayment meters within the industry of around 16% source CMA.
DELINQUENT MEMBERS 1.15% 2014 1.23% 2013 1.46% 2012 1.15% 2017 1.10% 2015 1.09% 2016 Delinquency the proportion of Members who have at least two energy bills outstanding has been on a steady downward trajectory over the last few years although in the last year it has increased slightly to 1.15% 2016 1.09%.
This increase is primarily due to a delay in fitting prepayment meters during the second half of the year which resulted from operational challenges with one of our MOPs this issue should be resolved over the coming months following the recent appointment of a new MOP.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
CONTINUED
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 23 The average number of employees increased from 908 to 1049.
This reflects our commitment to continue delivering the best possible experience to our Members increasing numbers of which are taking multiple services from us the additional services we are now supporting such as Insurance Daffodil and the smart meter rollout and a significant ongoing investment in strengthening both our IT resources and our management team.
Personnel expenses excluding the noncash accounting cost of share incentive schemes increased by 14.5% during the year to 35.3m 2016 30.8m.
Overall administrative expenses increased during the year by 2.8m to 55.2m 2016 52.4m mainly as a result of higher staff costs and increased investment in IT partly offset by the recovery of previously incurred smart meter rollout costs mentioned above.
OPUS
Our 20% stake in Opus Energy Group Limited Opus was sold in February 2017 resulting in Opus becoming a discontinued operation.
The sale resulted in the receipt of 71.1m of cash and an exceptional profit from the sale of 62.3m.
As explained in the Chairmans Statement above we intend to undertake a tender offer this summer through which we will be seeking to return up to 25m of these proceeds to shareholders full details will be sent to shareholders alongside the forthcoming AGM documents.
CASH CAPITAL EXPENDITURE AND WORKING CAPITAL During the year we received an exceptional cash inflow of 71.1m following the sale of our shareholding in Opus paid the 21.5m deferred consideration to Npower and fully repaid our revolving borrowing facilities pending the announced tender offer.
We ended the period with no debt and a cash balance of 18.7m 2016 cash before borrowings of 35.3m.
As expected our net working capital position showed a year on year cash outflow of 9.2m primarily due to timing differences related to our energy purchasing arrangements with Npower.
Under the terms of our energy supply arrangements Npower remains responsible for funding the working capital requirements associated with providing energy to Members who have chosen to pay on a Budget Plan.
BORROWINGS
Our balance sheet at the yearend shows a net cash position of 18.7m with zero debt drawn down from our revolving borrowing facilities 2016 net debt of 56.3m following receipt of the 71.1m proceeds from the sale of our shareholding in Opus.
Following the return of cash to shareholders under the impending share tender offer the Groups Net Debt  EBITDA ratio would still remain below 1.0x.
DIVIDEND
The final dividend of 25p per share 2016 24p will be paid on 28 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 7 July 2017 and is subject to approval by shareholders at the Companys Annual General Meeting which will be held on 20 July 2017.
This makes a total dividend payable for the year of 48p 2016 46p an increase of 4.3% compared with the previous year.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 24 We believe our strong underlying cash flow rising adjusted earnings and strong credit profile will enable us to refinance any remaining borrowings as they fall due whilst maintaining a progressive dividend policy.
In the light of the steadily improving quality of our membership base and the good visibility it provides over future revenues and margins we expect to increase our dividend to 50p per share for the current year.
Our
SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEME CHARGES Operating profit is stated after share incentive scheme charges of 1.2m 2016 2.5m.
These relate to an accounting charge under IFRS 2 Share Based Payments IFRS 2.
As a result of the relative size of share incentive scheme charges as a proportion of our pretax profits we are separately disclosing this amount within the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the period and excluding these charges from our calculation of adjusted profits and earnings so that the underlying performance of the business can be clearly identified.
Our current adjusted earnings per share have also therefore been adjusted to eliminate these share incentive scheme charges.
TAXATION
A full analysis of the taxation charge for the year is set out in note 4 to the financial statements.
The tax charge for the year is 10.4m 2016 8.9m.
The effective tax rate for the year was 9.9% 2016 21.9% due to the sale of our 20% shareholding in Opus on which no tax will be paid as it is eligible for the substantial shareholding exemption.
Excluding the sale of Opus and the share of profit from Opus in both years the effective tax rates for 2017 and 2016 would be 25.5% and 25.4% respectively.
Nick Schoenfeld Chief Financial Officer 12 June 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW
CONTINUED
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 25
The Group faces various risk factors both internal and external which could have a material impact on long term performance.
However the Groups underlying business model is considered relatively lowrisk with no need for management to take any disproportionate risks in order to preserve or generate shareholder value.
The Group continues to develop and operate a consistent and systematic risk management process which involves risk ranking prioritisation and subsequent evaluation with a view to ensuring all significant risks have been identified prioritised and where possible eliminated and that systems of control are in place to manage any remaining risks.
A formal document is prepared by the executive directors and senior management team on a regular basis detailing the key risks faced by the Group and the operational controls in place to mitigate those risks this document is then reviewed by the Audit Committee.
No new principal risks have been identified during the period and save as set out below nor has the magnitude of any risks previously identified significantly changed during the period.
BUSINESS MODEL The principal risks outlined below should be viewed in the context of the Groups business model as a reseller of utility services gas electricity fixed line telephony mobile telephony broadband and insurance services under the Utility Warehouse and TML brands.
As a reseller the Group does not own any of the network infrastructure required to deliver these services to its membership base.
This means that while the Group is heavily reliant on third party providers it is insulated from all the direct risks associated with owning andor operating such capital intensive infrastructure itself.
The Groups services are promoted using word of mouth by a large network of independent Partners who are paid solely on a commission basis.
This means that the Group has limited fixed costs associated with acquiring new Members.
The principal specific risks arising from the Groups business model and the measures taken to mitigate those risks are set out below.
REPUTATIONAL RISK The Groups reputation amongst its Members suppliers and Partners is believed to be fundamental to the future success of the Group.
Failure to meet expectations in terms of the services provided by the Group the way the Group does business or in the Groups financial performance could have a material negative impact on the Groups performance.
In relation to the service provided to its membership base reputational risk is principally mitigated through the Groups recruitment processes a focus on closely monitoring staff performance including the use of direct feedback surveys from Members Net Promoter Score and through the provision of rigorous staff training.
Responsibility for maintaining effective relationships with suppliers and Partners rests primarily with the appropriate member of the Groups senior management team with responsibility for the relevant area.
Any material changes to supplier agreements and Partner commission arrangements which could impact the Groups relationships are generally negotiated by the executive Directors and ultimately approved by the full Board.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 26 PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RISK The Group is dependent on its proprietary billing and membership management software for the successful operation of its business model.
This software is developed and maintained in accordance with the changing needs of the business by a team of highly skilled generally longstanding motivated and experienced individuals.
The Group relies on this software and any failure in its operation could negatively impact service to Members and potentially be damaging to the Groups brand.
All significant changes which are made to the billing and membership management software are tested as extensively as reasonably practicable before launch and are ultimately approved by the Chief Technology Officer and Billing departments in consultation with the Chief Executive as appropriate.
Backups of both the software and underlying billing and membership data are made on a regular basis and securely stored offsite.
The Group also maintains a disaster recovery facility in a warm standby state in the event of a failure of the main system designed to ensure that a nearseamless service to Members can be maintained.
The Group has full strategic control over the source code behind its billing and membership management system thereby removing any risk of future software development not being able to meet the precise requirements of the Group.
DATA SECURITY RISK The Group processes sensitive personal and commercial data during the course of its business.
The
Group looks to protect customer and corporate information and data and to keep its infrastructure secure.
A significant breach of cyber security could result in the Group facing prosecution and fines loss of commercially sensitive information financial losses from fraud and theft lost productivity from not being able to process orders and invoices and unplanned costs to restore and improve the Groups security.
This could damage the Groups brand and distributor confidence which might take an extended period of time to rebuild.
Ultimately individuals welfare could be put at risk in the event that the Group was not able to provide services or personal data was misappropriated.
The Group uses high specification firewalling network segmentation and multifaceted network and endpoint antiviral mitigation systems external consultants are also used to conduct penetration testing of the Groups internal and external IT infrastructure.
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY RISK The Group is subject to varying laws and regulations including possible adverse effects from European regulatory intervention.
The energy markets in the UK and Continental Europe are subject to comprehensive operating requirements as defined by the relevant sector regulators andor government departments.
Amendments to the regulatory regime could have an impact on the Groups ability to achieve its financial goals and any failure to comply may result in the Group being fined and lead to reputational damage which could impact the Groups brand.
Furthermore the Group is obliged to comply with retail supply procedures amendments to which could have an impact on operating costs.
The Group is a licenced gas and electricity supplier and therefore has a direct regulatory relationship with
If the Group fails to comply with its licence obligations it could be subject to fines or to the removal of its respective licences.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 27 Proposed regulatory changes such as the imposition of retail energy price caps the rapid rollout programme of smart energy meters with the potential for additional costs if existing meters must be replaced prior to the end of their planned lives and the replacement of existing environmental and social policies could all have a potentially significant impact on the sector and the net profit margins available to energy suppliers.
In general the majority of the Groups services are supplied into highly regulated markets and this could restrict the operational flexibility of the Groups business.
In order to mitigate this risk the Group seeks to maintain appropriate relations with both Ofgem and Ofcom the UK regulators for the energy and communications markets respectively the Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy BEIS and the Financial Conduct Authority FCA.
The Group engages with officials from all these organisations on a periodic basis to ensure they are aware of the Groups views when they are consulting on proposed regulatory changes or if there are competition issues the Group needs to raise with them.
It should be noted that the regulatory environment for the various markets in which the Group operates is generally focussed on promoting competition it therefore seems reasonable to expect that most potential changes will broadly be beneficial to the Group given the Groups relatively small size compared to the former monopoly incumbents with whom it competes although these changes and their actual impact will always remain uncertain.
Political and consumer concern over energy prices and fuel poverty may lead to further reviews of the energy market which could result in further consumer protection legislation being introduced through energy supply licences with price controls for certain customer segments currently being proposed.
In addition political and regulatory developments affecting the energy and telecoms markets within which the Group operates may have a material adverse effect on the Groups business results of operations and overall financial condition.
FINANCING RISK The Group has debt service obligations which may place operating and financial restrictions on the Group.
This debt could have adverse consequences insofar as it a requires the Group to dedicate a proportion of its cash flows from operations to fund payments in respect of the debt thereby reducing the flexibility of the Group to utilise its cash to invest in andor grow the business b increases the Groups vulnerability to adverse general economic andor industry conditions c may limit the Groups flexibility in planning for or reacting to changes in its business or the industry in which it operates d may limit the Groups ability to raise additional debt in the long term and e could restrict the Group from making larger strategic acquisitions or exploiting business opportunities.
Each of these prospective adverse consequences or a combination of some or all of them could result in the potential growth of the Group being at a slower rate than may otherwise be achieved.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 28 FRAUD AND BAD DEBT RISK The Group has a universal supply obligation in relation to the provision of energy to domestic customers.
This means that although the Group is entitled to request a reasonable deposit from potential new Members who are not considered creditworthy the Group is obliged to supply domestic energy to everyone who submits a properly completed application form.
Where Members subsequently fail to pay for the energy they have used Delinquent Members there is likely to be a considerable delay before the Group is able to control its exposure to future bad debt from them by either switching their smart meters to prepayment mode installing a prepayment meter or disconnecting their supply and the costs associated with preventing such Delinquent Members from increasing their indebtedness are not always fully recovered.
Fraud and bad debt within the telephony industry may arise from Members using the services or being provided with a mobile handset without intending to pay their supplier.
The amounts involved are generally relatively small as the Group has sophisticated call traffic monitoring systems to identify material occurrences of usage fraud.
The Group is able to immediately eliminate any further usage bad debt exposure by disconnecting any telephony service that demonstrates a suspicious usage profile or falls into arrears on payments.
More generally the Group is also exposed to payment card fraud where Members use stolen cards to obtain credit e. on their CashBack card or goods e.
Smartphones and Tablets from the Group the Group regularly reviews and refines its fraud protection systems to reduce its potential exposure to such risks.
WHOLESALE PRICES RISK The Group does not own or operate any utility network infrastructure itself choosing instead to purchase the capacity needed from third parties.
The advantage of this approach is that the Group is protected from technological risk capacity risk or the risk of obsolescence as it can purchase the amount of each service required to meet its Members needs.
Whilst there is a theoretical risk that in some of the areas in which the Group operates it may be unable to secure access to the necessary infrastructure on commercially attractive terms in practice the pricing of access to such infrastructure is either regulated as in the energy market or subject to significant competitive pressures as in telephony and broadband.
The profile of the Groups Members the significant quantities of each service they consume in aggregate and the Groups clearly differentiated route to market has historically proven attractive to infrastructure owners who compete aggressively to secure a share of the Groups growing business.
The supply of energy has different risks associated with it.
The wholesale price can be extremely volatile and Member demand can be subject to considerable short term fluctuations depending on the weather.
The
Group has a longstanding supply relationship with npower under which the latter assumes the substantive risks and rewards of hedging and buying energy for the Groups Members and where the price paid by the Group is set by reference to the average of the standard variable tariffs charged by the Big 6 to their domestic customers less an agreed discount this may not be competitive against the wholesale prices paid by new andor other independent suppliers.
However if the Group did not have the benefit of this long term supply agreement it would be exposed to the pricing risk of securing access to the necessary energy on the open market and the costs of balancing.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 29 COMPETITIVE RISK The Group operates in highly competitive markets and significant service innovations or increased price competition could impact future profit margins.
In order to maintain its competitive position there is a consistent focus on ways of improving operational efficiency.
New service innovations are monitored closely by senior management and the Group is generally able to respond within an acceptable timeframe by offering any new services using the infrastructure of its existing suppliers.
The increasing proportion of Members who are benefiting from the genuinely unique multiutility solution that is offered by the Group and which is unavailable from any other known supplier is considered likely to materially reduce any competitive threat.
The Directors anticipate that the Group will face continued competition in the future as new companies enter the market and alternative technologies and services become available.
The Groups services and expertise may be rendered obsolete or uneconomic by technological advances or novel approaches developed by one or more of the Groups competitors.
In the event that smaller independent energy suppliers were to experience financial difficulties as a result of increasing wholesale prices for instance it is possible that customers could also have a loss of confidence in the Group given that it is also an independent energy supplier.
The existing approaches of the Groups competitors or new approaches or technologies developed by such competitors may be more effective or affordable than those available to the Group.
There can be no assurance that the Group will be able to compete successfully with existing or potential competitors or that competitive factors will not have a material adverse effect on the Groups business financial condition or results of operations.
However as the Groups membership base continues to rise competition amongst suppliers of services to the Group is expected to increase.
This has already been evidenced by various volumerelated growth incentives which have been agreed with the Groups three largest wholesale suppliers.
This should also ensure that the Group has direct access to new technologies and services available to the market.
INFRASTRUCTURE RISK The provision of services to the Groups Members is reliant on the efficient operation of third party physical infrastructure.
There is a risk of disruption to the supply of services to Members through any failure in the infrastructure e. gas shortages power cuts or damage to communications networks.
However as the infrastructure is generally shared with other suppliers any material disruption to the supply of services is likely to impact a large part of the market as a whole and it is unlikely that the Group would be disproportionately affected.
In the event of any prolonged disruption isolated to the Groups principal supplier within a particular market services required by Members could in due course be sourced from another provider.
ENERGY INDUSTRY ESTIMATION RISK A significant degree of judgement and estimation is required in order to determine the actual level of energy used by Members and hence that should be recognised by the Group as sales.
There is an inherent risk that the estimation routines used by the Group do not in all instances fully reflect the actual usage of Members.
However this risk is mitigated by the relatively high proportion of Members who provide meter readings on a periodic basis and the rapid anticipated growth in the installed base of smart meters resulting from the national rollout programme.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 30 GAS LEAKAGE WITHIN THE NATIONAL GAS DISTRIBUTION NETWORK The operational management of the national gas distribution network is outside the control of the Group.
There is a risk that the level of leakage in future could be higher than those historically experienced and above the level currently expected.
KEY MAN RISK The Group is dependent on its key management for the successful development and operation of its business.
In the event that any or all of the members of the key management team were to leave the business it could have a material adverse effect on the Groups operations.
SINGLE SITE RISK The Group operates from one principal site and in the event of significant damage to that site through fire or other issues the operations of the Group could be adversely affected.
ACQUISITION RISK The Group may invest in other businesses taking a minority majority or 100% equity shareholding or through a joint venture partnership.
Such investments may not deliver the anticipated returns and may require additional funding in future.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 31
We rely on the combined efforts of around 1000 employees to manage relationships with both our Members and Partners and deliver a consistently high quality of service at all times.
We pay considerable attention to recruiting developing and retaining people with appropriate skills.
We continue to recruit new members of staff through our own Assessment Centre designed to give the Company greater control over the recruitment process and to ensure we select the very best candidates for our positions.
Once they have joined new starters go through a structured training programme to ensure that they are fully equipped to resolve any queries from our membership and to provide the high level of service that we demand.
Everyone who successfully completes this programme celebrates their achievement at a quarterly Academy graduation ceremony where they are presented with a certificate and Champagne by the Chief Executive.
This year we have introduced our own Technical Advisor Apprenticeships working with an accredited provider.
This is proving to be very successful and we believe will play an important role in our longterm recruitment plans.
The combination of valuing and developing our staff our serviceoriented culture and the daytoday reinforcement of our core values are key competitive advantages in enabling us to attract and retain a motivated talented and diverse workforce.
We continue to invest in our people evolving and refreshing our Manager and Team Leader development programmes which are accompanied by selective executive coaching.
We have recently launched a new online learning portal to assist in the development of all our employees the content of which is under continual review.
We promote from within where possible into both specialist and managerial roles.
Our monthly employee recognition awards known internally as Piggy Awards enable the Company to celebrate and reward employees who have gone over and above in the performance of their role.
We actively seek to engage all our employees in changes that may concern them rather than just a representative few on a committee.
Focus groups are held on a continual basis to ensure that any changes we have introduced continue to encourage our staff to perform to their best.
Regular lunches and teas are held with staff across the Company hosted by members of the senior management team to ensure that they are kept abreast of employee concerns.
We also keep employees informed on a regular basis of the financial performance of the business and other matters of potential concern to them through the Company intranet adhoc emails the monthly Company newsletter and quarterly breakfast forums with the Chief Executive.
Our intranet Babble provides a channel to communicate with staff as well as a platform for hosting communities and forums.
Amongst our many communities we boast a Book Club Film Club with regular film showings in our auditorium Guitar Club Football Teams and an Art Club.
We are particularly proud of our Art Club that curated an exhibition composed of works of art from members of our staff which are exhibited across the Company.
PEOPLE AND ORGANISATION Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 32 We operate an opendoor policy throughout the business and provide employees with various mechanisms for providing feedback and making suggestions.
This year we continued our tradition and held our very own Dragons Den competition The Piggies Pen to elicit innovative suggestions for improving our business from our staff and were delighted with the high number of entries from both individuals and teams within the Company.
We have an active staff social committee which organises a wide range of events supported by the Company including the annual summer and Christmas parties quiz nights and many other ad hoc fun events.
This year we also hosted our first Santas Grotto and Panto for all our staff and their children.
We also have a Fun Fund set aside for individual departmental social events.
We promote staff wellbeing through an employee assistance helpline periodic atdesk massages healthy meal options in the staff restaurant and a cycle to work scheme.
Each September we run our Fit Pig Week to promote health and wellbeing within the Company with a range of fun events and initiatives such as offering wellbeing checkups.
We now have a nurse who comes in periodically to assist our staff with general wellbeing and health issues.
Our headquarters building has been designed to offer our staff a muchenhanced working environment.
In addition to offering state of the art facilities the offices include design features to inspire our staff and encourage collaboration.
Spacious and light there are break out rooms on all floors and a recreation suite that boasts a widescreen TV lounge pods for relaxing in plenty of seating areas and a library area with tabletennis and pool tables.
We host a brasserie style eatery complete with its own Deli Bar.
This subsidised restaurant is an everpopular benefit for our staff and provides a great venue for the staff social events.
With the exception of our logistics team all our employees work together in Network HQ our new Head Office building in London.
We provide a wide range of other staff benefits including a discount on the services we provide employee loans at preferential interest rates a generous Christmas bonus scheme Gourmet Society dining membership and recognition for 5 10 and 15 years service.
The Company operates an HM Revenue and Customs approved employee share option plan under which employees are granted options to purchase shares in the Company which are exercisable between three and ten years from the date of grant.
The exercise price is the market price at the time of granting the option.
Our
As at 31 March 2017 there were outstanding options over 2325716 shares which had been granted to staff representing approximately 2.9% of the issued share capital of the Company.
The Company also operates a Save As You Earn SAYE share scheme under which employees are offered the opportunity to participate in the future growth of the Company through share option arrangements.
We were pleased that over 85 members of our staff participate in the scheme.
Employees returning from maternity leave with children less than 12 months old are able to benefit from a company contribution towards the cost of an external childcare service provider of their choice.
We also provide facilities for staff to purchase childcare vouchers in a taxefficient manner using a salary sacrifice scheme in accordance with HM Revenue and Customs guidelines.
PEOPLE AND ORGANISATION CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 33 We encourage all employees to participate in a stakeholder pension scheme operated by Aviva.
Participants can choose their own contribution level which is matched by the Company within certain limits depending on length of service.
As a result of pension autoenrolment the Company is contributing to the pension funds of virtually all employees on a monthly basis.
We actively facilitate Access to Work grants for employees who have a disability health or mental health condition providing the practical support to enable them to continue working effectively.
DIVERSITY
Full and fair consideration is given to opportunities for employment training career progression and promotion on the basis of each individuals ability attitude and track record irrespective of their gender ethnic origin nationality age religion sexual orientation or disability.
The table below sets out a breakdown of the gender diversity at various levels within the organisation 2017 2016 MALE FEMALE MALE FEMALE Board 6 1 6 Senior Managers Employees 64telThe Boards position in relation to the Code requirement to set out any existing measurable objectives in relation to Board diversity is set out in the Corporate Governance Statement on page 41.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 34 CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
We are conscious of the role we have to play in minimising the environmental impact of our activities.
We operate an energy efficiency helpline to provide advice to Members on how they can reduce their energy usage we enable qualifying Members to access free home insulation we actively promote FeedIn Tariffs and we encourage Members to monitor their energy usage by providing regular meter readings.
Since moving to an online Member application process we have increasingly reduced the amount of printed marketing materials we are using and seen a significant increase in the proportion of new Members choosing not to receive a paper bill each month.
We participate in a waste paper recycling programme with a certificated saving of 235 trees and 43710kg of CO2 during the year 2016 337 trees and 45720kg of CO2 we also recycle all of our cardboard and use only fsccertified paper.
We recycle both mobile phones and toner cartridges.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS STATEMENT The greenhouse gas GHG emissions statement below provides a summary of the Groups greenhouse gas carbon emissions from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017.
It gives a summary of emissions from fuel combustion and the operation of our facilities which include our offices and company cars scope 1 and from our purchased electricity use during the year scope 2.
We have adopted the operational control approach as defined in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard Revised Edition 2004 therefore emissions associated with our Members energy usage the activities of our independent distributors and the supply of energy from Npower are not included in this statement as they are outside the Groups operational control.
Global GHG emissions TOTAL EMISSIONS TONNES CO2e 20162017 20152016 Emissions from combustion of fuel scope 1 Emissions from electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for own use scope 2 2216.3 2419.9 Total emissions 2303.7 2535.1 Intensity Emissions per full time employee FTE 2.37 tCO2eFTE 2.87 tCO2eFTE Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 35
We have reported on all the emissions sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013.
These sources fall within our own business activities over which we have operational control.
We have used the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition data gathered from our own operations and emissions factors from UK Governments Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2016.
SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT During the year our Staff Members and Partners were active in raising funds for our Charity Partner Macmillan Cancer Support.
In addition at a more local level we have supported our neighbourhood by raising funds for our local food bank the Colindale Foodbank.
HUMAN RIGHTS This report does not contain information about any policies of the Group in relation to human rights issues as it is not considered relevant to understanding the development performance or position of the Groups business.
MODERN SLAVERY AND HUMAN TRAFFICKING STATEMENT The Board has approved a Modern Slavery Act Transparency Statement in compliance with section 54 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 which is available to view on the Companys website here sitelegalmodernSlaveryStatement STRATEGIC REPORT APPROVAL The Strategic Report set out on pages 1 to 35 which incorporates the Financial and Operating Highlights the Chairmans Statement the Chief Executives Review the Financial Review Principal Risks and Uncertainties People and Organisation and Corporate Responsibility has been duly approved by the
By order of the Board David Baxter Company Secretary 12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 36 THE HON.
CHARLES WIGODER EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Charles aged 57 qualified as a Chartered Accountant with KPMG in 1984 and was subsequently employed by Kleinwort Securities as an investment analyst in the media and communication sectors.
Between 1985 and 1988 he was head of corporate finance and development at Carlton Communications PLC and then Quadrant Group PLC.
In March 1988 he left Quadrant Group to set up The Peoples Phone Company PLC which was subsequently purchased by Vodafone in December 1996.
He joined the Company in February 1998.
JULIAN SCHILD DEPUTY CHAIRMAN AND SENIOR NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Julian aged 57 qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 1986.
He joined Huntleigh Technology PLC in 1987 and was promoted to Group Finance Director that year and to Chairman in 2003.
Julian was Chairman of the Association of British Healthcare Industries from 2006 to 2007.
Following the sale of Huntleigh in 2007 he set up a company investing in startups.
Julian actively supports many charitable activities.
He is a Director of the Hospital of St.
John and Elizabeth in London and is an Advisory Fellow of Pembroke College Oxford.
Julian joined the Company in May 2010 as an independent nonexecutive director and as determined by the Board meets the test of independence under section B.1.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
ANDREW LINDSAY MBE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER Andrew aged 40 joined the Company in April 2007 and was appointed to the Board in November 2008.
Before joining Telecom Plus Andrew was Managing Director of Ryness an electrical retail chain based in London in which he previously held a significant equity stake after performing a Management Buyout in 2006.
Prior to buying Ryness he spent three years as an analyst in the UK Mergers and Acquisitions team at Goldman Sachs.
Andrew rowed for Great Britain at the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000 where he won a Gold medal.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 37 NICK SCHOENFELD CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER Nick aged 46 joined the Company in January 2015 as Chief Financial
Since 2006 Nick was Group Finance Director of Hanover Acceptances a substantial diversified private company with holdings in the food manufacturing real estate and agribusiness sectors.
He was previously employed at Kingfisher plc where he was responsible for the groups financial planning and analysis functions.
Prior to this he held senior strategic and development roles within Castorama and the Walt Disney Company having started his career as a management consultant at the Boston Consulting
Nick also has an MBA from the Harvard Business School.
ANDREW BLOWERS OBE NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Andrew aged 56 is a nonexecutive Director of AA PLC the UKs leading provider of roadside assistance and of CETA Insurance Limited a specialist online insurance provider.
His career spans over 25 years in the UK financial services industry.
Churchill Insurance before this.
Andrew joined the Company in November 2016 as an independent nonexecutive director and meets the test of independence under section B.1.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
BEATRICE HOLLOND NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Beatrice aged 56 is a member of the Board of Brown Advisory a nonexecutive director of MandG Limited a nonexecutive director at Templeton Emerging Markets Investment Trust Chairman at Millbank Investment Managers Chairman at Keystone Investment Trust and non executive director and Chairman of the Audit Committee at Henderson Smaller Companies Investment Trust.
She spent 16 years at Credit Suisse Asset Management in Global Fixed Income and began her career as an equity analyst at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management.
Beatrice joined the Company in September 2016 as an independent nonexecutive director and meets the test of independence under section B.1.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
MELVIN LAWSON NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Melvin aged 58 is the Managing Director of A Beckman PLC a company formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange which was taken private in 1995.
He has interests in a wide range of investments and is a director of Catalyst Media Group PLC and a number of other companies.
He joined the Company in September 2006.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 38
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
The Board is pleased to report that during the year and as at the date of this Annual Report the Company has applied the main principles and complied with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council in September 2014 save in the limited instances explained below.
Copies of the Code are available at www. rc.
This report together with the Directors Report on pages 74 to 79 and the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 51 to 73 provides details of how the Company has applied the principles and complied with the provisions of the Code and where required explains the rationale for instances where the Company has not been compliant namely i the external facilitation of a Board evaluation exercise and ii the requirement for share awards to be phased rather than being granted in blocks.
Further detail in relation to the Companys position regarding performancerelated elements of remuneration is set out in the Directors
Remuneration Report.
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS The Board meets regularly to review the progress of the Company and to discuss the measures required for its future development.
Directors are provided in advance with a formal agenda of matters to be discussed at each meeting and with the detailed information needed to monitor the progress of the Company.
Records of meetings and the decisions of the Board are maintained by the Company Secretary and are approved by the Board at the following meeting.
All directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary and if required are able to take independent advice at the Companys expense in the furtherance of their duties.
Any question of the removal of the Company Secretary is a matter for the Board as a whole.
Whilst the members of the Board are all experienced and well qualified the opportunity to receive further training at the Companys expense is available to them.
The nonexecutive directors attended such formal externally facilitated courses as they considered relevant to their roles and responsibilities during the year.
BOARD DUTIES The matters specifically reserved for decision by the Board are fully documented and include the following principal areas reviewing and agreeing the Companys strategy and long term objectives assessing performance in the light of the Companys strategy and objectives ensuring an effective system of risk management and internal controls is in place approving changes to the structure size and composition of the Board and reviewing its performance on an annual basis reviewing the Companys overall corporate governance arrangements and approval of the Companys financial statements prior to publication.
Matters that are specifically delegated to the committees of the Board are documented in the various Terms of Reference of each committee which are available on the Companys website site.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 39 TABLE OF ATTENDANCE AT FORMAL MEETINGS DURING THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 NAME OF DIRECTOR BOARD REMUNERATION
AUDIT
COMMITTEE
NOMINATION
COMMITTEE
Number of meetings 10 3 3 Charles Wigoder 10 Julian Schild 10 3 3 Andrew Lindsay 10 Nick Schoenfeld 10 Andrew Blowers Beatrice Hollond Melvin Lawson 10 2 2 Michael Pavia Michael Pavia retired from the Board on 22 July 2016 Beatrice Hollond and Andrew Blowers were appointed to the Board on 26 September 2016 and 21 November 2016 respectively.
In accordance with provision A.4.2 of the Code the nonexecutive directors also met without the executives present during the year.
BOARD EVALUATION The directors recognise that the Code requires an external evaluation of the boards of FTSE 350 companies to be carried out at least every three years.
However the directors considered the position in relation to the current year and concluded that an external evaluation was not necessary.
In reaching this conclusion the directors were mindful of the effective operation of the Board during the year and the results of the internal Board evaluation exercise detailed below.
The Board considers it unlikely that an external evaluation will be conducted in the medium term.
An internal evaluation of the Board for the current year was conducted through the completion of formal detailed board and board committee evaluation questionnaires by each director.
In addition a review involving each director excluding those who had joined during the year was carried out.
This review was conducted by the Deputy Chairman and Company Secretary and principally covered the following areas specific matters of concern arising from the board evaluation questionnaires individual directors performances and key objectives for the coming year and the identification of any specific training and development requirements.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 40 The evaluation questionnaires were focussed on assessing effectiveness in the following key areas the size and balance of the Board the quality of board debates and its decision making processes the individual contributions made by each director the Chairmans approach to leadership the nonexecutive directors challenge of the executive directors the Boards approach to identifying and mitigating key business risks the quality of the Companys communications with key stakeholders the Boards consideration of diversity and succession planning and the induction and training of board members.
In accordance with provision B.6.3 of the Code and building on the results of the evaluation questionnaires the Deputy Chairman led a separate evaluation of the performance of the Chairman.
This evaluation principally comprised a review of the Chairmans leadership style and tone in promoting effective decision making and ensuring constructive and sufficient debate took place around key issues.
The results of this evaluation were entirely satisfactory.
The evaluation concluded that overall the Board and its Committees had operated satisfactorily during the year with all directors making an effective contribution to the Board commensurate with their experience and responsibilities.
However the evaluation highlighted that communications between the full Board and the Companys brokers could be improved as a result it was agreed that key representatives from the Companys brokers be invited to attend a full Board meeting in the autumn.
BOARD BALANCE The Board comprised three executive directors and four nonexecutive directors at the year end.
Julian
Schild acted as the Companys Deputy Chairman and Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
Membership of each committee of the Board is set out in the table below NAME OF DIRECTOR REMUNERATION
AUDIT
COMMITTEE
NOMINATION
COMMITTEE
Charles Wigoder   3 Julian Schild 3 Chairman 3 Andrew Lindsay Nick Schoenfeld Andrew Blowers Chairman 3 Beatrice Hollond 3 3 Chairman Melvin Lawson indicates independent nonexecutive directors
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 41 As confirmed in last years Annual Report Beatrice Hollond joined the Board in September 2016 as a new independent nonexecutive director.
Ms Hollond has become a member of the Audit and Remuneration Committees and chairs the Nomination Committee of the Board.
Mindful of the Code requirement to ensure a progressive refreshing of the Board the Nomination Committee continued to implement its plan for nonexecutive director succession during the year.
As such Andrew Blowers was appointed to the Board as a new independent nonexecutive director in November 2016.
Mr Blowers has become a member of the Audit Committee and now chairs the Remuneration Committee of the Board.
Further detail on the appointment of Mr Blowers is set out in the Nomination Committee report.
As a result of his long service on the Board since appointment in late 2006 Melvin Lawson is no longer considered independent under the Code and chose to step down from membership of the Audit and Remuneration Committees during the year.
Nonetheless the Board considers that the independence of Mr Lawson has not been negatively impacted by his long service on the Board and that he continues to provide robust constructive challenges to the executive directors on a regular basis by using his longestablished knowledge of the Company.
The Board believes that the addition of two new independent nonexecutive directors to the board during the year has strengthened the Companys compliance with one of the key supporting principles of the Code in relation to the composition of the board namely that the board should include an appropriate combination of executive and nonexecutive directors and in particular independent nonexecutive directors such that no individual or small group of individuals can dominate the boards decision making.
BOARD DIVERSITY The main objective of the Nomination Committee in considering the appointment of new directors to the Board remains to ensure that successful candidates are of the highest calibre and demonstrate the best possible combination of skills and experience.
The Committees Terms of Reference further stipulate that candidates from a wide range of backgrounds shall be considered and that due regard will be given to the benefits of diversity on the Board.
The Code requires companies to set out any measurable objectives that exist in relation to board diversity.
However it remains the Committees strong view that it is not appropriate to stipulate the characteristics of any future directors including gender ahead of a full assessment of the particular requirements of each role at the time a candidate is being sought.
The Committee will continue to adhere to the principles set out above in identifying and recruiting the best candidates for any future Board roles in a nondiscriminatory manner.
Further detail regarding the Companys position in relation to encouraging diversity within all layers of the organisation is set out in the People and Organisation section of the Strategic Report on pages 31 to 33.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 42
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
There is a clear division of responsibilities at the head of the Company with the Executive Chairman responsible for developing the strategic direction of the business and ensuring the effective operation of the Board including compliance with principles of good corporate governance and the Chief Executive primarily responsible for implementing strategy and running the Groups operations on a day to day basis.
As appropriate and in order to ensure good corporate governance the Executive Chairman is assisted by the Companys independent nonexecutive Deputy Chairman in ensuring compliance with the effective operation of the Board.
The division of responsibilities between the Executive Chairman and Chief Executive has been set out in writing and agreed by the Board in accordance with the Code provision A.2.1.
SUPPLY OF INFORMATION Information is supplied to the Board in a timely manner with board papers and accounts being provided in advance of meetings.
When the Board requests additional information it is provided.
REELECTION
The Companys Articles stipulate that one third of all directors are required to retire by rotation at each Annual General Meeting and all newly appointed directors are required to offer themselves for election by the shareholders at the next Annual General Meeting.
However the Code requires that all directors of FTSE 350 companies be subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
Therefore all the directors will be submitted for reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting in July.
Acknowledging the Code requirement for a particularly rigorous review in circumstances where nonexecutive directors terms are being extended beyond six years the Board has determined that all directors submitted for reelection continue to make a valuable contribution to the commercial success of the Company with each bringing a complementary range of skills to the team.
In particular and as referred to above the Board has considered the long service of Melvin Lawson and has determined that he continues to provide an extremely valuable independent contribution to the Board as a result of his deep historic knowledge of the business and its operations.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Board has a Remuneration Committee whose responsibility is to ensure that the remuneration of executive directors is sufficient to attract retain and motivate people of the highest calibre.
The
Remuneration Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors namely Andrew Blowers Chairman of the Committee Julian Schild and Beatrice Hollond.
The Directors Remuneration Report
The Remuneration Committee has written terms of reference available on the Companys website site which describe the authority and duties which have been delegated to it by the Board.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 43 AUDIT COMMITTEE The Audit Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors Julian Schild Chairman of the Committee Andrew Blowers and Beatrice Hollond in compliance with the Code provision C.3.1.
The activities of the Audit Committee are set out on pages 47 to 50.
The Audit Committee has written terms of reference available on the Companys website site which describe the authority and duties which have been delegated to it by the Board.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE The Nomination Committee comprises Beatrice Hollond Chairman of Committee Julian Schild and Charles Wigoder and therefore has a majority of independent nonexecutive directors in compliance with the Code provision B.2.1.
The main purpose of the Nomination Committee is to make recommendations to the Board on the appointment of new directors.
The Nomination Committee has written terms of reference available on the Companys website site which describe the authority and duties which have been delegated to it by the Board.
The activities of the Nomination Committee are set out on pages 45 to 46.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS It is the policy of the Company to maintain a dialogue with institutional shareholders and to keep them informed about the objectives of the business.
The Board considers that it is appropriate for the executive directors to discuss any relevant matters regarding company performance with major shareholders and this is undertaken primarily by the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer.
The Chief Executive provides feedback from major shareholders to the other directors ensuring that Board members and in particular nonexecutive directors develop a balanced understanding of the views of major investors.
The executive directors met with a number of the Companys main shareholders during the year.
The Executive Chairman Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer also have periodic discussions with the Companys brokers and any issues are fed back to the Board as appropriate.
When reports are received from the Companys brokers following investor presentations these are submitted to the Board for review.
Additionally the nonexecutive directors have at least one opportunity each year to meet with the Companys brokers to discuss any issues.
Responsibility for communication with key shareholders in relation to corporate governance and Board remuneration matters lies primarily with the Deputy Chairman and the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee who are assisted in this regard by the Company Secretary.
Individual invitations to engage with the Deputy Chairman have previously been sent out to key shareholders and where requested or considered necessary certain matters have been discussed in more detail during the year.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 44 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING Notice of the Annual General Meeting and related papers are sent to all shareholders at least 21 working days before the meeting.
Separate resolutions are proposed for each matter including the adoption of the Report and Accounts the approval of the Companys Remuneration Policy the Directors Remuneration Report and the appointment of the Groups external auditor.
Proxy votes are counted and the meeting is advised of the number of proxies lodged for and against each resolution.
The chairmen of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination committees and the remaining nonexecutive directors are normally available to answer questions.
Shareholders who attend are invited to ask questions and take part in the meeting.
INTERNAL CONTROL The Board acknowledges its responsibility for the Groups systems of internal control and risk management.
However it recognises that any system can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The principal risks faced by the Company and the measures taken to address these risks are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 25 to 30.
In conjunction with the Companys senior management team the executive directors regularly identify review and evaluate the key risks faced by the Group and the effectiveness of the internal controls in place to mitigate these risks.
The results of these reviews are recorded in a formal document which sets out a detailed evaluation of each risk and the associated internal control in place to mitigate that risk.
The document is reported to the Audit Committee and the Companys external auditor for review at least once per year.
The Board of directors has continued to review the internal controls of the Company including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management and the principal risks which the Company faces during the year.
No material weaknesses in internal controls were identified during the year.
The disclosures regarding internal controls do not encompass the Companys former investment in the associate Opus Energy Group Limited.
SHARE CAPITAL AND VOTING RIGHTS Details of the Companys share capital and substantial shareholdings can be found in the Directors Report under the capital structure and substantial shareholders sections on pages 76 and 77.
By Order of the Board David Baxter Company Secretary 12 June 2017
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 45 NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Following the retirement of Michael Pavia in July 2016 the chairmanship of the Committee was assumed by Beatrice Hollond following her appointment to the Board as a nonexecutive director.
The other members of the Committee are Julian Schild and Charles Wigoder which means that the Committee retains a majority of independent nonexecutive directors in compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code provision B.2.1.
The key responsibilities of the Nomination Committee include making recommendations to the Board on the appointment of new nonexecutive and executive directors including making recommendations as to the composition of the Board generally and the balance between executive and nonexecutive directors giving consideration to succession planning for directors and other senior executives reviewing on an annual basis the time required from nonexecutive directors and assessing whether the nonexecutive directors are spending enough time to fulfil their duties reviewing the reelection by shareholders of directors under the annual reelection provisions of the Code and evaluating any matters relating to the continuation in office of any director including the suspension or termination of service of an executive director.
THE COMMITTEES ACTIVITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 The Committee met informally on a number of occasions during the year and Committee matters were also discussed formally as part of certain full Board meetings.
Recruitment of new independent nonexecutive director The Committees principal activity during the year related to the identification and evaluation of a new independent nonexecutive director.
As previously indicated the Committee was keen to identify candidates with experience in the retail insurance industry given the Companys plans to expand into this area in future.
To meet this specific requirement an external search consultancy Korn Ferry was instructed to draw up a shortlist of suitable candidates for consideration by the Committee.
From this shortlist a small number of candidates were invited to meet the nonexecutive directors and Executive Chairman acting on behalf of the Board to evaluate their suitability for this role.
From these Andrew Blowers was selected as the strongest candidate by the Committee.
Mr Blowers is currently a nonexecutive director of AA PLC the UKs largest provider of roadside assistance and of CETA Insurance Limited a specialist online insurance provider.
His career spans over 25 years in the UK financial services industry. to 2009 and an executive director of Churchill Insurance before this.
He also displayed a keen interest in joining the Board.
Andrew joined the Board in November 2016 and has become a member of the Audit Committee and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 46 NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Korn Ferry does not have any other connection with the Company.
Other activities Other discussions concerning Committee matters during the year principally related to the appropriateness of the composition of the Board given the Companys operations and mediumterm strategic objectives and succession planning for senior management.
Aside from the appointment of Andrew Blowers described above no other changes to the Board were deemed necessary during the year.
The Committees position in relation to diversity and the Code requirement to set out any measurable objectives that exist in this regard is included in the Corporate Governance Statement on page 41 of this document.
Beatrice Hollond Chairman of the Nomination Committee On behalf of the Board 12 June 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 47
Following the retirement of Michael Pavia in July 2016 independent nonexecutive Deputy Chairman Julian Schild became chairman of the Audit Committee the Committee.
The other members of the Committee include independent nonexecutive directors Beatrice Hollond and Andrew Blowers.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code provision C.3.1 the Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors.
Julian Schild is also identified as having recent and relevant financial experience.
THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Attendance at Committee meetings during the current year by Committee members is set out in the Corporate Governance Report on page 39 of this document.
In accordance with best practice the Committee has the opportunity as required to meet with the external auditor of the Company without the presence of any executive directors and has done so during the current year.
The key responsibilities of the Committee include reviewing the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor and the direction of the external auditor to investigate any matters of particular concern assessing the effectiveness of the Companys external auditor including considering the scope and results of the annual audit reviewing the independence and objectivity of the external auditor and assessing any potential impact on objectivity resulting from the provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor monitoring the integrity of the financial statements of the Company and any formal announcements relating to the Companys performance and reviewing the Companys internal financial controls and other internal control and risk management processes.
The senior management team and executive directors periodically review the effectiveness of key internal control and risk management processes within the Company and report any changes in such activities to the Audit Committee and the external auditor for consideration.
The review covers all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
THE COMMITTEES ACTIVITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 The Committees main activities during the year included a review of the financial statements involving a detailed evaluation of the significant accounting issues therein.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 48 The actions taken by the Committee in regard to these issues are described in the table below.
ISSUE ACTION TAKEN BY THE COMMITTEE Operational accuracy of billing system Review of internal analysis and external auditor procedures.
Monitoring of regulator communications Ofgem BABT and monthly monitoring of detailed call centre statistics which would indicate significant billing issues.
Revenue recognition in relation to energy services Monitoring of key assumptions underlying the recognition of energy revenues based on internal analysis.
Valuation of intangible assets Review of key assumptions underlying the value and recoverability of the intangible asset relating to the energy supply agreement entered into with Npower in December 2013.
Risk of management override of internal controls Review of significant accounting estimates and judgements in relation mainly to receivables balances.
Also in conjunction with the Companys external auditor the Audit Committee has considered amongst other matters compliance with the provisions of the Code and accounting developments the Companys financial control environment and its risk management and control processes.
As part of this process the Audit Committee has also considered the need for any special projects or internal investigations and concluded that no such additional projects or investigations have been required.
In accordance with the Code provision C.3.6 the Audit Committee has also considered the need for an internal audit function at the Company.
In the light of the simplicity of the Group structure its single country focus its relatively straightforward financial model the internal controls in place and the fact that management and the Board conduct regular financial reviews the Committee has recommended to the Board that an internal audit function is not currently appropriate for the business.
This decision will be kept under regular review and where appropriate extended assurance will also be sought in specific areas of concern.
During the year the Audit Committee reviewed and approved the Companys half year and annual financial statements.
The Committee has advised the Board that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole provide a fair balanced and understandable picture of the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Audit Committee has also been involved in discussions regarding the forthcoming implementation of IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers and the potential impact of the standard on the financial statements of the Company.
As detailed further below the Audit Committee also reviewed the Companys nonaudit fee policy during the year.
EXTERNAL AUDITOR EFFECTIVENESS The Companys external auditor KPMG presented a detailed audit report to the Audit Committee following a review of the annual financial statements.
Having regard to its review of the work performed by the external auditor during the year and its approach to key audit issues the Audit Committee was satisfied with the effectiveness of KPMG as external auditor.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 49 In reaching this conclusion the Committee assessed the efficiency with which the audit team was able to understand the Company and its systems and processes the experience and expertise of the audit team the scope and eventual fulfilment of the detailed audit plan the robustness and perceptiveness of the audit team in their handling of key accounting and audit judgements and the nature and quality of the content of the external auditors report.
The Committee has therefore recommended to the Board for approval by shareholders at the AGM the reappointment of KPMG as the Companys external auditor for the coming year.
EXTERNAL AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE The Audit Committee reviewed the Companys nonaudit fee policy during the year.
In order to guard against the objectivity and independence of the external auditor being compromised the provision of any significant additional services remains subject to the prior approval of the Audit Committee.
In accordance with the new policy the Committee would normally be likely to prohibit the provision of the following types of nonaudit related work by the Companys external auditor tax services relating to i preparation of tax forms ii payroll tax iii customs duties iv identification of public subsidies and tax incentives unless support from the external auditor in respect of such services is required by law v support regarding tax inspections by tax authorities unless support from the external auditor in respect of such inspections is required by law vi calculation of direct and indirect tax and deferred tax and vii provision of tax advice services that involve playing any part in the management or decisionmaking of the Company bookkeeping and preparing accounting records and financial statements payroll services designing and implementing internal control or risk management procedures related to the preparation andor control of financial information or designing and implementing financial information technology systems valuation services including valuations performed in connection with actuarial services or litigation support services legal services with respect to i the provision of general counsel ii negotiating on behalf of the Company and iii acting in an advocacy role in the resolution of litigation services linked to the financing capital structure and allocation and investment strategy of the Company except providing assurance services in relation to the financial statements such as the issuing of comfort letters in connection with prospectuses issued by the Company promoting dealing in or underwriting shares in the Company and Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 50 human resources services with respect to i management in a position to exert significant influence over the preparation of the accounting records or financial statements which are the subject of the statutory audit where such services involve searching for or seeking out candidates for such position or undertaking reference checks of candidates for such positions ii structuring the organisation design and iii cost control.
The Committee will also prohibit any other work where mutual interests exist that could impair the independence and objectivity of the external auditor.
REPORTING OF STAFF CONCERNS Melvin Lawson a longstanding nonexecutive director is the primary point of contact for staff of the Company to raise in confidence concerns they may have over possible improprieties financial or otherwise.
All employees have been notified of this arrangement in the Staff Handbook and on the Companys intranet website which sets out Melvin Lawsons contact details Code provision C.3.5.
No such matters were raised by employees during the current year.
Julian Schild Chairman of the Audit Committee On behalf of the Board 12 June 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 51
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
ANNUAL STATEMENT Dear Shareholder As newly appointed Chairman and in accordance with best practice I am pleased to provide my first introduction to the Remuneration Committee Report which appears in full on pages 51 to 73.
The Committee continues to believe that remuneration packages should be simple competitive align the interests of management with those of external shareholders and both incentivise and reward superior long term performance in a highly transparent manner.
As set out in last years Report a new long term incentive plan LTIP 2016 was duly approved at the Annual General Meeting in July 2016.
The first LTIP 2016 awards were made in April 2017 with the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer each subscribing for 30000 growth shares and simultaneously relinquishing their unexercised share options for no consideration.
Growth shares under LTIP 2016 were also issued to certain other senior employees.
The launch of LTIP 2016 required a material change to the Companys Remuneration Policy which was approved by shareholders at the Companys last AGM.
The Committee will keep this new remuneration policy under review in accordance with legislation and the principles of good corporate governance and expects to submit an updated version to the AGM to be held in 2019.
Executive directors salaries are reviewed annually.
During the year covered by this Report the Executive Chairman and Chief Executive Officer each received an increase of 1.25% taking their salaries to 431629 and 467598 respectively this percentage increase was in line with the Companys standard increase for employees generally.
The Chief Financial Officer received an increase from 406000 to 456000 reflecting his growing knowledge and experience of the Company and the increasing scope of his role.
For the year to 31 March 2018 the Executive Chairman will receive an increase of 2% on his salary to 440262 this is in line with the Companys average cost of living increase.
The Chief Executive Officer
530000 each for the period.
Whilst these increases are higher than the Companys average level of increase the Committee believes that they are fully justified by reference to the relevant competitor benchmarks the strong performance of both the Company and the individuals and the absence of any bonus element in their remuneration structure.
The Committee continues to believe that the provision of competitive base salaries together with market price equity incentives including the awards made under the LTIP 2016 are the best way to ensure a clear alignment of interest between management and shareholders combined with long term retention and motivation of the individuals involved.
In conclusion and on behalf of both myself the former Committee Chairman I would like to thank shareholders for their continued engagement on remuneration matters during the year.
Andrew Blowers Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 52 REMUNERATION POLICY REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Remuneration Committee the Committee is responsible for reviewing and making recommendations to the Board regarding the policy relating to the total remuneration paid to the executive directors and members of senior management of the Company.
It meets regularly to review and set all elements of the remuneration paid to the executive directors of the Company including pension rights and monitors the level and structure of remuneration for other senior management of the Company.
It also exercises all the powers of the Board in relation to the operation of the Companys share incentive schemes including the grant of options and the terms of those grants.
The Committee met formally three times during the year and details of attendance at these meetings are provided in the Corporate Governance Statement on page 39.
The Committees principal activities during the year included reviewing and approving executive director remuneration packages monitoring senior management remuneration packages reviewing and approving the issue of share options to certain employees and independent distributors of the Company and overseeing the implementation of the new LTIP 2016 following shareholder approval.
REMUNERATION POLICY INTRODUCTION The Companys overall remuneration policy remains to ensure that the executive directors and other senior managers are fairly and responsibly rewarded for their individual contribution to the overall long term performance of the Company in a manner that ensures that the Company is able to attract motivate and retain executives of the quality necessary to ensure the successful management of the Company.
The Companys remuneration policy will continue to be based on the principle that the fortunes of the directors and senior management should be directly aligned with those of external shareholders.
The
Committee believes this is best achieved by using sharebased incentives granted at market value and that issuing growth shares under LTIP 2016 provides a far more transparent method of directly aligning each directors interests with all shareholders compared with paying annual cash bonuses linked to shortmedium term performance measures.
In view of the weight placed by the company on long term performance as part of its remuneration structure the Committee continues to believe it is more appropriate to grant meaningful share awards in blocks rather than using a phased approach as set out in the Corporate Governance Code.
The proposed remuneration policy described in this part of the report was prepared in accordance with the requirements of Schedule 8 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in August 2013.
The existing policy was duly approved by the Companys shareholders at the AGM on 22 July 2016 and is intended to apply for the three years beginning on that date.
The Committee will continue to review the amended remuneration policy annually to ensure it remains appropriate for the Companys requirements and consistent with market practice.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 53 REMUNERATION POLICY TABLE How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods Base Salary To recognise status and responsibility to deliver operational strategy on a daytoday basis.
Base salary is paid in 12 equal monthly instalments during the year.
Base salaries are reviewed annually and any changes are effective from 1 April each year.
Increases normally for inflation and in line with other employees or in order to ensure that base salaries properly reflect the size complexity and growth rate of the Company relative to other FTSE 250 companies.
Increases may also reflect any change in the level of responsibility of the director whether through a change in role or an increase in the scale andor scope of the activities carried out by the Company or an increase in experience and knowledge of the Company and its markets.
None although overall performance of the individual is considered by the Committee when setting and reviewing salaries.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 54 How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods
To provide benefits commensurate with the role and market practice.
The Company pays for private healthcare for each director and their immediate family.
The Company provides company cars for executive directors where appropriate.
The Company provides death in service benefits up to a maximum of four times annual base salary subject to prevailing policy caps.
The Committee reserves the right to introduce other benefits should this be necessary to attract and or retain key executive directors.
In relation to new directors the Company will pay for reasonable relocation expenses where required.
Market cost of the provision of private healthcare company cars and other benefits as applicable from time to time.
None.
Annual Bonus No regular annual cash bonus scheme is currently in place although the Committee wishes to retain the flexibility to introduce such a scheme should it be deemed necessary to attract and retain high calibre executive directors in future.
Bonus payment to be dependent on achievement of performance measures.
Maximum potential bonus of 200% of annual Base Salary including the value of any share incentive awards granted as detailed below.
The overall combined limit for annual cash bonuses and share incentive awards to be 200% of annual Base
In years where no bonus is awarded andor no grant of share incentives is made to a director the maximum grant limit of 200% can be accumulated andor brought forward to be used in other years.
Performance measures are likely to include similar metrics to the Company performance measures used for share incentive schemes described below coupled with short term strategic or operational objectives specific to the individual director.
Save in exceptional circumstances directors will be required to reinvest 25% of any bonus payment after tax in the Companys shares at the prevailing market price.
These shares are then expected to be retained for the directors period of service.
REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 55 How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods Individual Cash Bonus Only paid to recognise an exceptional short term contribution to a discrete project outside the ordinary course of business requiring the director to commit time and effort significantly over and above their normal duties.
Bonus to be paid at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee and based on the formal recommendation of the
Maximum potential bonus of 10% of base salary in any one year.
Committee to evaluate the contribution of the director to any project outside the ordinary course of business with a particular emphasis on the level of commitment made by the director and the complexity and importance of the project to the strategic success of the Company.
Existing share plans Share Incentive Schemes and new LTIP LTIP 2016 To directly align the directors interests with those of all other shareholders.
Issue of share incentives at market price on the date of grant which provide direct and transparent exposure to the Company share price for the director Share Incentive Schemes or under the longterm incentive plan LTIP 2016 subscription for growth shares at market value.
Some participants below board level may be invited to subscribe for growth shares under employee shareholder status ESS i. certain employment rights.
Share Incentive Schemes include HMRC approved share option awards and unapproved share option awards.
Maximum grant value equivalent to 200% of salary per annum assuming that no annual cash bonus has been awarded during that year.
Larger awards may be made but any excess over 200% will be carried forward and taken into account in any future share incentive grants andor bonus payments.
Share Incentive Schemes Grants made periodically with awards vesting over 3 to 7 years.
Grant value of share incentives to be determined in accordance with FRC Reporting Lab guidance issued in March 2013 i. option.
Vesting is dependent on service and the achievement of performance conditions.
30% vests at threshold performance.
Share Incentive Schemes Service and performance conditions must be met over the vesting period weighted average of three performance measures typically used for Chief Executive and Finance
Adjusted EPS growth TSR growth Service number growth Weighting of each measure to be determined by the Committee and dependent on each directors role and strategic responsibility.
The Committee also retains the ability to amend the performance conditions for future grants to ensure that they appropriately reflect the strategic responsibilities of the director concerned.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 56 How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods Existing share plans Share Incentive Schemes and new LTIP LTIP 2016  continued LTIP 2016 Grants are expected to be made in a single tranche following adoption of the plan although new joiners or promoted individuals may be invited to join at a later stage.
Grant value of the growth shares will be based on their market value on the date they are issued to participants and assuming maximum dilution i. shares in the Company.
Awards will vest over 3 to 10 years and the growth shares will accrete value subject to the achievement of defined hurdles.
Participants will only share in the growth of the value of the Company if the initial share price increases to at least 20 or if the Committee so determines adjusted EPS has increased by at least 100%.
Maximum dilution will only occur if the share price exceeds 50 or if the Committee has so determined adjusted EPS has increased to at least 3.5x the current level.
The Committee may require forfeiture of shares comprised in an award in the event of a material error or misstatement in the accounts or a material failure in risk management Malus and Clawback.
LTIP 2016 Service conditions must be met over vesting periods of 3 5 7 or 10 years each in relation to 25% of the total number of growth shares issued to each participant.
The basis on which value accretes to the growth shares is determined by reference to increases in share price or at the discretion of the Commit earnings per share.
In respect of the shares which become convertible on each vesting date the basis of conversion will be the higher of the rate given by using the share price and adjusted EPS growth rates as follows
Conversion
Price
Ratio
Nil
REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 57 How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods Existing share plans Share Incentive Schemes and new LTIP LTIP 2016  continued The Committee has absolute discretion in setting the share price hurdles for both initial participants being those made shortly after the adoption of LTIP 2016 and future grants subject to the hurdles not being below the levels set out in this report i.
6.25x conversion 40 for 7.5x conversion 45 for 8.75x conversion and 50 for 10x conversion.
For initial participants the first vesting period will be the 30 day window immediately following the announcement of the results for the Company for the year ended 31 March 2019 i. annually thereafter.
For future grants the first vestingconversion period will be the 30 day window immediately following the third anniversary of the date on which the growth shares were issued then annually thereafter.
EPS
Conversion
Growth
Ratio
Nil
2.0x to 2.24x 2.5x to 2.74x 2.75x to 2.9x 3.0x to 3.24x 3.25x to 3.5x For any future grants other than those made immediately following adoption of the LTIP 2016 stretching hurdles will be set by the Committee that will not be below those which apply to initial participants.
The Company has the right to reduce or withhold the value that would otherwise accrue under the 2016 LTIP or Share Incentive Schemes prior to exercise conversion malus or after exerciseconversion clawback in certain circumstances including Gross misconduct of the participant ii Material error or misstatement in the accounts or iii Grant or vesting of awards being found to be incorrect due to misleading or inaccurate information.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 58 How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods
To provide funding for retirement.
Defined contribution pension scheme open to all employees and executive directors.
Company contributes up to a maximum of 20% of Base Salary per annum.
None.
Shareholding Requirement To strengthen the long term alignment of directors interests with those of all shareholders.
Shareholding requirement policy is primarily driven from the issue of shares resulting from the exercise of awards made under the Share Incentive Schemes and LTIP 2016.
Subject to personal circumstances and existing shareholding level and the payment of relevant taxes directors are encouraged to retain 25% of the shares resulting from each exercise of awards made under the Share Incentive Schemes and LTIP 2016.
Under LTIP 2016 in relation to the 25% blocks of their award which vest after 3 5 or 7 years participants are required to retain 50% of any shares they choose to convert for at least 12 months.
In relation to the final 25% block which vests after 10 years they are obliged to retain 75% for 12 months 50% for 18 months and 25% for 24 months.
NA
References to the JSOP have been removed from these tables as it has now expired.
REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 59 CHOICE OF PERFORMANCE MEASURES The Committee chose the performance measures described in the table above as these are deemed to align directly the executive directors interests with those of all shareholders in an easily understood and transparent manner.
Share Incentive Schemes excluding LTIP 2016 The performance measures comprise a combination of relative total shareholder return TSR Adjusted EPS excluding share incentive scheme charges and amortisation of intangible assets and service number growth measures.
Adjusted EPS is considered appropriate as a key strategic objective of the Company if it is to drive profitable growth in each year.
It also provides a balance to relative TSR which considers shareholder value creation and reflects market expectations of future performance and absolute service number growth which when achieved responsibly will also drive longterm value creation.
The use of relative TSR and Adjusted EPS growth measures provides a combined focus on the Companys financial performance and shareholder value creation.
Targets for Adjusted EPS are set by reference to internal budgeting plans and external market expectations.
TSR targets are set on a standard practice median to upper quartile ranking range.
Only 30% of share incentive awards vest for threshold levels of performance.
The Committee wishes to retain the ability to change the composition of performance conditions for future grants to directors should this be required in order to reflect appropriately the strategic responsibilities of the particular director concerned.
LTIP 2016 The Committee has chosen growth in the Companys share price as the primary measure for LTIP 2016 because it directly links the rewards received by participants with the value that has been created for shareholders.
However the Committee recognises that share price is not in the control of senior management and periods of stock market volatility may coincide with the dates on which growth shares issued under the plan are due to vest.
An alternative stretching growth metric of adjusted earnings per share for the purposes of determining the number of ordinary shares in the Company received by participants on each vesting date has therefore been included at the discretion of the Committee.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 60 ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY The bar chart below seeks to illustrate the potential rewards available under the proposed remuneration policy for the coming financial year under varying levels of performance in relation to the LTIP 2016.
The illustration reflects the issue of 30000 growth shares each to Andrew Lindsay and Nick Schoenfeld on 4 April 2017 and that no annual cash bonuses are paid.
The amounts for pensions and benefits included in the fixed remuneration figure have been calculated on the same basis as payments made for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The potential rewards available under the LTIP 2016 reflect the annual equivalent value of the awards over the 10 year life.
The ontarget and maximum performance under the LTIP 2016 have been based on a Company share price of 20 and 50 respectively at vesting.
Below target Ontarget ANDREW LINDSAY Maximum Below target Ontarget NICK SCHOENFELD
100% 79% 27% 21% 73% 100% 79% 27% 21% 73% Fixed pay LTIP 2016 The Executive Chairman Mr Wigoder has not been included in the above bar chart as he only receives fixed remuneration due to the size of his existing shareholding in the Company.
REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 61 SERVICE CONTRACTS AND POLICY FOR PAYMENT FOR LOSS OF OFFICE The table below sets out the Companys policy regarding service contracts and payments for loss of office.
Standard provision Policy Details Other provisions in service contracts Notice periods in executive directors service contracts.
6  12 months notice from the Company.
6  12 months notice from the executive director.
Executive directors may be required to work during notice period or may be provided with pay in lieu of notice if not required to work full notice.
All executive directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
NA
Compensation for loss of office in service contracts.
No more than base salary benefits and pension contributions for the period of the executive directors notice.
No contractual provision for additional compensation in the event of loss of office resulting from poor performance.
Any statutory entitlements or sums to settle or compromise claims in connection with any termination of office would need to be paid as necessary subject to the fulfilment of the directors duty to mitigate their loss.
NA
Treatment of unvested Share Incentive Scheme and LTIP 2016.
Share Incentive Schemes All awards lapse except for good leavers i.
Group by reason of the Transfer of Undertakings Protection of Employment Regulations 2006.
Share Incentive Schemes A good leaver may exercise any subsisting share options within the period of 6 months from the date of cessation of employment.
If a participant ceases to be employed within the Group otherwise than as a good leaver no unvested share options held shall be exercisable after the date of such cessation unless the Committee in its absolute discretion provided that such discretion must be exercised fairly and reasonably so decides but for a period of not more than 12 months from the date of cessation.
The Committee considers it unlikely that such discretion would be used in the event of a participant ceasing to be employed by the Company as a bad leaver.
NA Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 62 Standard provision Policy Details Other provisions in service contracts LTIP 2016 All awards lapse except for good leavers i.
Group by reason of the Transfer of Undertakings Protection of Employment Regulations 2006.
In the event of injury disability retirement or redundancy the Committee may exercise its discretion to classify the participant as a good leaver.
LTIP 2016 If a participant in the LTIP 2016 ceases to be employed within the Group otherwise than as a good leaver any unvested awards will be forfeited.
Any growth shares which have vested but not been converted must be converted within 14 days of the end of their employment otherwise they will be forfeited the conversion ratio shall be based on the average share price for the 30 working days immediately preceding the date on which conversion takes place.
If a participant in the LTIP 2016 is a good leaver then he shall be entitled to the benefit of any shares that have become convertible prior to the date of leaving and such shares shall be converted at the option of the employee either within 14 days of the termination of their employment in which case the conversion ratio shall be based on the average share price for the 30 working days immediately preceding the date on which conversion takes place or during the next annual vesting period using the criteria which apply on that date.
NA
Exercise of discretion.
Discretion to be used only in exceptional circumstances.
The Committee will take into account the recent performance of the director and the Company and the nature of the circumstances around the executive directors departure.
NA
NonExecutive Directors.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed for an initial term of one year which is then reviewed by the Board on annual basis thereafter.
Nonexecutive directors are all subject to annual reelection by shareholders at the Companys AGM each year.
Nonexecutive directors have a three month notice period and there is no provision for compensation if required to stand down.
Nonexecutive directors have the right to seek independent professional advice at the expense of the Company in the pursuance of their duties.
REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 63 APPROACH TO RECRUITMENT REMUNERATION The Committees approach to recruitment is to pay a sufficient amount necessary to attract the best candidates to the particular role.
In determining these amounts the Committee will be mindful of inter alia prevailing market rates the chosen candidates skills knowledge and experience and their existing location and position.
Where the candidate has variable remuneration arrangements with a previous employer that will be lost on leaving employment the Company will consider offering a signon award in compensation for the value foregone either as an award under an existing share incentive scheme or a bespoke award under the Listing Rules exemption available for this purpose.
The face andor expected values of the awards offered will not materially exceed the value ascribed to the awards foregone and would normally follow the same vesting timing and form i. in shares at its discretion.
The application of performance conditions would be considered and where appropriate the awards could be made subject to clawback in certain circumstances.
For material amounts the Committee would where practicable consult with key institutional shareholders ahead of committing to make any such signon awards and in any event a full explanation of any amounts awarded an explanation of why it was necessary and a breakdown of the awards to be made will be announced to the markets at the time of granting.
For the avoidance of doubt should a new director be internally promoted from the Companys senior management team they will not be expected to give up or amend any element of remuneration granted to them prior to becoming a director which is inconsistent with the remuneration policy set out above.
Any new executive directors remuneration package would include the same elements and be subject to the same constraints as those of the existing executive directors as outlined in the above policy table.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS FEES POLICY How component supports strategic objectives Operation of component Maximum potential value of component Performance metrics used weighting and time periods To attract nonexecutive directors who have a broad range of experience and skills to support and oversee the implementation of strategy and ensure good corporate governance.
Nonexecutive directors fees are set by the Board as a whole and aligned with the responsibilities of each director.
Annual fees are paid in 12 equal monthly instalments during the year.
Nonexecutive directors fees are periodically reviewed by the Board in the light of any changes in role and prevailing market rates for Nonexecutive directors in similarly sized listed companies.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration will not be set outside the parameters of prevailing market rates for similarlysized companies of equal complexity.
Nonexecutive directors are not eligible to participate in any performancerelated arrangements or share incentive schemes.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 64 STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDER VIEWS The Chairman of the Committee engages with certain of the Companys largest shareholders who have expressed an interest in being consulted in relation to remuneration matters to understand their expectations and monitor any changes in their views.
STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION OF EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS ELSEWHERE IN THE GROUP The Committee considers pay levels across the organisation when setting remuneration for all directors both executives and nonexecutives.
However this review is undertaken against a background of ensuring that the prevailing market rates for all levels of employee in the organisation are taken into account in order to attract retain and motivate the best employees at each level.
In relation to directors specific account is taken of any change in the level of responsibility of the director whether through a change in role or the increased size of the Company or an increase in experience and knowledge of the Company and its markets which may not be relevant to roles elsewhere in the Company.
The Company does not deem it appropriate to formally consult with employees regarding the determination of the directors remuneration policy as the broad remuneration structure for directors mirrors that of all employees i. andor LTIP 2016 awards.
However employees have the opportunity to make comments on any aspect of the Companys activities through an employee survey and any comments made which are relevant to directors remuneration would be considered by the Committee.
REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 65
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
This report which has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council in September 2014 and Schedule 8 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in August 2013 the Regulations has been approved by the Board of directors for submission to shareholders for approval at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
The sections under the headings Single Total Figure of Remuneration parts of Share Incentive Schemes and Pension Schemes have been subject to external audit.
SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION The Committee recommended increases to the annual base salaries of Executive Chairman Charles Wigoder Chief Executive Andrew Lindsay and Chief Financial Officer Nick Schoenfeld during the year as follows Charles Wigoder  increased from 426300 to 431629 Andrew Lindsay  increased from 461825 to 467598 and Nick Schoenfeld  increased from 406000 to 456000.
These increases for Charles Wigoder and Andrew Lindsay broadly reflected the average increase in the base salaries of the majority of the Companys employees.
Nick Schoenfeld received an increase from 406000 to 456000 reflecting his increased knowledge and experience of the Company following joining the Board in January 2015.
The nonexecutive directors receive fees for their services the details of which are described below.
The level of these fees for the existing nonexecutive directors was unchanged during the year.
Andrew Blowers and Beatrice Hollond joined the Board during the year on annual salaries of 40000 each.
YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 AUDITED Audited details of directors remuneration for the year are as follows
SALARY and FEES
BENEFITS
PENSION
CONTRIBUTIONS
SHARE
INCENTIVES TOTAL Charles Wigoder 432    432 Julian Schild 35    35 Andrew Lindsay 468 15 40  523 Nick Schoenfeld 456 13 40  509 Andrew Blowers Beatrice Hollond Melvin Lawson 12    12 Michael Pavia TOTAL 1447 28 80  1555 Michael Pavia retired from the Board on 22 July 2016 Beatrice Hollond and Andrew Blowers were appointed to the Board on 26 September 2016 and 21 November 2016 respectively.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 66 Only Andrew Lindsay held share incentive awards where final vesting was determined as a result of performance conditions relating to a period ending in the financial year to 31 March 2017.
However as set out in the Chairmans Annual Statement above these awards were relinquished for no consideration by Mr Lindsay after the year end on 4 April 2017 and therefore no amount has been included in the table above as no benefit will accrue to Mr Lindsay from these awards.
YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2016 AUDITED Audited details of directors remuneration for the year are as follows
SALARY and FEES
BENEFITS
PENSION
CONTRIBUTIONS
SHARE
INCENTIVES TOTAL Charles Wigoder 426    426 Julian Schild 35    35 Andrew Lindsay 462 11 40  513 Nick Schoenfeld 406 4 40  450 Melvin Lawson 12    12 Michael Pavia 21    21 TOTAL 1362 15 80  1457 The amounts relating to benefits received relate principally to the provision of private health insurance and Company motor vehicles to the directors.
SHARE INCENTIVE SCHEMES The Company has two conventional share option plans and the LTIP 2016.
The first share option plan and the LTIP 2016 are available to employees and the second share option plan is available to the Companys independent distributors.
The Company also has a Save As You Earn share option plan the Employee SAYE Share Option Plan for employees.
The Employee Share Option Plan Subject to serving the requisite probationary period all employees are eligible to participate in the Companys employee share option plan and be issued with market price options over shares in the Company the number of shares being related to their seniority and length of service.
The Committee recognises that the collective contribution of all employees is critical to the success of the Company and continues to believe that the granting of share options at all levels within the organisation generates employee loyalty and helps to ensure that staff turnover is kept to a minimum and below the levels seen across the industry for employees passing their probationary periods.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 67 The LTIP 2016 The LTIP 2016 comprises the issue to participants of a class of growth shares which potentially become convertible into ordinary shares in the Company over a period of typically 310 years following the achievement of stretching targets.
If these targets are not achieved then the growth shares lapse with no value to participants.
The first awards of growth shares were made to initial participants in the scheme on 4 April 2017 these included the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the Company.
The intention behind introducing LTIP 2016 was to reward the creation of significant shareholder value therefore the following hurdles have been chosen with no value accruing to participants unless either i the share price has risen to at least 20 or ii the adjusted earnings per share of the Company has at least doubled.
The initial participants have been set further stretching targets of growing the share price and adjusted EPS as each of these hurdles is achieved the conversion ratio of growth shares to ordinary shares in the Company increases as follows SHARE PRICE EPS GROWTH CONVERSION
20 2.0x Nil For initial participants the awards vest progressively over approximately a 9 year period with 25% vesting after approximately 2 years 25% after approximately 4 years 25% after approximately 6 years and the final 25% vesting after approximately 9 years in all cases conversion is subject to the relevant hurdles having been achieved on the conversion date.
In addition transfer restrictions will apply on a proportion of the shares for up to two years to ensure the interests of management and shareholders remain aligned.
For any future LTIP 2016 grants stretching targets will be set by the Committee that will not be below those which apply to initial participants.
One of the key drivers behind the introduction of LTIP 2016 is the retention of key individuals over the longer term therefore any growth shares issued to a participant will generally lapse if they cease to be employed by the Company before they have vested.
In accordance with best practice both malus and clawback provisions have been included.
A summary of the principal terms of the LTIP 2016 was included in the Appendix to the 2016 AGM circular sent to all shareholders.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 68 The Employee SAYE Share Option Plan The Employee SAYE Share Option Plan enables employees of the group to acquire shares in the Company in a tax efficient manner using monies saved from salary over a three or five year period.
A summary of the principal terms of the Employee SAYE Share Option Plan were set out in the Appendix to the 2015 AGM circular sent to all shareholders.
The Networkers and Consultants Share Option Plan The Networkers and Consultants Share Option Plan exists to provide incentives and rewards to those distributors who have been most successful in gathering new Members for the Company.
These distributors whilst not being employees of the Company are nevertheless essential to its future growth and it is the opinion of the Committee that this plan can in some cases be an important factor in their motivation.
Statement of Directors Shareholding and Share Interests audited Details of the directors shareholdings are set out in the Directors Report on page 75.
As set out in the Future Remuneration Policy Table of the Companys Remuneration Policy a target level of share ownership is not stipulated for directors however subject to personal circumstances and existing shareholdings they are encouraged to retain 25% of shares issued as a result of the exercise of share incentive awards.
Details of the share awards held by or granted to directors during the year are set out in the table below further details on the estimated cost of these awards are set out in note 18 to the financial statements CHARLES WIGODER 1 APRIL GRANTED EXERCISED
31 MARCH EXERCISE PRICE PER SHARE
FROM
EXPIRY
DATE
SAYE Scheme 25 Sept 2015 1701   1701 1058p 1 Nov 18 30 Apr 19 ANDREW LINDSAY 1 APRIL GRANTED EXERCISED
31 MARCH EXERCISE PRICE PER SHARE
FROM
EXPIRY
DATE
Share options 1 July 2014 100000   100000 1337p 1 Jul 17 30 Jun 24 1 July 2014 100000   100000 1337p 1 Jul 19 30 Jun 24 1 July 2014 100000   100000 1337p 1 Jul 21 30 Jun 24 SAYE Scheme 25 Sept 2015 1701   1701 1058p 1 Nov 18 30 Apr 19
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 69 NICK SCHOENFELD 1 APRIL GRANTED EXERCISED
31 MARCH EXERCISE PRICE PER SHARE
FROM
EXPIRY
DATE
Share options 13 July 2015 100000   100000 985p 13 Jul 18 12 Jul 25 13 July 2015 50000   50000 985p 13 Jul 19 12 Jul 25 13 July 2015 50000   50000 985p 13 Jul 20 12 Jul 25 13 July 2015 50000   50000 985p 13 Jul 21 12 Jul 25 13 July 2015 50000   50000 985p 13 Jul 22 12 Jul 25 SAYE Scheme 25 Sept 2015 1701   1701 1058p 1 Nov 18 30 Apr 19 Mr Andrew Lindsay On 1 July 2014 300000 share options were awarded to Mr Lindsay under the terms of the Employee Share Option Scheme.
These options were made subject to performance conditions which were described in previous annual reports.
However Mr Lindsay relinquished these options for no consideration after the year end on 4 April 2017 and therefore no benefit will accrue to Mr Lindsay from this award.
Mr Nick Schoenfeld On 13 July 2015 300000 share options were awarded to Mr Schoenfeld under the terms of the Employee Share Option Scheme.
These options were made subject to performance conditions which were described in the previous annual report.
However Mr Schoenfeld relinquished these options for no consideration after the year end on 4 April 2017 and therefore no benefit will accrue to Mr Schoenfeld from this award.
DIRECTORS CONTRACTS OF SERVICE There are Service Contracts or Letters of Appointment for Charles Wigoder 5 May 2011 Andrew Lindsay 5 May 2011 Nick Schoenfeld 9 October 2014 Julian Schild 25 May 2010 Andrew Blowers 2 November 2016 Beatrice Hollond 26 September 2016 and Melvin Lawson 27 September 2006.
These provide notice periods of three months on either side for the nonexecutive directors and the following notice periods for the executive directors Mr Wigoder twelve months on either side and Mr Lindsay and Mr Schoenfeld each with six months on either side.
PENSION SCHEMES AUDITED The Company makes no contributions to the pensions of any current directors except to Mr Lindsay and Mr Schoenfeld details of which are shown within the table on page 65.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 70 PERFORMANCE GRAPH SHOWING TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN The following graph shows the Companys performance measured by total shareholder return compared with the performance of the FTSE All Share Telecommunications Index and the FTSE 350 for the period 2 April 2012 to 31 March 2017.
As noted in previous years the FTSE All Share Telecommunications Index was initially selected at a time when a larger proportion of the Companys revenues related to the supply of telephony services only approximately 18% of the Companys revenues are now generated from such telephony services.
The FTSE 350 Index is included as a further comparator in the light of the fact that there are no sector specific indices containing directly comparable quoted companies supplying a broad range of services similar to that provided by the Company.
5tel250teltel 2017 Telecom Plus PLC FTSE 350 FTSE All Share Telecommunications SOURCE BLOOMBERG Instructions for 2018 Open graph from Word into PowerPoint.
Paste powerpoitn graph into illustrator then it will vectorise graph lines just recolour
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 71 TABLE OF HISTORICAL DATA The following table shows the total remuneration as defined by the Regulations and the amount vesting under share incentive schemes as a percentage of the maximum that could have been achieved in respect of the Chief Executive.
The Chief Executive was Mr Andrew Lindsay in all years shown in the table.
YEAR ENDED 31 MARCHtel 2016 2017 Single figure of total remuneration 000 399 432 2175 513 523 Percentage of maximum of share incentives vesting in year % NA NA 100 NA NA The gain on share incentive schemes vesting in the year ended 31 March 2015 represent the gains on share incentive awards based on the prevailing share price as at the earlier of the date of exercise of the share incentives and the year end in which the awards vested.
No share incentive awards vested to the Chief Executive in the years ended 31 March 2013 2014 2016 and 2017.
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN THE REMUNERATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE The following table shows the change in certain aspects of the remuneration of Mr Lindsay.
YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017
Salary 468 462 1.25% Benefits 15 11 36.36% The Groups pay review for the year ended 31 March 2017 which took effect on 1 April 2016 awarded average percentage increases in salaries to employees of 1.25%.
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE SPEND ON PAY The Regulations require an illustration of the significance of the Companys expenditure on pay in the context of its operations.
Set out below is a summary of the Companys levels of expenditure on pay and other significant cash outflows to key stakeholders.
CASH OUTFLOWS TO KEY STAKEHOLDERS 2017
Wages and salaries 31501 27495 14.6% Dividends paid 37633 34331 9.6% Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 72 STATEMENT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY IN THE FOLLOWING FINANCIAL YEAR Base Salaries The Committee recommended increases of 13.3% and 16.2% be made to the base salaries of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer for the forthcoming year ended 31 March 2018 with effect from 1 April 2017 taking each of their salaries to 530000.
Whilst these increases are above the Companys normal cost of living increase the Committee believes that they are fully justified by reference to the relevant competitor benchmarks and the strong performance of the Company and both individuals.
In setting these increases the Committee also took into account the fact that the executive directors do not receive annual cash or share bonuses.
The Committee also recommended an increase of 2.0% to the Executive Chairmans salary to 440262 in line with the Companys average cost of living increase.
Employee and distributor share option schemes The Companys existing employee and distributor share option schemes were put in place in August 2007 and have a 10 year life.
As such two new share option plans will be submitted for approval by shareholders at the forthcoming AGM in July.
The new schemes will be proposed based on substantially the same terms and conditions as the existing plans.
LTIP 2016 In line with the intention of the Company as set out in last years Annual Report on 4 April 2017 Andrew Lindsay and Nick Schoenfeld each subscribed to 30000 growth shares in accordance with the rules of LTIP 2016 set out above.
Other benefits Directors remuneration in relation to pension contributions and other benefits for the year will be made in accordance with the Remuneration Policy.
SHAREHOLDER VOTE AND SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT As set out in the Remuneration Policy the Committee encourages dialogue with the Companys major shareholders regarding remuneration matters and will endeavour to consult with these shareholders ahead of any significant future changes to the remuneration policy.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 73 Details of the votes cast in relation to the main remuneration resolutions at last years AGM are set out below 2016 AGM % To approve the 2016 Remuneration Report Votes cast in favour and Chairman discretion 52912532 97.68 Votes cast against 1257898 2.32 Total 54170430 100.00 To approve the Remuneration Policy Votes cast in favour and Chairman discretion 35263962 66.24 Votes cast against 17974019 33.76 Total 53237981 100.00 To approve the implementation of the LTIP 2016 Votes cast in favour and Chairman discretion 35263351 66.23 Votes cast against 17978277 33.77 Total 53241628 100.00 In addition to the above there were 15525 947974 and 944327 votes withheld for each vote above respectively.
The Committee noted the high number of votes cast against the Remuneration Policy and the proposed introduction of the LTIP 2016.
However the Committee firmly believes that LTIP 2016 was in the best interests of the Company and that its implementation was in the best longterm interests of the Company.
THE UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE The Committee acknowledges the requirement set out in the Corporate Governance Code issued by the FRC in September 2014 the Code for companies to put in place arrangements that will enable them to recover or withhold variable remuneration when appropriate to do so.
The Committee therefore included provisions to withhold or recover such remuneration in the event of fraud or malus committed by a director in the recent LTIP 2016 awards.
Andrew Blowers Chairman of the Remuneration Committee On behalf of the Board 12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 74 The directors have pleasure in presenting their report and the audited financial statements for the year to 31 March 2017.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES AND BUSINESS REVIEW A full review of the development of the business is contained in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 35.
A summary of the financial risk management objectives and policies is contained in note 19 to the financial statements.
This Directors Report together with the information in the Strategic Report forms the management report for the purposes of DTR 4.1.8R.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS The profit for the year after tax of 94960000 2016 31774000 has been transferred to reserves.
An interim dividend of 23p per share 2016 22p was paid during the year.
A final dividend of 25p per share 2016 24p per share is proposed.
On 20 April 2017 the Board announced that it expected adjusted profit before tax from continuing activities to be around 53 million for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The actual adjusted profit before tax for the year ended 31 March 2017 from continuing activities was 53.3 million.
GROUP REORGANISATION On 1 April 2017 the trading activities the majority of the assets and liabilities and the employees of Telecom Plus PLC as well as all its subsidiaries were transferred to Utility Warehouse Limited a 100% subsidiary of Telecom Plus PLC under a group reorganisation.
The reorganisation was designed to provide the Group with a more conventional legal structure in line with other large publiclylisted entities and to facilitate the launch of the LTIP 2016 detailed in the Remuneration Committee report.
The reorganisation will not have any impact on the consolidated trading results of the Group going forward.
DIRECTORS REPORT Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 75
The names of directors who served during the year and their interests including those of their connected persons in the share capital of the Company at the start and end of the year are set out in the table below.
Details of the directors share incentive awards are disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 68 to 69.
ORDINARY 5P SHARES HELD AT DIRECTOR 31 MARCH 2017 31 MARCH 2016 Charles Wigoder 16073241 16073241 Julian Schild 189932 189932 Andrew Lindsay 382674 382674 Nick Schoenfeld 6250 6250 Andrew Blowers Beatrice Hollond 1800 Melvin Lawson 2136744 2136744 Michael Pavia NA 36391 indicates nonexecutive directors Michael Pavia retired from the Board on 22 July 2016 In respect of the above shareholdings Mr Wigoder has a nonbeneficial interest in 3067683 shares 2016 3067683.
The powers of directors are set out in the Companys Articles of Association the Articles.
The Articles may be amended by way of a special resolution of the members of the Company.
The Board may exercise all powers conferred on it by the Articles and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and other applicable legislation.
The Board has established a formal rigorous and transparent process for the selection and subsequent appointment of new directors to the Board.
The rules relating to the appointment and replacement of directors are contained within the Articles.
The Articles provide that Directors may be appointed by an ordinary resolution of the members or by a resolution of the Directors provided that in the latter instance a director appointed in that way retires at the first Annual General Meeting following their appointment.
In addition shareholders with in excess of 20% of the shares in the Company are entitled under the Articles to appoint a director and remove any such director appointed.
In accordance with current best practice all Board directors will be retiring at the forthcoming AGM and will then offer themselves for reelection.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 76 DIRECTORS CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The Directors have a statutory duty to avoid situations where they have or could have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or possibly may conflict with the Companys interests.
The Companies Act 2006 and the Companys Articles allow the Board to authorise such conflicts of interest should this be deemed to be appropriate.
The Board has put in place effective procedures for managing and where appropriate approving conflicts or potential conflicts of interest.
Under these procedures the Directors are required to declare all directorships or other appointments to companies which are not part of the Group as well as other situations which could give rise to a potential conflict.
The Board will where appropriate authorise a conflict or potential conflict and will impose all necessary restrictions andor conditions where it sees fit.
The Company maintains a register of directors interests which is reviewed regularly by the Board.
DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS LIABILITY INSURANCE The Company maintains appropriate insurance to cover directors and officers liability and has provided an indemnity as permitted by the Companies Act 2006 in respect of all of the Companys directors which was in force throughout the financial year and remains in force.
Neither the insurance nor the indemnity provides cover where a director has acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
EMPLOYEES
The requirements of the Companies Act 2006 in respect of employees are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 31 to 33.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDERS As at 12 June 2017 in addition to the directors the following have notified the Company of their substantial shareholdings as detailed below SHAREHOLDER NUMBER OF SHARES PERCENTAGE OF ISSUED SHARE CAPITAL Standard Life Investments Ltd 7453001 9.3% Schroders PLC 6057750 7.5% Hargreave Hale Ltd 3756743 4.7% Norges Bank 3241358 4.0% DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 77 CAPITAL STRUCTURE Restrictions on the transfer of shares The Company only has ordinary shares in issue.
Other than as set out below there are no restrictions on the transfer of the ordinary shares except where a holder refuses to comply with a statutory notice requesting details of those who have an interest and the extent of their interest in a particular holding of shares.
In such cases where the identified shares make up 0.25% or more of the ordinary shares in issue the directors may refuse to register a transfer of any of the identified shares in certificated form and so far as permitted by the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001 a transfer of any of the identified shares which are held in the electronic share dealing system CREST unless the directors are satisfied that they have been sold outright to an independent third party.
Other than as set out below and so far as the directors are aware there were no arrangements at 31 March 2017 by which with the Companys cooperation financial rights carried by securities are held by a person other than a holder of securities or any arrangements between holders of securities that are known to the Company and which may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
Executive Chairman Charles Wigoder entered into an agreement to charge 325000 of his shares in the Company as security for a loan from Barclays Bank on 3 December 2013.
The loan enabled him to apply for 57142 ordinary shares as part of his open offer entitlement which resulted from funding the Companys entering into of the new energy supply arrangements with Npower on 20 December 2013.
Under the terms of the charge title to the 325000 shares can be transferred sold or otherwise dealt with by Barclays following the occurrence of a failure to pay any amount due and payable under the loan.
In addition certain members of senior management have loans secured against some or all of their shareholdings in the Company which restrict their ability to transfer these shares prior to repayment of the loans.
The Company established a Joint Share Ownership Plan the JSOP on 30 March 2011.
As part of the JSOP an employee benefit trust was established to jointly hold shares with the participants in the plan the JSOP Share Trust.
As at 31 March 2017 the JSOP Share Trust held 252638 shares.
All voting and dividend rights attached to these shares have been waived.
Takeovers
There are no significant arrangements to which the Company is party that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid save in relation to the arrangements with Npower and EE for the supply of energy and mobile telephony respectively or any agreements between the Company and its directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment whether through resignation purported redundancy or otherwise that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Authority for purchase of own shares At the last AGM held on 22 July 2016 the Company obtained authority to purchase up to 8025835 ordinary shares representing approximately 10% of the issued ordinary share capital excluding treasury shares as at 17 June 2016.
The Company intends to renew this authority at this years AGM.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 78 During the year the Company did not repurchase any ordinary shares.
As previously announced the Company intends to use certain of the proceeds from the disposal in February 2017 of its investment in Opus Energy Group Limited to undertake a tender offer open to all shareholders.
Details of the tender offer are set out in a circular sent to shareholders along with this document.
Treasury shares The Company held 60000 ordinary shares in treasury as at 31 March 2017 2016 60000.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION Each of the directors has confirmed that so far as he is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and that he has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The Companys position in relation to compliance with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council is set out in the Corporate Governance Statement on pages RISK CONTROL AND VIABILITY In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a three year period taking into account the Groups current position and the potential impact of the principal risks and uncertainties set out on pages 25 to 30.
Based on this assessment the directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to March 2020.
The directors have determined that a three year period to 31 March 2020 constitutes an appropriate period over which to provide its viability statement.
This is the period focussed on by the Board during the strategic planning process.
Whilst the directors have no reason to believe the Group will not be viable over a longer period given the inherent uncertainty involved we believe this presents users of the Annual Report with a reasonable degree of confidence while still providing a longerterm perspective.
In making this statement the Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The Board considers annually and on a rolling basis a three year strategic plan.
The output of this plan is used to perform central debt and headroom profile analysis which includes a review of sensitivity to business as usual risks such as profit growth and working capital variances and severe but plausible events.
The Board also considers the ability of the Group to raise finance and deploy capital.
The results take account of the availability and likely effectiveness of the mitigating actions that could be taken to avoid or reduce the impact or occurrence of the underlying risks.
DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 79 Under the revised energy supply arrangements which were effective from 1 December 2013 Npower continues to be responsible for funding the principal working capital requirements relating to the supply of energy to the Companys Members.
This includes funding the Budget Plans of Members who pay for their energy in equal monthly instalments and prefunding the payment of certain energy network charges.
The Group has from Barclays Bank PLC and Lloyds Bank PLC total revolving credit facilities of 150 million for the period to 14 December 2020.
As at 31 March 2017 18.7 million of cash was held on the balance sheet with no debt outstanding following the receipt of proceeds from the sale of the Companys shareholding in Opus Energy Group Limited in February 2017.
The Company has announced that it intends to return 25 million of these proceeds via a share tender offer in July 2017.
The Company has considerable financial resources together with a large and diverse retail and small business membership base and long term contracts with a number of key suppliers.
As a consequence the directors believe that the Company is well placed to manage its business risks.
Whilst this review does not consider all of the risks that the Group may face the directors consider that this stresstesting based assessment of the Groups prospects is reasonable in the circumstances of the inherent uncertainty involved.
For and on behalf of the Board David Baxter Company Secretary 12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 80 The directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors are required to prepare the group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss for the group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare a directors report and directors remuneration report which comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
WEBSITE PUBLICATION The directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the financial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the Companys website in accordance with legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the Companys website is the responsibility of the directors.
The directors responsibility also extends to the integrity of the financial statements contained therein.
DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES PURSUANT TO DTR4 The directors confirm to the best of their knowledge the Group financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit and loss of the Group and the annual report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the financial position of the Group and the parent company together with a description or the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 81 Having taken advice from the Audit Committee the Board considers the report and accounts taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and that it provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
For and on behalf of the Board Charles Wigoder Executive Chairman 12 June 2017 Nick Schoenfeld Chief Financial Officer 12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 82 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TELECOM PLUS PLC ONLY OPINIONS AND CONCLUSIONS ARISING FROM OUR AUDIT 1 Our opinion on the financial statements is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Telecom Plus PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017 set out on pages 88 to 126.
In our opinion the Financial Statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group Financial Statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group Financial Statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
OVERVIEW
Materiality Group Financial Statements as a whole 1.65m 2016 1.9m 4.5% 2016 4.7% of reported profit before tax of normalised group profit before tax from continuing operations Coverage 100% 2016 100% of group profit before tax from continuing operations RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT VS 2016 Recurring risks Energy revenue recognition unchanged Valuation of energy supply agreement intangible asset unchanged Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 83 2 Our assessment of risks of material misstatement In arriving at our audit opinion above on the financial statements the risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows unchanged from 2016 THE RISK OUR RESPONSE Energy revenue recognition Use of estimates Our procedures included Refer to page 48 Audit Committee Report page 95 critical accounting estimates page 97 accounting policy and page 103 financial disclosures.
Revenue recognised in relation to the supply of gas and electricity includes estimates of the value of the energy supplied to customers between the date of the last meter reading and the year end.
The method of estimating such revenues is complex and judgmental requiring estimates and assumptions to be made to assess the volume of energy supplied which is sensitive to a number of factors one of which includes any volatility in weather patterns.
The risk of misstatement is that the accounting for the Groups estimated revenues does not appropriately reflect the underlying actual delivery of gas and electricity as at 31 March 2017 and as a result revenues may be misstated.
Control design testing the design implementation and operating effectiveness of the Groups controls which include monitoring the accuracy of the billing systems estimation of energy usage Test of detail for a sample of customers analysing the accuracy of the energy usage estimate at the year end by comparing actual usage obtained from meter readings received between 15 March 2017 and 2 April 2017 with the billing system generated estimated usage for the same period Test of detail assessing the volume and nature of customer complaints received in relation to estimated meter readings in order to identify whether any indicators exist of an underlying issue with the Groups estimation of energy usage and Assessing transparency considering whether the critical accounting estimates judgements and assumptions and accounting policy disclosures properly reflect the judgements and estimates inherent in recognising revenue.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 84 THE RISK OUR RESPONSE Energy supply agreement intangible asset Valuation of the energy supply agreement intangible asset Our procedures included 187.1m 2016 198.4m Refer to page 48 Audit Committee Report page 95 critical accounting estimates page 99 accounting policy and page 108 financial disclosures.
An intangible asset is held on the Groups balance sheet at cost less amortisation representing an energy supply agreement to supply gas and electricity to the Group.
Wholesale energy prices are volatile and there are high levels of competition in the energy supply market leading to challenging market conditions with increased customer churn and price competitiveness.
In that context the external market conditions have led to the identification of a market indicator of impairment.
Recoverability of the intangible asset is subject to judgement in terms of the assumptions used in the Groups discounted cash flow model in particular in respect of customer growth and the discount rate.
Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting and discounting future cash flows which are the basis of the assessment of recoverability this is one of the key judgemental areas that our audit is concentrated on.
Methodology choice assessing the appropriateness of the design and implementation of the Groups discounted cash flow model in particular the appropriateness of the cash flows used in the model Historical comparisons assessing the reasonableness of the Groups forecasting by comparing actual performance for the year against forecasts for the same period in the prior year model Benchmarking assumptions evaluating the Groups assumptions included within the discounted cash flow forecasts by comparing key inputs such as projected growth cost inflation and discount rates to internally and externally derived data Sensitivity analysis performing sensitivity analysis on the assumptions and Assessing transparency considering whether the Groups disclosures about the sensitivity of the outcome of the impairment assessment to changes in key assumptions.
3 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 1.65m 2016 1.9m.
The 2017 materiality has been determined with reference to a benchmark of group profit before tax from continuing operations of 40.8m normalised to exclude a recovery of 4.2m of previously incurred costs relating to the smart meter rollout programme of which it represents 4.5% 2016 4.7%.
We reported to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 82500 2016 95000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Five 2016 four components were subjected to full scope audits all conducted by the Group team with a component materiality ranging from 35000 to 1237500 2016 90000 to 1500000.
These components accounted for 100% of total Group revenue 98% of Group profit before taxation and 100% of total Group assets.
In both 2017 and 2016 the Group audit team also performed specified riskfocused procedures over the share of profit of associate prior to its disposal covering the revenue recognition policy and estimation of supply of energy to customers.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TELECOM PLUS PLC ONLY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 85 The group team performed procedures on the item excluded from normalised group profit before tax from continuing operations.
MATERIALITY
1.65m 2016 1.9m Whole nancial statements materiality 2016 1.9m NORMALISED PROFIT BEFORE TAX FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 40.8m 2016 40.7m includes operations disposed of in the year ended 31 March 2017 Normalised prot before tax from continuing operations Group materiality Range of materiality at ve components 35000  1237500 2016 90000  1500000 Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 95000 NORMALISED GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS Full scope for group audit purposes 2017 Specied riskfocused audit procedures 2017 Full scope for group audit purposes 2016 Specied riskfocused audit procedures 2016 GROUP REVENUE GROUP PROFIT BEFORE TAX GROUP TOTAL ASSETS 100% 2016 100% 100% 2016 100% 100% 2016 100% 100% 2016 100% 8tel100 97 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 86 4 Our opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 is unmodified In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements.
Based solely on the work required to be undertaken in the course of the audit of the financial statements and from reading the Strategic Report and the Directors Report we have not identified material misstatements in those reports and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies act 2006.
5 We have nothing to report on the disclosures of principal risks Based on the knowledge we acquired during our audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors statement of risk control and viability on pages 78 to 79 concerning the principal risks their management and based on that the directors assessment and expectations of the Groups continuing in operation over the 3 years to 31 March 2020 or the disclosures in note 1 of the financial statements concerning the use of the going concern basis of accounting.
6 We have nothing to report in respect of the matters on which we are required to report by exception Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if based on the knowledge we acquired during our audit we have identified other information in the annual report that contains a material inconsistency with either that knowledge or the financial statements a material misstatement of fact or that is otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our audit and the Directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the Audit Committee Report does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit
Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TELECOM PLUS PLC ONLY CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 87 Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the directors statement set out on pages 78 to 79 in relation to going concern and longerterm viability and the part of the Corporate Governance Statement on pages 38 to 44 relating to the Companys compliance with the eleven provisions of the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review.
We have nothing to report in respect of the above responsibilities.
SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITIES As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on pages 80 to 81 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Financial Statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditscopeukprivate.
This report is made solely to the Companys Members as a body and is subject to important explanations and disclaimers regarding our responsibilities published on our website at siteauditscopeukco2014a which are incorporated into this report as if set out in full and should be read to provide an understanding of the purpose of this report the work we have undertaken and the basis of our opinions.
David Neale Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5GL United Kingdom 12 June 2017 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 88 Note 2017 2016 Continuing operations Revenue 1 740290 744732 Cost of sales 609859 620858 Gross profit 130431 123874 Distribution expenses 21116 21424 Share incentive scheme charges 101 36 Total distribution expenses 21217 21460 Administrative expenses 55195 52355 Share incentive scheme charges 1084 2479 Amortisation of energy supply contract intangible 11228 11228 Total administrative expenses 67507 66062 Other income 449 397 Operating profit 12 42156 36749 Financial income 89 126 Financial expenses 1378 1801 Net financial expense 1289 1675 Profit before taxation 40867 35074 Taxation 4 10424 8909 Profit for period 30443 26165 Discontinued operations Profit for period from associate 8 64517 5609 Profit and other comprehensive income for the year attributable to owners of the parent 94960 31774 Basic earnings per share Continuing operations 38.0p 32.8p Discontinued operations 80.6p 7.0p Diluted earnings per share Continuing operations 37.8p 32.6p Discontinued operations 80.1p 7.0p CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 89 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 MARCH 2017 Note 2017
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 5 31117 33063 Investment property 5 9089 9211 Intangible assets 6 190575 198364 Goodwill 7 3742 3742 Investments in associate 8  11604 Other noncurrent assets 10 15593 13800 Total noncurrent assets 250116 269784 Current assets Inventories 2676 2762 Trade and other receivables 11 29812 27749 Prepayments and accrued income 11 98320 97233 Cash 18732 35343 Total current assets 149540 163087 Total assets 399656 432871 Current liabilities Deferred consideration 13  21500 Trade and other payables 13 24608 26580 Current tax payable 5407 936 Accrued expenses and deferred income 14 111322 114583 Total current liabilities 141337 163599 Noncurrent liabilities Long term borrowings 12  70152 Deferred tax 9 605 839 Total noncurrent liabilities 605 70991 Total assets less total liabilities 257714 198281
Share capital 15 4024 4016 Share premium 138642 137729 Treasury shares 15 760 760 JSOP reserve 1150 1150 Retained earnings 116958 58446 Total equity 257714 198281 These accounts were approved and authorised for issue by the Board on 12 June 2017 Andrew Lindsay
Nick Schoenfeld Director Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 90 Note 2017
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 5 31117 33063 Investment property 5 9089 9211 Intangible assets 6 3439 Investments in associate 8  2294 Investments in subsidiary undertakings 8 227097 227097 Other noncurrent assets 10 9528 11547 Total noncurrent assets 280270 283212 Current assets Inventories 2600 2762 Trade and other receivables 11 12476 14033 Prepayments and accrued income 11 8023 7159 Cash 18368 35002 Total current assets 41467 58956 Total assets 321737 342168 Current liabilities Deferred consideration 13  21500 Trade and other payables 13 41278 43937 Current tax payable 5405 938 Accrued expenses and deferred income 14 9462 8712 Total current liabilities 56145 75087 Noncurrent liabilities Long term borrowings 12  70152 Deferred tax 9 609 845 Total noncurrent liabilities 609 70997 Total assets less total liabilities 264983 196084
Share capital 15 4024 4016 Share premium 138642 137729 Treasury shares 15 760 760 Retained earnings 123077 55099 Total equity 264983 196084 These accounts were approved and authorised for issue by the Board on 12 June 2017 Andrew Lindsay
Nick Schoenfeld
COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 MARCH 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 91 CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 Group Companytel 2016 Operating activities Profit before taxation  continuing operations 40867 35074 38256 55987 Adjustments for Distributions from subsidiary companies    20000 Net financial expense 1289 1675 1320 1675 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 3203 3596 3203 3596 Profit on disposal of fixed assets 21 12 21 12 Amortisation of intangible assets 12088 11228 860 Amortisation of debt arrangement fees 22telDecreaseincrease in inventories 86 1869 162 1869 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 4084 8202 3570 1459 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 5241 1206 473 145 Decrease in intercompany payable   1443 2321 Share incentive scheme charges 1185 2515 1185 2515 Corporation tax paid 6190 8755 3429 5190 Net cash flow from operating activities 43411 53845 43419 33762 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 2066 4080 2066 4080 Purchase of intangible assets 3406  3406 Disposal of property plant and equipment Payment of deferred consideration 21500  21500 Distributions from subsidiary companies    20000 Disposal of associated company 71103  71103 Distribution from associated company 5074 5474 5074 5474 Purchase of shares in associated company 55 626 55 626 Interest received Cash flow from investing activities 49301 905 49256 20904 Financing activities Dividends paid 37633 34331 37633 34331 Interest paid 1370 2202 1356 2202 Drawdown of long term borrowing facilities  71241  71241 Repayment of long term borrowing facilities 71241 70000 71241 70000 Fees associated with long term borrowing facilities  1147  1147 Issue of new ordinary shares 92telCash flow from financing activities 109323 35943 109309 35943 Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 16611 18807 16634 18723 Net cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 35343 16536 35002 16279 Net cash and cash equivalents at the year end 18732 35343 18368 35002 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 92
Share capital
Treasury shares
Retained earnings Total Balance at 1 April 2015 4011 137238 760 2275 58106 196320 Profit and total comprehensive income     31774 31774 Dividends     34331 34331 Credit arising on share options     1224 1224 Credit arising on exercise of JSOP    1125 1673 2798 Issue of new ordinary shares 5 491    496 Balance at 31 March 2016 4016 137729 760 1150 58446 198281 Profit and total comprehensive income 94960 94960 Dividends     37633 37633 Credit arising on share options     1185 1185 Issue of new ordinary shares 8 913    921 Balance at 31 March 2017 4024 138642 760 1150 116958 257714 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 93 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017
Share capital
Treasury shares
Balance at 1 April 2015 4011 137238 760 31019 171508 Profit and total comprehensive income    54389 54389 Dividends    34331 34331 Credit arising on share options    1224 1224 Credit arising on JSOP exercise    2798 2798 Issue of new ordinary shares 5 491   496 Balance at 31 March 2016 4016 137729 760 55099 196084 Profit and total comprehensive income 104426 104426 Dividends    37633 37633 Credit arising on share options    1185 1185 Issue of new ordinary shares 8 913   921 Balance at 31 March 2017 4024 138642 760 123077 264983 Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 94 GENERAL INFORMATION Telecom Plus PLC the Company is a company domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company for the year ended 31 March 2017 comprise the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group and the Groups interest in associates.
The financial statements were authorised for issue by the directors on 12 June 2017.
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS As a result of the relative size and historical volatility of share incentive scheme charges it has been decided to separately disclose the amounts on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
In view of the size and nature of the charge as a noncash item the amortisation of energy supply contract intangible asset has also been separately disclosed on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the period.
More information regarding the intangible asset is set out in note 6 of these financial statements.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES a Statement of compliance The financial statements of the Group and the Company have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRIC interpretations as endorsed by the EU and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The Companys business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 35.
The financial position of the Company its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review on pages 20 to 24 and within notes 12 and 19 to the financial statements.
In addition notes 15 and 19 include the Companys objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and its exposures to credit risk and liquidity risk.
Under the revised energy supply arrangements which were effective from 1 December 2013 Npower continues to be responsible for funding the principal working capital requirements relating to the supply of energy to the Companys Members.
This includes funding the Budget Plans of Members who pay for their energy in equal monthly instalments and prefunding the payment of certain energy network charges.
The Company has from Barclays Bank PLC and Lloyds Bank PLC total revolving credit facilities of 150.0 million for the period to 14 December 2020 of which Nil was drawn down as at 31 March 2017 2016 71.2 million drawn down.
The Company has considerable financial resources together with a large and diverse retail and small business membership base and long term contracts with a number of key suppliers.
As a consequence the directors believe that the Company is well placed to manage its business risks.
On this basis the directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
The annual financial statements have therefore been prepared on a going concern basis in accordance with the FRCs Going Concern and Liquidity Risk Guidance for Directors of UK Companies 2009 issued in October 2009.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 95 b Basis of preparation continued The accounting policies set out below have been consistently applied to both years presented unless otherwise stated.
The financial statements have been prepared on a historical costs basis.
Post balance sheet events On 1 April 2017 the trading activities the majority of the assets and liabilities and the employees of Telecom Plus PLC as well as all its subsidiaries were transferred to Utility Warehouse Limited a 100% subsidiary of Telecom Plus PLC under a group reorganisation.
The reorganisation was designed to provide the Group with a more conventional legal structure in line with other large publiclylisted entities.
The reorganisation will not have any impact on the consolidated trading results of the Group going forward.
Critical accounting estimates judgements and assumptions In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies which are described below the Directors have made judgements estimations and assumptions regarding the future.
The judgements estimations and assumptions that have the most significant impact on the amounts recognised in the financial statements are detailed below.
Estimates and judgements are evaluated based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
In future actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions.
Revenue relating to the sale of energy includes an estimate of the value of electricity or gas supplied to customers between the date of the last meter reading and the year end.
This will have been estimated by using historical consumption patterns prevailing weather data and other industry information.
Whilst the estimation routines are currently considered appropriate a significant change in historical consumption patterns andor a failure to maintain the accuracy of the estimation routines could impact the amount of revenue recognised.
The Group energy supply contract intangible assets relate to the entering into of the energy supply arrangements with Npower on improved commercial terms through the acquisition by the Company of Electricity Plus Supply Limited and Gas Plus Supply Limited from Npower Limited having effect from 1 December 2013.
The valuation of intangible assets represents a significant area of judgment as certain key assumptions are required in relation to the future financial performance of the assets.
Further detail regarding intangible assets is set out in note 6.
Trade receivables largely represent customers who have energy debt assigned to a prepayment meter or are in the process of having such a meter installed.
This requires the Directors to make estimates and judgements as to the expected level of eventual debt recovery from these customers based on historical experience.
While the provisions are currently considered to be appropriate changes in estimation basis or in economic and regulatory conditions could lead to a change in the level of provisions recorded and consequently on the charge or credit to the statement of comprehensive income.
The Group has a conventional share option scheme for employees and Directors.
The fair value of share options is estimated by using the Binomial valuation model on the date of grant based on certain assumptions.
The assumptions used in the valuations are described in note 18 and include amongst others the dividend yield expected volatility expected life of the options and number of options expected to vest.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 96 v Metering contracts In 2017 as part of the smart meter rollout the Group renewed rental arrangements with thirdparties.
The
Group assessed that these are not leases because it does not have the right to physically or operationally control the smart meters other parties also take a significant amount of output from the assets and when customers switch energy supplier the responsibility for paying the third parties transfers to the new supplier.
By virtue of section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from presenting a statement of comprehensive income.
The Company made a profit for the year of 104426000 2016 54389000 including dividends received from subsidiary companies of 20000000.
The following standards and interpretations have become mandatory for the Group during the current accounting period but where relevant to the Group they have not had a material impact on the financial statements Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20122014 Cycle.
Amendments to IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements related to the disclosure initiative.
The Groups financial statements consolidate the financial statements of Telecom Plus PLC and its subsidiaries.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which control transfers to the Group and are included until the date on which the Group ceases to control them.
Control is recognised where an investor is expected to receive or has rights to variable returns from its investment in the investee and has the ability to affect these returns through its power over the relevant activities of the investee.
Transactions between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation.
An associate is an entity over which the Group has significant influence and that is neither a subsidiary nor an interest in a joint venture.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control or joint control over those policies.
The results assets and liabilities of associates are incorporated in these financial statements using the equity method of accounting.
Under the equity method investments in associates are carried in the consolidated balance sheet at cost and adjusted for postacquisition changes in the Groups share of the net assets of the associate less any impairment in the value of individual investments.
Losses of an associate in excess of the Groups interest in that associate are not recognised.
The Companys investment in associate Opus Energy Group Limited was sold during the year.
In accordance with IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements the assets and liabilities of employee benefit trusts are consolidated in the Group financial statements.
Employee benefit trusts are treated as a legal entity separate from the Company but as subsidiaries of the Company.
Any loans made by the Company to employee benefit trusts are accounted for as loans in accordance with the relevant terms.
When the trust transfers shares to employees to satisfy share incentive scheme awards this is considered to be in substance two transactions a distribution of the shares from the employee benefit trust back to the Company as treasury shares followed by a distribution of those shares to the employees.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 97 d Revenue
Revenue is the value of goods and services supplied to external customers and independent distributors excluding value added tax and other sales related taxes.
For each of the Groups main income streams from the provision of fixed line telephony broadband mobile telephony gas and electricity services transactions are recorded as sales in the month when the provision of those services or the supply of goods takes place.
The Groups customers are invoiced in the month following that in which the services are provided.
The Group also generates revenue as a result of providing bill payment protection and accidental death cover to customers for a monthly fee.
The Group does not retain the insurance risk for these services.
Tariffs are set by Member by service and these can vary depending on the number of services provided.
Each element of any package is priced independently to arrive at the total package price.
Revenue recognition  Energy services The recognition of revenue associated with the provision of gas and electricity services to customers by the Group relies on estimates of usage where meter readings are not available.
These estimates are based on historical usage information adjusted for known factors such as variations in weather.
Revenue is recognised during the period in which the services are supplied and any unbilled revenue is accrued at each period end.
Revenue recognition  Telephony services The Group principally generates revenue from providing the following telecommunications services i fixed telephony line rental call and broadband data charges and ii mobile telephony call and data charges and mobile handset sales.
Revenue is recognised during the period in which the services are supplied and any unbilled revenue is accrued at each period end.
Revenue for mobile handset sales are recognised when the devices are delivered to the end customer and the sale is considered complete.
Revenue recognition  Other services The Group also generates revenues from providing Members with bill protection cover and CashBack cards.
In addition the Group generates revenues from providing services to its network of independent distributors.
Revenue is recognised during the period in which the services are supplied and any unbilled revenue is accrued at each period end.
The Groups independent distributors earn commissions mainly on the introduction of new customers to the Group and on the ongoing monthly use of the Groups services by the customers they have introduced.
Commissions are recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income as they are earned by distributors on an accruals basis.
In relation to certain multiservice customers distributors are able to bring forward the payment of a limited number of future monthly commission payments expected to be due on the usage of customers they have introduced.
These advanced commission payments are held on the Balance Sheet as prepayments and are amortised on a straightline basis through the Statement of Comprehensive Income over the period during which they are earned and would otherwise have been paid had the payment not been brought forward.
Financial income comprises interest income and is recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income as it accrues using the effective interest rate method.
Financial expenses comprise bank interest and non utilisation fees associates with the Companys debt facilities.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 98 g Leases Payments on operating leases are charged to the Statement of Comprehensive Income on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Hire purchase agreements relate to leases of assets where the Group has passed on substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership and are therefore classified as finance leases.
When assets are leased out under finance leases the present value of the minimum lease payments is recognised as a receivable.
The tax charge for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Taxation is recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using tax rates enacted or substantially enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is recognised based on the balance sheet liability method on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.
Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less a provision for depreciation.
Depreciation is calculated so as to write off the cost less estimated residual value of the assets in equal instalments over their expected useful lives.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land.
Depreciation is provided on other assets at the following rates Freehold buildings 50 years Freehold and leasehold improvements 3 to 25 years Plant and machinery 15 years Fixtures fittings and office equipment Fixtures and fittings Computer and office equipment 7 to 10 years 3 to 5 years Motor vehicles 4 years The carrying amounts of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment when there is an indication that they may be impaired.
Investment properties are properties which are held either to earn rental income or for capital appreciation or for both.
Investment properties are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Rental income from investment properties is accounted for on an accruals basis.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 99 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED l Intangible assets Intangible assets which arise e. review.
IT software and web development costs are capitalised as intangible assets to the extent that certain projects can be separately identified and involve the production of new andor enhanced systems that the Company will use over the medium term.
It must also be considered probable that the asset will generate future economic benefits and the development cost can be measured reliably.
Where these conditions are not met development expenditure is recognised as an expense in the year in which it is incurred.
Directly attributable costs that are capitalised include employee and external costs specifically incurred in the development of the intangible asset.
These costs are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful economic lives of up to 5 years when each system is brought into use by the Company.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a business representing the difference between the fair value of consideration and the fair value of the separable net assets acquired is capitalised and is subject to impairment review both annually and when there are indications that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
The carrying amounts of the Groups assets other than inventories and deferred tax assets are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
If any such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
The recoverable amount of assets is the greater of their fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
An impairment loss is recognised whenever the carrying amount of an asset or its cashgenerating unit exceeds its recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive
An impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
In the Companys accounts investments in subsidiary and associated undertakings are initially stated at cost.
Provision is made for any impairment in the value of these investments.
In the Group accounts investments in associated undertakings are shown at cost plus accumulated profits less any dividends received from the associated undertakings.
Inventories principally include mobile telephones LED light bulbs and other electronic equipment and are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is measured on a first in first out basis.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
The Group classifies financial instruments or their component parts on initial recognition as a financial asset a financial liability or an equity instrument in accordance with the substance of the contractual arrangement.
Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 100 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Financial instruments are recognised on the trade date when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial instruments are recognised initially at fair value plus in the case of a financial instrument not at fair value through profit and loss transactions costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or issue of the financial instrument.
Financial instruments are derecognised on the trade date when the Group is no longer a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Trade receivables are stated at their nominal value as reduced by appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts.
The interest that would be recognised from discounting future cash receipts over the short credit period is not considered to be material.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and deposits with banks and for the purposes of the Cash Flow Statement short term revolving credit facilities.
Short and long term borrowings comprise revolving credit facilities and bank loans.
The fees associated with entering into borrowing facilities are capitalised and netted off against borrowings and amortised over the term of the borrowings.
Trade payables are stated at their nominal value as the interest that would be recognised from discounting future cash payments over the short payment period is not considered to be material.
The fair value at the date of grant of share based remuneration principally share options is calculated using a binomial pricing model and is charged to the Statement of Comprehensive Income on a straight line basis over the vesting period of the award.
The charge to the Statement of Comprehensive Income takes account of the estimated number of shares that will vest.
All share option based remuneration is equity settled.
Financial information on operating segments that corresponds with information regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker Chief Executive Mr Andrew Lindsay is disclosed in note 1 to the accounts.
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions are measured at the directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the balance sheet date and are discounted to present value where the effect is material.
The Group makes contributions to certain employees personal pension plans.
These are charged to the Statement of Comprehensive Income in the year in which they become payable.
Final dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when paid.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 101 aa New standards issued but not yet effective The Group has not yet applied the following standard as it is not yet effective in the consolidated Group financial statements and remains subject to endorsement by the EU IFRS 16 Leases effective for the year ending 31 March 2020.
The following standards are not yet effective in the consolidated Group financial statements but have been endorsed by the EU IFRS 9 Financial instruments effective for the year ended 31 March 2019 and IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers effective for year ended 31 March 2019.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 15 was issued in May 2014 and subsequent amendments Clarifications to IFRS 15 were issued in April 2016.
IFRS 15 as amended is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 it has not yet been adopted by the EU.
The impact of IFRS 15 on the Groups reporting of revenue and costs is currently being assessed.
Initial
Under IFRS 15 certain incremental costs incurred in acquiring a contract with a customer may be deferred on the balance sheet and amortised as revenue is recognised under the related contract this could generally lead to the later recognition of charges for certain commissions payable to third party independent distributors.
Certain costs incurred in fulfilling customer contracts may be deferred on the balance sheet under IFRS 15 and recognised as related revenue is recognised under the contract.
Such deferred costs could be related to the provision of deliverables other than mobile handsets to customers that do not qualify as performance obligations and for which revenue is not recognised currently such costs are generally expensed as incurred.
The Group is continuing to assess the impact of these and other accounting changes that will arise under IFRS 15 however the changes highlighted above may have an impact on the consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of financial position after the Group adopts IFRS 15 on 1 April 2018.
When IFRS 15 is adopted it can be applied either on a fully retrospective basis requiring the restatement of the comparative periods presented in the financial statements or with the cumulative retrospective impact of IFRS 15 applied as an adjustment to equity on the date of adoption when the latter approach is applied it is necessary to disclose the impact of IFRS 15 on each line item in the financial statements in the reporting period.
In respect of IFRS 9 and IFRS 16 exercises are underway to assess the impacts that these standards will have on the Groups assets and liabilities.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 102 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SEGMENT REPORTING The Groups reportable segments reflect the two distinct activities around which the Group is organised Customer Acquisition and Customer Management.
Customer Acquisition revenues mainly comprise sales of equipment including mobile phone handsets and wireless internet routers to customers.
Customer Management revenues are principally derived from the supply of fixed telephony mobile telephony gas electricity internet services and home insurance to residential and small business customers.
The Board measures the performance of its operating segments based on revenue and segment result which is referred to as operating profit.
The Group applies the same significant accounting policies across both operating segments.
Operating segments  continuing operations Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 restated
Management
Customer
Acquisition Total
Management
Customer
Acquisition Total Revenue 722748 17542 740290 727936 16796 744732 Segment result 60445 18289 42156 51305 14556 36749 Operating profit 42156 36749 Net financing expense 1289 1675 Profit before taxation 40867 35074 Taxation 10424 8909 Profit for the year from continuing operations 30443 26165 Segment assets 390639 9017 399656 411292 9975 421267 Investment in associates    11604  11604 Total assets 390639 9017 399656 422896 9975 432871 Segment liabilities 138850 3092 141942 231553 3037 234590 Net assets 257714 198281 Capital expenditure 5343 129 5472 3988 92 4080 Depreciation 3127 76 3203 3515 81 3596 Amortisation 12088  12088 11228  11228 Statutory operating profit is stated after deducting share incentive scheme charges 1.2m and the amortisation of the energy supply contract intangible asset 11.2m.
It also includes a oneoff recovery of 4.2m of costs incurred in prior years relating to the smart meter rollout programme under our energy supply agreement.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 103 SEGMENT REPORTING CONTINUED Revenue by service 2017 2016 Customer Management Electricity 310370 313689 Gas 265822 273889 Fixed communications 106653 102085 Mobile 27500 24434 Other 12403 13839 722748 727936 Customer Acquisition 17542 16796 740290 744732 The Group operates solely in the United Kingdom.
OPERATING PROFIT Operating profit is stated after chargingcrediting 2017 2016 Depreciation and amortisation 15291 14824 Profit on disposal of fixed assets 21 12 Operating lease rentals  land and buildings 101 150 Auditors remuneration  audit of Company and consolidated accounts 136 124 audit of subsidiaries of the Company 40 39 audit related assurance services 29 31 other services 103 Inventories expensed 18159 14538 Receivables and accrued income impairment cost 7827 8398 Recovery of smart meter rollout costs previously incurred 4188 Rental income 449 397 Total fees paid to the auditor KPMG LLP during the year were 308000 2016 194000 including non audit services of 132000 2016 31000.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 104 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PERSONNEL EXPENSES The total charge in the Statement of Comprehensive Income comprised the following 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 31501 27495 Social security costs 3084 2649 Pension contributions 674 654 35259 30798 Share incentive scheme charges 1084 2479 36343 33277 Average number employed by the Group during the year excluding directors 2017 2016 Customer Acquisition 123 109 Customer Management 926 799 1049 908 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 105
2017 2016 Current tax charge Current year 10739 9673 Adjustments for prior years 81 1052 10658 8621 Deferred tax charge Decelerated capital allowances 96 296 Reductionincrease in respect of share options 300 9 Reduction in rate of future taxes 47 60 Adjustment for prior years 17 43 Total tax charge 10424 8909 ii Reconciliation of total tax charge 2017 2016 Profit before tax  continuing operations 40867 35074 Profit for period from associate  discontinued operations 64517 5609 Accounting profit before tax 105384 40683 Corporation tax using the UK corporation tax rate of 20% 2016 20% 21077 8136 Expenses not deductible for taxation purposes 2614 2548 Adjustment in respect of share options 288 433 Share of associates tax charge 440 1122 Income not taxable for tax purposes  disposal of Opus 12464 Reduction in rate of future taxes 11 77 Adjustments in respect of prior years  current tax 81 1052 deferred tax 17 43 Total tax charge 10424 8909 Reductions in the UK corporation tax rate from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 17% effective 1 April 2020 were substantively enacted on 26 October 2015 and 6 September 2016 respectively.
This will reduce the Companys future current tax charge accordingly.
The deferred tax liability at 31 March 2017 has been calculated based on these rates.
The gain on disposal of Opus is not taxable income for tax purposes as it is eligible for the substantial shareholding exemption.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 106 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Freehold land and buildings Freehold and leasehold improvements Plant and machinery
Motor vehicles Total Group and Company
At 1 April 2016 12678 27352 750 689 11405 1521 54395 Transfers to intangibles     2165  2165 Additions 578 94 2066 Disposals      131 131 At 31 March 2017 13024 27383 751 705 10818 1484 54165
At 1 April 2016 3467 988 631 44 6567 424 12121 Transfers to intangibles     1272  1272 Charge for the year 468 852 61 46 1523 253 3203 Disposals      93 93 At 31 March 2017 3935 1840 692 90 6818 584 13959 Net book amounts At 31 March 2017 9089 25543 59 615 4000 900 40206 IT software and web development assets previously included in Fixtures fittings and office equipment have been transferred to intangible assets see note 6.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 107 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT CONTINUED
Freehold land and buildings Freehold and leasehold improvements
Plant and machinery
Motor vehicles Total Group and Company
At 1 April 2015  15774 713 22723 1043 9622 451 50326 Transfers  Investment property 12593 9019 8  1044 2522 Transfers  Assets under construction 20322  23704 638 2744 Additions  1561 1081 4080 Disposals       11 11 At 31 March 2016 12678 27352 750  689 11405 1521 54395
At 1 April 2015  940 577  406 6348 255 8526 Transfers  Investment property 3192 858 4  441 1889 Charge for the year 275 906 58  79 2108 170 3596 Disposals       1 1 At 31 March 2016 3467 988 631  44 6567 424 12121 Net book amounts At 31 March 2016 9211 26364 119  645 4838 1097 42274 At 31 March 2015  14834 136 22723 637 3274 196 41800 The operations of the Company were transferred into newly refurbished head offices at Merit House in 2015 and the former head office building Southon House was vacated.
Southon House is therefore now held as an investment property and separately disclosed on the balance sheet of the Company.
An independent valuation of Southon House was conducted at 30 September 2015 in accordance with RICS Valuation  Professional Standards UK January 2014 revised April 2015 guidelines.
The independent market value of Southon House was determined to be 10.2 million and has been categorised as a Level 3 fair value based on the inputs to the valuation technique used.
The valuation was prepared on a Market Value basis as defined in the Valuation Standards and was primarily derived from using comparable market transactions carried out on an arms length basis.
These inputs are deemed unobservable.
The directors believe that there have not been any material changes in circumstances that would lead to a significant change in the market valuation of Southon House since 30 September 2015.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 108 INTANGIBLE ASSETS Energy Supply
IT Software and Web Development Total
At 1 April 2016 224563  224563 Transfers from property plant and equipment  2165 2165 Additions  3406 3406 At 31 March 2017 224563 5571 230134
At 1 April 2016 26199  26199 Transfers from property plant and equipment  1272 1272 Charge for the period 11228 860 12088 At 31 March 2017 37427 2132 39559 Net book amount at 31 March 2017 187136 3439 190575 Net book amount at 31 March 2016 198364  198364 The Energy Supply Contract intangible asset relates to the entering into of the new energy supply arrangements with Npower on improved commercial terms through the acquisition by the Company of Electricity Plus Supply Limited and Gas Plus Supply Limited the Companies from Npower Limited having effect from 1 December 2013 the Transaction.
The total consideration for the Transaction comprised a payment to Npower of 196.5 million on 20 December 2013 a deferred amount of 21.5 million paid in December 2016 and a payment of 2.5 million made in January 2014 for the net assets acquired in the Companies which comprised cash and short term working capital balances.
The addition to intangible assets of 221.6 million in 2014 therefore represented the total consideration paid and payable to Npower excluding the payment for net assets acquired in the Companies plus certain transaction costs of 3.6 million which in accordance with the relevant accounting standards were recognised as a cost of acquisition.
The intangible asset is being amortised evenly over the 20 year life of the new energy supply agreement reflecting the period over which the Company will benefit from the agreement.
The Board regularly monitors the carrying amount of the intangible assets.
A review was undertaken at 31 March 2017 to assess whether the carrying amount of intangible assets was supported by their value in use determined by the net present value of the future cash flows derived from the assets using cash flow projections based on current levels of profitability.
A posttax discount rate of 7.0% was used which was considered appropriate given the expectation that for term of the contract the Group will continue to derive significant value from supplying energy to its customers.
The result of the review undertaken at 31 March 2017 indicated that no impairment was necessary.
No reasonably possible change in the assumptions used in the impairment calculation would give rise to an impairment of intangible assets.
The IT Software and Web Development intangible asset relates to the capitalisation of certain costs associated with the development of new IT and web systems.
Approximately 1.3 million of the additions during the year relate to IT systems which remain under construction.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 109
Group
Cost
At 1 April 2016 and 31 March 2017 4558
At 1 April 2016 and 31 March 2017 816 Carrying amounts At 31 March 2017 3742
At 1 April 2015 and 31 March 2016 4558
At 1 April 2015 and 31 March 2016 816 Carrying amounts At 31 March 2016 3742 At 31 March 2015 3742 Goodwill relates to the Companys subsidiary Telecommunications Management Limited TML cash generating unit which is included within the Customer Management operating segment.
The Group regularly monitors the carrying amount of its goodwill.
A review was undertaken at 31 March 2017 to assess whether the carrying amount of assets was supported by their value in use determined by the net present value of the future cash flows derived from the assets using cash flow projections based on current levels of profitability.
A posttax discount rate of 10% into perpetuity was used which was considered appropriate given the relatively small size of the business and the expectation that for the foreseeable future TML will continue to operate as a going concern.
However no growth has been assumed in the review given the relative maturity of the business.
The result of the review undertaken at 31 March 2017 indicated that no impairment was necessary.
No reasonably possible change in the assumptions used in the impairment calculation would give rise to an impairment of goodwill.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 110
Fixed asset investments The investment in the associate represented the cost of purchasing a 20% 2016 20% equity interest in the ordinary share capital of Opus Energy Group Limited Opus together with the Groups share of retained reserves.
The Companys 20% investment in Opus was sold on 10 February 2017 for 71102650.
The Group profit on disposal of Opus was 62317458 and the share of Opus profit for the period up to disposal was 2200000 these figures have been presented as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income given the nature of Opus as a supplier of energy to the corporate market being substantially different to the continuing operations of the Company.
No tax will be paid on the disposal as it is eligible for the substantial shareholding exemption.
Associated undertaking 2017 2016 Associated undertaking
At 1 April 2294 1668 Additions 55 626 Disposals 2349 At 31 March  2294 Share of profit At 1 April 9310 9175 Share of profit after taxation for the year 2200 5609 Dividends received in the year 5074 5474 Disposals 6436 At 31 March  9310 Carrying amounts At 31 March  11604 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 111 INVESTMENTS CONTINUED Associated undertaking A summary of the balance sheet and income statement for Opus is as follows Period to 10 Feb 2017 Year to 31 Mar 2016 Noncurrent assets 5552 4822 Current assets 203395 129942 Cash and cash equivalents 6482 22310 Total assets 215429 157074 Current liabilities 172832 104586 Total liabilities 172832 104586 Net assets 42597 52488 Revenue 549322 571985 Depreciation and amortisation 993 926 Net interest 532 415 Other expenses 534693 535566 Total expenses 536218 536907 Profit before tax 13104 35078 Taxation 2104 7035 Profit after tax 11000 28043 Investment in subsidiary companies The Company owns 100% of the ordinary share capital of Telecommunications Management Limited TML being two 1 shares.
The principal activity of TML is the supply of fixed wire and mobile telecommunication services to business and public sector customers.
The Company also owns 100% of the ordinary share capital of Utilities Plus Limited Utilities Plus being two 1 shares.
Utilities Plus is an FCA Consumer Credit Act licenced entity which provides loans and hire purchase agreements to employees and independent distributors.
The Company also owns 100% of the ordinary share capital of Electricity Plus Supply Limited Electricity Plus and Gas Plus Supply Limited Gas Plus being one 1 share in each company.
The principal activity of Electricity Plus and Gas Plus is to hold the licences for the supply of energy services to residential and business customers in the UK.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 112 INVESTMENTS CONTINUED The cost of investment in subsidiary undertakings represents capitalised transaction costs of approximately 3.6 million and the total consideration for the entering into of the new energy supply arrangements with Npower through the acquisition of Electricity Plus and Gas Plus comprising a cash payment to Npower of 196.5 million on 20 December 2013 a deferred cash amount of 21.5 million paid on 20 December 2016 and a cash payment of 2.5 million made in January 2014 for the net assets acquired in Electricity Plus and Gas Plus which comprised cash and short term working capital balances.
The cost of investment in subsidiary undertakings also includes the 2.9 million opening intangible asset which related to the preceding energy supply agreement with Npower entered into in May 2011.
As at 31 March 2017 the Company also owned 100% of the ordinary share capital of nine dormant non trading subsidiaries as listed below Freetalk Limited Mobile Xtra Limited Savings Plus Limited The Peoples Champion Limited Utility Debt Collectors Limited Utility House Limited Utility Warehouse Limited Value Group Limited Value Plus Limited The registered office of each company referred to in this note excluding Opus is Network HQ 508 Edgware Road London NW9 5AB.
All companies referred to above are registered in England and Wales.
The Company also has an investment in the JSOP Share Trust.
Included within Company Trade and other receivables is a loan receivable from the JSOP Share Trust of 2275000 2016 2275000 which represents the maximum exposure to loss from its interest in the JSOP Share Trust.
DEFERRED TAX Deferred tax recognised in the financial statements is as follows Group Companytel 2016 Tax effect of temporary differences Accelerated capital allowances 1212 1166 1216 1172 Other short term temporary differences Employee benefits expected in excess of amount expensed 59tel605 839 609 845 Group Companytel 2016 Charged to the Statement of Comprehensive Income 234 288 235 284 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 113 OTHER NONCURRENT ASSETS Group Companytel 2016 Hire purchase agreements receivable 3174 3330  3330 Loan to JSOP Share Trust   2275 2275 Trade receivables 7523 7020 2705 2492 Other noncurrent receivables 4036 3450 3688 3450 Total noncurrent receivables 14733 13800 8668 11547 Unamortised bank loan arrangement fees 860  860 Total other noncurrent assets 15593 13800 9528 11547 No amounts receivable under hire purchase agreements are due after five years.
The loan receivable from the JSOP Share Trust does not bear interest and is repayable on demand.
There is no current expectation that the loan will be recalled by the Company within the next 12 months.
Unamortised bank loan arrangement fees have been reclassified to noncurrent assets as the RCF facility was fully repaid as at 31 March 2017.
It is expected that amounts will be withdrawn from the facility in the coming 12 months.
RECEIVABLES AND ACCRUED INCOME Group Companytel 2016 Trade and other receivables 29812 27749 12476 14033 Current tax receivable Trade and other receivables 29812 27749 12476 14033 Accrued income 93442 94009 3962 4533 Prepayments 4878 3224 4061 2626 Prepayments and accrued income 98320 97233 8023 7159 Trade and other receivables 29812 27749 12476 14033 Accrued income 93442 94009 3962 4533 Receivables and accrued income net 123254 121758 16438 18566 Gross accrued income of 94466000 2016 95058000 includes March revenue invoiced in April of 54216000 2016 56313000 unbilled energy debtors of 40247000 2016 38738000 and accrued income relating to property of 3000 2016 7000.
Offset against this figure is an allowance for future credit losses of 1024000 2016 1049000 which is included in the allowance for credit losses of 16271000 2016 16626000.
Other receivables include amounts due within one year relating to hire purchase agreements of 1775000 2016 2451000.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 114 RECEIVABLES AND ACCRUED INCOME CONTINUED Allowance for credit losses on receivables and accrued income Group Companytel 2016 Allowances as at 1 April 16626 17236 4288 4754 Additions  charged to Statement of Comprehensive Income 7827 8398 2132 3173 Allowances used on fully written down receivables 8182 9008 3088 3639 Allowances as at 31 March 16271 16626 3332 4288 Analysis of receivables and accrued income Group Companytel 2016 Receivables and accrued income gross 139525 138384 19770 22854 Allowance for credit losses 16271 16626 3332 4288 Receivables and accrued income net 123254 121758 16438 18566 At 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 the Group had no trade receivables that were passed due and not individually impaired.
In accordance with note r of the Significant Accounting Policies trade receivables are stated at their nominal value as reduced by appropriate allowances.
Interest that would be recognised from discounting future cash receipts over the short credit period is not currently considered material.
INTEREST BEARING LOANS AND BORROWINGS Group and Company 2017 2016 Bank loans  71241 Unamortised bank loan arrangement fees 860 1089 860 70152 Due within one year Due after one year  71241 In December 2015 the Group entered into new fiveyear 150000000 revolving debt facilities with Barclays Bank PLC and Lloyds Bank PLC the Revolving Debt Facilities.
Interest is charged on the facilities in accordance with the schedule set out in the table below.
As at 31 March 2017 the interest rate was LIBOR  1.40%.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 115 INTEREST BEARING LOANS AND BORROWINGS CONTINUED Net DebtEBITDA Three month LIBOR 2.5x 2.20% 2.5x 1.90% 2.0x 1.65% 1.5x 1.40% 1.0x 1.15% All bank loans are secured through a floating charge on the assets of the Group.
The Revolving Debt Facilities when drawn down are stated net of unamortised arrangement fees of 860000 2016 1089000 on the face of the Balance sheet.
These costs have been capitalised and are being amortised over the term of the Revolving Debt Facilities.
At the year end the Revolving Debt Facilities were not drawn down and therefore the unamortised arrangement fees have been shown in non current assets as set out in note 10.
In addition as at 31 March 2017 the Company had letters of credit in place relating to certain energy distribution charges with a total value covered of 15585500 2016 12340500.
Maturity analysis Group and Company 2017 2016 Bank loans Due in one year or less Due in more than one year but not more than two years Due in more than two years but not more than five years  75409 The analysis of maturity above includes interest to be paid during the term of the loans in accordance with IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 116 TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES Group Companytel 2016
Trade payables 19373 20773 3713 4042 Intercompany payables   34023 35466 Other taxation and social security 5235 5807 3542 4429 24608 26580 41278 43937 Deferred consideration  21500  21500 ACCRUED EXPENSES AND DEFERRED INCOME Group Companytel 2016 Accrued expenses 110328 113684 8672 8037 Deferred income 99tel111322 114583 9462 8712 All accrued expenses are payable within one year.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 117 CAPITAL AND RESERVES Issued share capital  ordinary shares of 5p each 2017 2016 Number Number Authorised share capital 160000 8000 160000 8000 Allotted called up and fully paid share capital At 1 April 80317 4016 80221 4011 Issue of new ordinary shares At 31 March 80488 4024 80317 4016 At the year end the Companys share price was 1197p and the range during the financial year was 819p to 1255p.
At 31 March 2017 the Company had 80487892 2016 80316387 shares in issue.
The total number of voting rights of 5p ordinary shares in the Company was 80427892 2016 80256387 excluding shares held in treasury.
Since the year end a further 53612 shares have been issued to satisfy the exercise of distributor share options increasing the total number of voting rights of 5p ordinary shares in the Company to 80481504.
As at 31 March 2017 there were 60000 ordinary shares held in treasury 2016 60000.
There are 252638 ordinary shares held in the JSOP Share Trust representing approximately 0.3% of issued share capital on which voting and dividend rights have been waived.
These shares are included in the above total voting rights figure of 80481504.
The JSOP reserve in the Group accounts represents ordinary shares in the Company held by the JSOP Share Trust.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 118 CAPITAL AND RESERVES CONTINUED Capital management The Groups overall objective when managing capital is to continue to provide attractive returns to shareholders.
Total shareholder equity at 31 March 2017 was 257.7 million 2016 198.3 million.
The Groups current capital management strategy is to retain sufficient working capital for day to day operating requirements.
In addition as a result of the entering the energy supply arrangements with Npower in December 2013 and the consequent drawdown of transaction debt facilities the Groups capital management strategy is also to ensure that interest costs are minimised.
Under the revised energy supply arrangements which were effective from 1 December 2013 Npower continues to be responsible for funding the principal working capital requirements relating to the supply of energy to the Companys customers.
This includes funding the Budget Plans of customers who pay for their energy in equal monthly instalments and prefunding the payment of certain energy network charges.
Dividends
2017 2016 Prior year final paid 24p 2016 21p per share 19205 16734 Interim paid 23p 2016 22p per share 18428 17597 The Directors have proposed a final dividend of 25p per ordinary share totalling approximately 20.1 million payable on 28 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 7 July 2017.
In accordance with the Groups accounting policies the dividend has not been included as a liability as at 31 March 2017.
This dividend will be subject to income tax at each recipients individual marginal income tax rate.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS15.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 119 EARNINGS PER SHARE The calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share EPS is based on the following data 2017 2016 Earnings for the purpose of basic and diluted EPS 94960 31774 Share of profit related to associate net of tax 64517 5609 Earnings for the purpose of basic and diluted EPS  continuing operations 30443 26165 Share incentive scheme charges net of tax 968 2278 Amortisation of energy supply contract intangible assets 11228 11228 Earnings excluding share incentive scheme charges and amortisation of intangibles for the purpose of adjusted basic and diluted EPS 42639 39671 Number Number Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purpose of basic EPS 80073 79789 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares share incentive awards 438 363 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purpose of diluted EPS 80511 80152 Continuing operations Adjusted basic EPS Basic EPS 38.0p 32.8p Continuing operations Adjusted diluted EPS Diluted EPS 37.8p 32.6p Adjusted basic and diluted EPS for continuing operations exclude share incentive scheme charges and the amortisation of the intangible asset recognised as a result of the new energy supply arrangements entered into with Npower in December 2013.
It has been deemed appropriate to present the analysis of adjusted EPS excluding share incentive scheme charges due to the relative size and historical volatility of the charges.
In view of the size and nature of the charge as a noncash item the amortisation of intangible assets arising from the energy supply agreement with Npower has also been adjusted.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 120
Operating lease commitments The Group is committed to make payments in respect of operating leases for land and buildings as follows Company and Group 2017 2016 Amounts payable Less than one year 103 117 Between one and five years 6telThe principal lease arrangements relate to office premises.
Capital commitments At 31 March 2017 the Company had capital commitments of approximately 76000 2016 285000.
Energy supply arrangements The Group entered into a 20 year energy supply agreement with Npower the SSA on 20 December 2013.
In the event that the SSA is terminated by Npower in certain circumstances including on a material breach by the Group or on the insolvency of the Company additional consideration of up to 187 million may become payable by the Company to Npower.
Full details of the termination provisions of the SSA were set out in paragraph 4 of Part VIII on page 38 of the prospectus issued to shareholders on 20 November 2013.
However given the energy supply agreement termination rights are either in the directors view very unlikely to occur or entirely within the control of the Group the directors believe the likelihood of this type of termination event is remote.
The amount of the additional consideration reduces from 187 million to 11 million over the remaining life of the supply agreement.
Furthermore depending on the circumstances giving rise to a termination event the additional consideration if payable may be spread over the unexpired term of the supply agreement.
Following any such termination event the Group would have direct access to the wholesale energy markets and the opportunity to earn additional margin from sourcing energy directly for the Groups customer base.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The Company has two share option plans one of which is available to employees the other to distributors of the Company.
The Company has also established a Save As You Earn share option plan the 2015 Employee SAYE Share Option Plan for employees.
All new employees who have passed the requisite probationary period are issued with market price options over shares in the Company further options are also granted to existing employees depending on their seniority and length of service The Telecom Plus PLC 2007 Employee Share Option Plan.
The 2015 Employee SAYE Share Option Plan enables employees of the group to acquire shares in the Company in a tax efficient manner using monies saved from salary over a three or five year period.
A summary of the principal terms of the SAYE Share Option Plan were set out in the Appendix to the 2015 AGM circular sent to all shareholders.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 121 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED The distributor scheme The Telecom Plus PLC 2007 Networkers and Consultants Share Option Plan exists to provide incentives to the people who are most successful in gathering new customers for the Company.
As it is not possible to measure directly the benefit received from these activities the fair value of the benefit received has been measured by reference to the fair value of the equity instruments granted.
A reconciliation of movements in the numbers of share options for the Group can be summarised as follows 2017 2016 Number Weighted average exercise price Number Weighted average exercise price At 1 April 2489194 916p 2269104 991p Options granted 583236 1101p 1176001 999p Options exercised 181645 574p 103813 556p Options lapsedexpired 227668 1085p 852098 1273p At 31 March 2663117 965p 2489194 916p The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised during the year was 1154.3p 2016 1063.3p.
During the current year ended 31 March 2017 and prior year ended 31 March 2016 the Group issued share options to employees and distributors on the occasions set out below.
Share price at grant date Exercise price
Risk free rate
Fair value per option Grant date pence pence % years % % pence 2007 Employee Share Option Plan 13072015 1044 985 43.57 10 0.80 4.67 255 10122015 1085 1074 46.47 10 0.65 4.28 316 22072016 1033 1047 43.76 10 0.10 4.58 265 08122016 1187 1209 39.31 10 0.32 3.
25092015 1070 1058 46.31 3.5 0.79 4.35 269 15082016 1058 1042 42.92 3.5 0.10 4.
13072015 1044 985 43.57 10 0.80 4.67 255 10122015 1085 1074 46.47 10 0.65 4.28 316 22072016 1033 1047 43.76 10 0.10 4.58 265 The Group has used a binomial model to value its share options with account being taken of vesting conditions where these were considered material.
The expected volatility for the share option arrangements is based on historical volatility determined by the analysis of daily share price movements over the previous 12 months.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 122 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED The options outstanding at the end of the year relating to employees are as follows
1 April 2016
31 March 2017 Exercise price per share
2007 Employee Share Option Plan 30 Aug 2007 14335 4811 171p 30 Aug 2010 29 Aug 2017 17 Jan 2008 17000 5500 198p 17 Jan 2011 16 Jan 2018 12 Jun 2008 25070 10050 330.5p 12 Jun 2011 11 Jun 2018 10 Dec 2008 3800 3720 340p 10 Dec 2011 9 Dec 2018 26 Jun 2009 38220 34770 278p 26 Jun 2012 25 Jun 2019 9 Dec 2009 3000 3000 305p 9 Dec 2012 8 Dec 2019 5 Jul 2010 50207 33010 338p 5 Jul 2013 3 Jul 2020 17 Dec 2010 15990 10040 442p 17 Dec 2013 16 Dec 2020 14 Jun 2011 157330 140780 603p 14 Jun 2014 11 Jun 2021 15 Dec 2011 44360 22060 774p 15 Dec 2014 14 Dec 2021 26 Jun 2012 112854 79904 828p 26 Jun 2015 25 Jun 2022 10 Dec 2012 57800 39600 878p 10 Dec 2015 9 Dec 2022 17 Jun 2013 97300 88500 1219p 17 Jun 2016 16 Jun 2023 16 Dec 2013 16500 9500 1739p 16 Dec 2016 15 Dec 2023 1 Jul 2014 328750 322500 1337p 1 Jul 2017 30 Jun 2024 16 Dec 2014 34500 22500 1254p 16 Dec 2017 15 Dec 2024 13 Jul 2015 932100 827600 985p 13 Jul 2018 12 Jul 2025 10 Dec 2015 116500 94750 1074p 10 Dec 2018 9 Dec 2025 22 Jul 2016  342500 1047p 22 Jul 2019 21 Jul 2026 8 Dec 2016  169370 1209p 8 Dec 2019 7 Dec 2026 2065616 2264465 2015 Employee SAYE Share Option Plan 25 Sep 2015 63953 48037 1058p 1 Nov 2018 30 Apr 2019 15 Aug 2016  13214 1042p 1 Nov 2019 30 Apr 2020 63953 61251 Total employees 2129569 2325716 Weighted average exercise price 969.9p 1016.6p NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 123 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED The options outstanding at the end of the year relating to distributors are as follows
1 April 2016
31 March 2017 Exercise price per share
2007 Networkers and Consultants Share Option
30 Aug 2007 6000 6000 171p 30 Aug 2010 29 Aug 2017 10 Dec 2008 15250 12250 340p 10 Dec 2011 9 Dec 2018 26 Jun 2009 9000 6000 278p 26 Jun 2012 25 Jun 2019 9 Dec 2009 7350 5350 305p 9 Dec 2012 8 Dec 2019 5 Jul 2010 145088 137247 338p 5 Jul 2013 3 Jul 2020 17 Dec 2010 6687 6404 442p 17 Dec 2013 16 Dec 2020 14 Jun 2011 3000 3000 603p 14 Jun 2014 11 Jun 2021 15 Dec 2011 11000 7000 774p 15 Dec 2014 14 Dec 2021 1 Jun 2012 53000 49000 721p 1 Jun 2015 31 May 2022 26 Jun 2012 10000 8000 828p 26 Jun 2015 25 Jun 2022 20 Nov 2012 24000 21400 854.5p 20 Nov 2015 19 Nov 2022 10 Dec 2012 17000 16000 878p 10 Dec 2015 9 Dec 2022 17 Jun 2013 5000 5000 1219p 17 Jun 2016 16 Jun 2023 16 Dec 2013 2000 2000 1739p 16 Dec 2016 15 Dec 2023 1 Jul 2014 7900 7900 1337p 1 Jul 2017 30 Jun 2024 16 Dec 2014 6000 6000 1254p 16 Dec 2017 15 Dec 2024 13 Jul 2015 29850 29850 985p 13 Jul 2018 12 Jul 2025 10 Dec 2015 1500 1500 1074p 10 Dec 2018 9 Dec 2025 22 Jul 2016  7500 1047p 22 Jul 2019 21 Jul 2026 Total distributors 359625 337401 Weighted average exercise price 594.7p 609.8p At 31 March 2017 a total of 769896 share options were exercisable 2016 847341 at a weighted average exercise price of 660.8p 2016 566.0p.
The average remaining contractual life of the outstanding options was 7.1 years 2016 7.4 years.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 124 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Treasury activities take place under procedures and policies approved and monitored by the Board.
They are designed to minimise the financial risks faced by the Group which primarily arise from credit interest rate and liquidity risks.
Carrying amounts of financial instruments All financial assets which include cash trade and other receivables and accrued income are classified as loans and receivables with a total value for the Group of 155336000 2016 169444000 and for the Company of 43637000 2016 65201000.
All financial liabilities which include trade and other payables and accrued expenditure are held at amortised cost with a total value for the Group of 135421000 2016 227857000 and for the Company 51099000 2016 140930000.
Credit risk All customers are invoiced monthly and approximately 90% pay by direct debit accordingly credit risk in respect of trade receivables is considered low due to the large number of customers supplied each of whom represents an insignificant proportion of total revenue.
The Company has a universal supply obligation in relation to the provision of energy to domestic customers.
This means that although the Company is entitled to request a reasonable deposit from a potential new customer who is not considered creditworthy the Company is obliged to supply domestic energy to anyone who submits a properly completed application form.
Where such customers subsequently fail to pay for the energy they have used delinquent customers there is likely to be a delay before the Company is able to eliminate its exposure to future bad debt from them by either installing a prepayment meter or disconnecting their supply and the costs associated with preventing such delinquent customers from increasing their indebtedness are not always fully recoverable.
The Group has identified specific balances for which it has provided an impairment allowance on a line by line basis across all ledgers in both years.
No general impairment allowance has been provided in either year.
The allowance accounts in respect of trade receivables are used to record impairment losses unless the Group is satisfied that no recovery of the amount owing is possible at that point the amounts considered irrecoverable are written off against the financial asset directly.
The maximum credit risk for the Group is 155336000 2016 169444000 and for the Company 43637000 2016 65201000.
Interest rate risk The Group finances its day to day operations primarily through cash generated within the business.
Cash surpluses are placed on deposit with Barclays Bank PLC and Lloyds Bank PLC at money market rates to maximise returns.
The Groups profit and equity for the current year will not be significantly affected by changes in the UK base rate of  1% from current levels.
Commodity price risk The Group is not materially exposed to any fluctuations in commodity prices due to the nature of the agreements with wholesale providers of telephony and energy services and its ability to pass the effect of any such fluctuations through to its customers.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 125 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Liquidity risk The Groups treasury management policies are designed to ensure continuity of funding.
Foreign currency risk The Group does not have any significant foreign currency exposure.
Interest rate and currency profile of financial assets and liabilities All financial assets and liabilities are denominated in Sterling.
Receivables due after one year include 3683000 2016 3940000 due mainly from distributors elements of which earn interest at varying rates above Base Rate.
Borrowing facilities At 31 March 2017 the Group had total revolving credit facilities of 150000000 2016 150000000.
These facilities are available to the Group until 14 December 2020.
As at 31 March 2017 Nil of the facilities was drawn down 2016 71241000 drawn down.
As at 31 March 2017 the Company also had letters of credit in place relating to certain energy distribution charges with a total value covered of 15585500 2016 12340500.
The facilities are secured by fixed and floating charges over the assets of the Company and through a cross guarantee with the Companys subsidiaries Electricity Plus Supply Limited Gas Plus Supply Limited Utilities Plus Limited and Telecommunications Management Limited.
Further details of the facilities are set out in note 12 of these financial statements.
Fair values There is not considered to be any material difference between the fair value of any financial instruments and their net book amount due to the shortterm maturity of the instruments.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2017 126 RELATED PARTIES Identity of related parties The Company has related party relationships with its subsidiaries see note 8 formerly its associate until disposal on 10 February 2017 see note 8 and with its directors and executive officers.
Transactions with key management personnel Directors of the Company and their immediate relatives control approximately 23.3% of the voting shares of the Company.
No other employees are considered to meet the definition of key management personnel other than those disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Details of the total remuneration paid to the directors of the Company as key management personnel for qualifying services are set out below 2017 2016 Shortterm employee benefits 1475 1377 Social security costs 196 184 Postemployment benefits 80 80 1751 1641 Share incentive scheme charges 186 1555 1937 3196 During the year the Company acquired goods and services worth approximately 130000 2016 59000 from companies in which directors have a beneficial interest.
No amounts were owed to these companies by the Company as at 31 March 2017.
During the year the Company sold goods and services worth approximately 12000 2016 33000 to companies in which directors have a beneficial interest.
During the year directors purchased goods and services on behalf of the Company worth approximately 118000 2016 161000.
The directors were fully reimbursed for the purchases and no amounts were owing to the directors by the Company as at 31 March 2017.
OTHER RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
During the year ended 31 March 2017 up to the date of disposal on 10 February 2017 the associate supplied goods to the Group which amounted to 1304000 2016 1371000.
Transactions with the associate are priced on an arms length basis.
Dividends received during the year from the associate amounted to 5074000 2016 5474000 relating to the financial year to 31 March 2016.
Subsidiary companies During the year ended 31 March 2017 the Companys subsidiaries purchased goods and services from the Company in the amount of 61235000 2016 50519000.
At 31 March 2017 the Company owed the subsidiaries 34023000 which is recognised within trade payables 2016 35466000 owed by the Company to the subsidiaries.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Telecom Plus PLC Report and Accounts 2015 2 COMPANY NUMBER REGISTERED OFFICE Network HQ 508 Edgware Road The Hyde London NW9 5AB
David Baxter ACA
Peel Hunt Ltd Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET JP Morgan Cazenove 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf London E14 5JP
Nabarro LLP 125 London Wall London EC2Y 5AL
KPMG LLP 15 Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5GL
Barclays Bank PLC 1 Churchill Place London E14 5HP Lloyds Bank PLC 25 Gresham Street London EC2V 7HN
Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU
Strategic Report Financial and Operating Highlights Our Values and Services 2
Chairmans Statement 4
Chief Executives Review 12
Markets 12 Business model 12 Strategy 13 Operational performance and nonfinancial KPIs 14
Financial Review 20
Principal Risks and Uncertainties 25 People and Organisation 31 Corporate Responsibility 34
Board of Directors 36
Corporate Governance Statement 38
Nomination Committee Report 45 Audit Committee Report 47
Directors Remuneration Report 51
Directors Report 74 Directors Responsibilities 80 Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report 82
