Polar Capital Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Polar Capital Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 69 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Polar Capital Holdings plc
Strategic Report Highlights 01 At a Glance 02 Strategy and Business Model 04
Chairmans Statement 05
Chief Executives Report 08
Financial Review 10
Principal Risk and Uncertainties 14
Board of Directors 16 Directors Report and Corporate Governance Report 18 Audit Committee Report 24
Remuneration Committee Report 27
Statement of Directors Responsibilities in Relation to the Groups Financial Statements 34 Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Polar Capital Holdings plc 35 Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss 37 Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income 37 Consolidated Balance Sheet 38 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 39 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 40 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 41 Company Balance Sheet 65 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 66 Company Cash Flow Statement 67 Notes to the Company Financial Statements 68 Shareholder Information and Advisers 69 Shareholder Information and Advisers Company No.
Registered office 16 Palace Street London SW1E 5JD tel Company Secretary Neil Taylor
Annual General Meeting 26 July 2017 Please see separate AGM Notice for details.
Dividends
Where possible it is recommended that dividend payments are made directly into a bank account to provide improved security and faster access to funds.
You may give instruction via the registrars website site or in writing.
First interim dividend For the financial year ended 31 March 2017
5.5p per ordinary share Exdividend date 29 December 2016 Record date 30 December 2016 Payment date 13 January 2017 Second interim dividend For the financial year ended 31 March 2017
19.5p per ordinary share Exdividend date 6 July 2017 Record date 7 July 2017 Payment date 21 July 2017
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Shareholder helplinetel 44tel
Auditors
Ernst and Young LLP 25 Churchill Place Canary Wharf London E14 5EY
HSBC Bank plc Nominated Adviser and Corporate Broker Canaccord Genuity 88 Wood Street London EC2V 7QR Joint Corporate Broker Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall
EC2Y 5ET
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP Exchange House Primrose Street London EC2M 2EG
The shares are traded on the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock Exchange and information on the share price and the Company can be accessed via the Companys website or at site  code POLR or Bloomberg POLR LN.
ISIN number
SEDOL code B1G Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 01 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017
We added to our fund range in January 2017 with the UK Value Opportunities Fund which raised over 100m on its launch and with assets over 256m at the end of May.
Since our year end our Healthcare Investment Trust was successfully restructured resulting in a fund with 289m of AUM.
Assets Under Management AUM Profit before Share Based Payments Basic EPS
Core Operating Profit Pretax Profit Adjusted Diluted EPS Shareholders Funds Strategic Reporttelteltel 9.3bn  11.6bn 7.3bn  10.4bn Comparative amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
The nonGAAP alternative performance measures shown here are reconciled to IFRS measures in the Financial Review on pages 10 to 13.
Corporate Corporate
Our AUM increased 27% over the year in Sterling terms and 12% in Dollar terms.
The increase in AUM was due entirely to market and currency movement as it was another year of net outflows from our funds.
The level of net outflows of 230m was however markedly lower than last year and over the second half of the year we returned to net inflows.
Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 02 At a Glance Polar Capital is a specialist investment management Group offering professional and institutional investors a range of geographical and sector funds.
Each investment strategy has a fundamental research driven approach.
Who we are Since its foundation in 2001 the Group has grown and currently supports 12 investment teams managing 25 funds and 4 managed accounts across a range of long only and alternative products with combined AUM of 9.3 billion.
Polar Capital Holdings plc is traded on the Alternative Investment Market under the ticker POLR.
N.
Our Philosophy Primacy of investment performance.
Institutional robustness across operations compliance risk and relationship management.
Diversified yet complementary set of funds with a focus on fundamental research driven strategies.
Culture which is flexible entrepreneurial and transparent.
Environment for employees in which talent can flourish and be well rewarded.
High equity ownership amongst staff.
Our Office Locations
Jersey
London
Edinburgh
Tokyo
Geneva Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 03 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 bn bn % Total Longonly 6.53 9.38 89.9% Total alternative 0.73 1.05 10.1% 31 March 2017 bn bn % Total Longonly 8.44 10.60 91.1% Total alternative 0.83 1.04 8.9% Assets Under Management AUM AUM split by strategy 2017 2016 31 March 2016 bn bn % Technology 1.38 1.98 19.0% Japan 1.51 2.18 20.9% European LongShort 0.38 0.55 5.3% Healthcare 0.92 1.32 12.6% Financials 0.73 1.05 10.1% Emerging Markets 0.36 0.51 4.9% Convertibles 0.31 0.45 4.3% North America 1.53 2.20 21.0% Global Alpha 0.07 0.10 1.0% UK Absolute Equity 0.04 0.05 0.5% European Income 0.03 0.04 0.4% Total Assets 7.26 10.43 91.1% 89.9% 8.9% 10.1% AUM split by Business Unit In Chronological order 31 March 2017 bn bn % Technology 2.19 2.75 23.6% Japan 0.97 1.22 10.4% European LongShort 0.27 0.33 3.0% Healthcare 1.43 1.79 15.4% Financials 1.32 1.66 14.2% Emerging Markets 0.39 0.49 4.2% Convertibles 0.43 0.55 4.7% North America 1.74 2.19 18.9% Global Alpha 0.11 0.13 1.1% UK Absolute Equity 0.13 0.16 1.4% European Income 0.12 0.16 1.3% UK Value Opps 0.17 0.21 1.8% Total Assets 9.27 11.64 3.0% 5.3% 1.1% 1.0% 1.8% 1.4% 0.5% 1.3% 0.4% 23.6% 15.4% 12.6% 14.2% 10.1% 18.9% 21.0% 4.7% 4.3% 4.2% 4.9% 2017 2016 10.4% 20.9% 23.6% 19.0% Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 04 The Groups goal is to become a leading specialist fund manager through a strategy of delivering to professional and institutional investors a range of fundamentally driven investment products that deliver differentiated risk adjusted returns over the longterm.
Our focus is investment performance over and above the gathering of assets.
We believe there is an alignment of interest between the investment managers we recruit their focus on delivering superior returns and the interests of professional and institutional clients who are seeking differentiated investment products.
Strategy and Business Model
Strategy for Further Growth To be a leading global investment management boutique To attract further inflows into existing products To deliver first quartile performance over the investment cycle To attract more top quality managers To maintain high levels of corporate governance and transparency To continue to invest further in client servicing and support To be a strong and dependable partner to our clients offering them a range of interesting and differentiated investment products To launch new products with current teams To maintain a robust operational infrastructure and to maintain high levels of client service and support To consider opportunistic corporate activity To maintain a strong balance sheet To provide and maintain an entrepreneurial vibrant collegiate and transparent environment for our fund managers and our employees Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 05 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Tom Bartlam
Chairmans Statement
Our Assets Under Management AUM increased 27% over the year in Sterling terms from 7.3bn to 9.3bn and 12% in Dollar terms from 10.4bn to 11.6bn.
The increase in AUM was due entirely to market and currency movement as it was another year of net outflows from our funds.
The level of net outflows of 230m was however markedly lower than last year and over the second half of the year we returned to net inflows.
Stock markets around the world were surprisingly buoyant over the period although this was not reflected in flows into active equity funds as it was another challenging year for the industry with passive products continuing to take market share.
Across Europe active equity funds suffered net outflows of 60bn and in the UK it was the worst year for retail fund flows for over 20 years In this context our reducing levels of net outflows provide grounds for encouragement.
Funds and Performance Despite the very challenging industry conditions eight of our twelve strategies recorded positive net inflows over the financial year.
The four strategies that suffered outflows were Japan GEMS and North America on the longonly side and European LongShort on the absolute return side.
Although the main Japan UCITS fund experienced further substantial outflows it is pleasing to see a sharp improvement in the funds performance over the last twelve months as the teams style has returned to favour.
We again suffered redemptions from our GEMS funds following a sustained period of lacklustre performance although the longerterm performance of the GEMS Income fund remains impressive.
The outflows on our North America fund were due to shortterm client tactical allocation decisions away from the US market rather than relating to fund performance which continues to be strong and well ahead of benchmark over most periods and since launch.
On the alternatives side we have continued to see redemptions on our European LongShort products in reaction to several years of below target returns.
The teams fundamental bottom up value style has been challenged over recent years and the distortions in the European market as a result of the ECBs extensive QE program have certainly proved unhelpful.
However there are signs that market conditions are normalising and the teams flagship Forager fund has rebounded sharply through the end of May giving us encouragement that the worst may well be behind the team and their funds.
Of the eight strategies that experienced net inflows we saw particularly good interest in Technology Healthcare Financials and European Income ex UK on the longonly side and on the alternative side Global Convertibles and UK Absolute had meaningful inflows.
In the March quarter of the year inflows were helped further by the successful launch of our longonly UK Value Opportunities UCITS fund managed by Georgina Hamilton which raised over 100m at launch.
George
Godber was able to join us in April and be reunited with Georgina as comanager on the fund and momentum has continued to be strong with assets at the end of May over 256m.
The poor performance of active managers in general against their benchmarks in 2016 and that of many of our own managers too is reflected in the low level of performance fees we received last year which came in well below our expectations.
This was though the 16th successive year of earning performance fees.
Results
Pretax profits fell to 20.4m from 23.6m in the prior year.
Core pretax profits fell from 23.6m to 21.8m and net performance fees decreased from 3.0m to 1.2m.
Adjusted diluted earnings per ordinary share fell from 22.0p to 20.4p.
Our balance sheet remains strong with net assets of 70.7m 2016 75.7m including net cash of 58.5m 2016 48.8m.
Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 06 Market Background Markets climb a wall of worry goes the old adage and surely that has never been truer than last year.
First we had the run up to the Brexit vote in June which created a degree of uncertainty in the UK and then the vote itself which proved a surprise to many and certainly to most stock market investors.
Worries over the implications for the UK economy were quickly followed by worries over the US presidential election which produced another result to confound the pollsters political commentators and most investors.
The European political situation has been another area of constant worry as has been North Korea the Middle East and the South China Sea where tensions between China and many of its neighbours over rights and claims continue to simmer.
Investors even had to contend with a rise in US interest rates  the first increase since the financial crisis of 2008.
Despite all these worries returns on major stock markets around the world proved remarkably strong and particularly so for the sterling based investor.
The global economy proved itself oblivious to all the political turmoil growing steadily through calendar 2016 and through the opening months of 2017.
Even Europe is showing signs of a broad based improvement in economic activity.
Earnings at many companies have thus proved remarkably resilient in the face of all the political drama and with many corporates awash with cash corporate takeover activity has continued at a high level.
The overall earnings outlook has been further boosted by improvement in the outlook for financials commodities and energy  all important sectors that have experienced their challenges over recent years.
In the UK the FTSE 100 Index returned 23.3% over the year with many of the large companies in the Index benefitting from a weak pound boosting their overseas earnings.
The broader based FTSE All Share Index still managed a healthy return of 22% even though many of the smaller companies within the Index were initially most impacted by the Brexit vote and the implications for the UK economy.
The strong consensus of economists and politicians and indeed many investors post the Brexit result was for an immediate and sharp slowdown in the domestic economy.
The reality so far has rather confounded the consensus.
Nevertheless the Brexit negotiations are an immense challenge and will create much uncertainty in the coming months and years.
Outside of the UK returns around the world were also strong with the SandP500 Index in the US up 17% and the NASDAQ up 23%  for the Sterling investor these translated into even greater returns of 34% and 41% respectively.
The EURO STOXX 50 posted a 21% return in Euros but in sterling this was nearly 31% and whilst the Japanese Topix returned a rather pedestrian 15% by comparison translated into sterling this became a heady 33%.
Awards
A good number of our funds and fund managers received awards again this year with the Insurance fund part of our Financials team receiving a total of six awards.
There were multiple awards also for our Technology and Healthcare teams as well awards for the Japan and North America teams.
At a company level we received awards from Investment Week at their Specialist Awards 2016 and from International Adviser for product and service.
Dividend
As previously stated the Board believes that the level of dividend should reflect the Companys trading results its cash resources and also its future prospects.
With the outlook improving as we enter the new financial year and supported by our very strong balance sheet the Board has decided to once again pay an uncovered dividend and to maintain the second interim dividend at 19.5p.
Chairmans Statement continued Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 07 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Leadership Changes On behalf of the other Board members and the entire staff at Polar I would like to thank Tim Woolley cofounder of the business who will be standing down as Chief Executive in July for his leadership in so successfully guiding us through many challenges over the past seven and a half years.
Since Tim has been CEO the Group has added eight new investment teams head count has increased from 52 to 114 and AUM has increased from 1.9bn to 12.6bn.
This has been a tremendous achievement not only when considered against the back drop of seismic changes in geopolitics and regulation market crises and shifting trends in the asset management industry that have occurred during his tenure but also when one considers that growth and success have come whilst retaining the entrepreneurial collegiate and transparent environment that Polar offers its fund managers and staff.
Fortunately our association will continue as Tim will be staying on as a nonexecutive member of the Board.
I am looking forward to welcoming Gavin Rochussen on board as our new Chief Executive in July.
Gavin has an exceptional record as a CEO in the asset management industry and has a proven record in developing an institutional business and building a significant presence in North America.
We look forward to a bright future under his proven and dynamic leadership.
Annual General Meeting Once again our AGM will be held at our offices at 16 Palace Street London SW1E 5JD.
The meeting will be on the 26 July 2017 commencing at 230pm.
Although we do not give a trading update at the meeting I encourage shareholders to attend so that they can meet the Directors after the meeting.
Outlook
Whilst political uncertainty and marketvolatility appear to be our constant travelling companions these days we enter the new fiscal year with a good degree of momentum in terms of fund performance fund flows and asset growth.
Despite ongoing regulatory headwinds within the industry we believe we are well positioned to return to earnings growth in the new financial year subject to there being no major correction in markets.
Tom Bartlam
26 June 2017 Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 08
Chief Executives Report
For the year ended 31 March 2017 Tim Woolley
Chief Executive Officer and Founder
Our Chairman referred in his Statement to the fact that last year was a disappointing year for active managers and that indeed many of our funds failed to beat their benchmarks.
Whilst disappointing one should never read too much into a single year  our history has shown that backing a good active manager over the longterm delivers better returns net of all costs than betting on a passive benchmark product.
Many clients would agree that the US market is regarded as the most efficient and most difficult in which to beat the benchmark yet if you had invested 10000 in our North America UCITS fund over 1 3 5 years or since launch your returns would be comfortably ahead of the benchmark return net of all costs in every one of those periods as indicated below.
Cumulative returns % 1 YR 3 YR 5 YR
Polar Capital North America 20.61 34.20 85.48 110.70 MSCI North American Index 16.69 29.00 76.25 97.11 The North America fund is not an isolated example of the value we can bring to a clients portfolio as the table of performance against benchmark for our UCITS funds since inception shows Return net of all costs %
Global Technology 247.50 174.03 73.47 Japan Alpha 119.63 126.03 6.04 Healthcare Opportunities 173.53 77.51 96.02 Biotechnology 97.00 45.28 51.72 Healthcare Blue Chip 12.80 12.47 0.33 Emerging Markets Income 13.70 0.35 14.05 Emerging Markets Growth 1.70 6.05 4.35 Global Insurance 479.02 121.88 357.04 Financial Opportunities 30.50 26.12 4.38 Income Opportunities 109.36 20.69 88.67 Asian Opportunities 241.31 65.78 175.53 North America 110.70 97.11 13.59 Global Alpha 44.80 49.57 4.77 European Income 23.00 21.67 1.33 European Income ex UK 31.55 29.19 2.36 UK Value Opportunities 10.10 3.50 6.6 Figures as at 28 April 2017  source fact sheets Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 09 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 On the absolute return side we have also achieved some impressive returns particularly on our two absolute UCITS products GCB and UK Absolute over recent years.
The
GCB fund was launched in September 2013 and has delivered a return of 19.50% against an index return of 11.49% and carries an attractive ongoing yield for clients 4.2% as at the end of April 2017.
The UK Absolute fund is turning into a star performer up 58% since the launch in September 2014 and one of the very few UK funds to be up over Brexit.
The performance has not gone unnoticed and the fund size is now over 150m which should increase further once the crucial three year anniversary is reached assuming performance is maintained.
We are justifiably proud of the above record and it demonstrates our commitment to being investment rather than marketing led in the teams we attract and the funds we launch.
The simple lesson would seem to be that clients should back all our funds at launch and sit back and enjoy the longterm ride I am excited at the prospect of handing over leadership of the Company to Gavin Rochussen over the coming weeks.
His record of success at J O Hambro was exceptional and we are delighted that he has chosen Polar for the next chapter in his career.
Gavins success at J O Hambro was built around the same philosophy and values that we have at Polar and this together with his record of execution gives me great encouragement for the future of the Company.
The focus will continue to be investment led with high alpha differentiated active product serving the needs of our clients with capacity limits on funds appropriate to the underlying liquidity of the strategy.
There are undoubtedly challenges ahead for us as a Company and the industry in general but I believe significant opportunities too especially if one looks beyond the UK to the global wealth management industry.
Gavins arrival is timely in that respect given his expertise in overseas business development and this will no doubt play a key role in our future growth in the coming years.
I would like to thank our many loyal clients and shareholders for their support during my tenure as CEO and to thank all our talented and dedicated employees who have delivered so much during the last seven and half of years.
Whilst my involvement in the daytoday operations of Polar is coming to an end I am very much looking forward to my continued association with the Company as nonexecutive Board member and major shareholder.
Tim Woolley
Chief Executive Officer
26 June 2017 Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 10
Financial Review
Introduction
Commentary on the results for the year follows in the sections below.
Adjustments have been made to the 2016 comparatives following reclassification of the seed capital investments and are explained under the heading Prior year restatement later in this report and in Note The net effect to the current year results has been that 0.5m of unrealised foreign exchange translation gains have been posted to other comprehensive income rather than profit and loss.
Results for the Year  Revenues The quantum of management fees earned by the Group is a function of the AUM managed by the firm and the fee rate charged.
This year there was an exceptional third material factor the devaluation of Sterling.
While the firms revenues are all recorded in Sterling the majority of the firms AUM are not sterling denominated with dollar assets being the dominant constituent.
At 31 March 2017 the value of the firms AUM was in both Dollar and Sterling terms higher than 12 months earlier.
But the average AUM over the past 12 months was in Dollar terms lower compared to the previous year in fact 10% lower.
The fact that management fee revenues only fell 3.4% compared to last year was a product of Sterlings weakness post the BREXIT referendum.
The firm has a policy to hedge 50% of its nonSterling revenues which has resulted in an overall dampening of the benefit of Sterlings weakness and accounts for the 2.4m loss on forward currency hedging contracts.
The largest swing factor in the Groups revenues was the year on year reduction in the performance fees generated from 7.2m to 2.7m.
The fall was a product of the generally disappointing performance delivered by our funds in calendar year 2016 a phenomenon that affected many active managers in the year.
Revenues
31 March
31 March Net management fees net of commissions and fees payable 67.9 70.3 Performance fees 2.7 7.2 Loss on forward currency contracts 2.4 0.9 Total net revenues 68.2 76.6 Other income 1.5 0.3 Net income 69.7m 76.9m Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
Results for the Year  Costs Total operating costs fell to 45.2m from 49.9m last year.
The small increase in salaries bonuses and other staff costs was a product of a small increase in head count in the firm as average staff numbers increased from 110 to 114.
The decrease in core distributions was a function of the fall in management fee revenues and the management fee profitability of the firm as well as the impact of implementing the Groups Deferred Remuneration Plan DRP which came into effect during the year.
For the year ending 31 March 2017 bonuses amounting to 1.7m have been deferred over a period of 3 years.
Further details are provided in the Remuneration Report on pages 27 to 33 and Note 3.5.
The National Insurance cost on share options is a product of and varies accordingly to the Companys share price.
The reduction in the provision is a product of the fall in the Companys share price over the year.
The increase in other operating costs is a product of mainly two factors.
The first is an increase in Sterling terms in Bloomberg cost which is US dollar based as the value of Sterling fell over the year.
The second component is an increase in irrecoverable VAT costs as a result of the change in product mix impacting the Groups recovery rate.
The fall in performance fee interests to 1.5m from 4.2m last year is directly correlated to the reduction in performance fee revenues.
John Mansell Chief Operating Officer and Finance Director Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 11 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 31 March Salaries bonuses and other staff costs 16.9 16.6 Manager distributions 14.8 17.2 Compensation costs 31.7 33.8 NIC on share options 0.6 0.6 Other operating costs 12.6 11.3 Core operating costs 43.7 45.7 Performance fee interests 1.5 4.2 Total operating costs 45.2m 49.9m Results for the Year  Profits The headline profit before tax for the year has decreased to 20.4m from last years 23.6m Restated  See Note 2.8.
The Group believes that the best measure of the Groups profitability is the profit before sharebased payments and tax.
The reason for excluding the sharebased payments charge is that the cost is dominated by the existence of the Groups preference shares which as an instrument deliver when they vest an uplift to EPS and are not a detractor.
On this basis the Group has delivered a fall in profits to 24.5m compared to last years 26.9m.
The analysis of the different components of profits shows that Core operating profits the decrease in profits reflects the reduction in management fee revenues driven by the decrease in average value of assets managed over the year.
Performance fee profits weaker performance across the product range compared to last year has resulted in the reduction in performance fee profits.
Other income the increase in contribution is a product of the good performance of the seed investments held on the balance sheet.
Profits
31 March
31 March Core operating profit 21.8 23.6 Performance fee profit 1.2 3.0 Other income 1.5 0.3 Profit before sharebased payments and tax 24.5 26.9 Sharebased payments 4.1 3.3 Profit before tax 20.4m 23.6m Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
Sharebased Payments The face of the consolidated income statement includes a line titled sharebased payments which accounts for a charge of 4.1m 2016 3.3m.
The figures are broken down as follows 31 March 31 March Cost attributed to preference shares 3.2 2.4 Cost attributed to conventional options 0.9 0.9 Total cost of sharebased payments 4.1m 3.3m The increase in this charge is dominated by the increase in the charge associated with the groups preference shares see below.
Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 12 Earnings Per Share The effect that the charge for sharebased payments has on the EPS figures of the Group is as follows 31 March
Restated
31 March
Diluted earnings per share 17.0 19.5 Impact of sharebased payments  preference shares only 3.4 2.5 Adjusted diluted EPS 20.4 22.0 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
Preference Shares A separate class of preference share can be issued by Polar Capital Partners Limited for purchase by each new team of fund managers on their arrival at the firm.
These shares provide each manager with an economic interest in the funds that they run and ultimately enable the manager to convert their interest in the revenues generated from their funds into equity in Polar Capital Holdings plc.
The equity is awarded in return for the forfeiture of their current core economic interest and vests over three years with the full quantum of the dilution being reflected in the diluted share count and so diluted EPS from the point of conversion.
The event has been designed to be at both the actual and the diluted levels earnings enhancing to shareholders.
In the year to 31 March 2017 as was also the case in the year to March 2016 there were no new conversions of preference shares into Polar Capital Holdings equity.
As at 31 March 2017 three sets of preference shares have the ability to call for a conversion.
The call has to be made on or before 30 November 2017 if any conversion is to take place with effect from 31 March 2017.
It is the relative success and profitability of the funds represented by these three sets of preference share that accounts for the increased cost attributed to preference shares that has been identified above 2017 3.2m versus 2016 2.4m.
Balance Sheet and Cash At the year end the cash balances of the Group were 58.5m 2016 48.9m.
The increase was mainly a product of the reduction over the year in the Groups portfolio of seed investments.
At the balance sheet date the Group held 22.1m of investments in its funds 2016 40.1m.
Capital Management The Group believes in retaining a strong balance sheet.
The capital that is retained in the business is used to either seed new investment products or if not so required is invested into the Groups absolute return funds as investment capital.
As at March 2017 there were 9.5m of investments and 12.6m of the Groups balance sheet was invested to seed fledgling funds.
The Groups dividend policy is to distribute the majority of its earnings.
Prior Year Restatement The most significant accounting change has been the reclassification of our seed capital investment in the European Income Fund.
On initial seeding in 2015 the Group planned to actively reduce its investment in this fund and it was expected that control would be relinquished within 12 months.
Therefore the investment was initially classified as an asset heldforsale.
In 2016 it was determined that the investment met the relevant criteria for continued classification as heldforsale because the period to complete the loss of control had been delayed by events beyond the Groups control and the Group remained committed to the original plan.
During 2017 the seed investment in the European Income fund was still controlled by the Group and therefore ceased to meet the criteria for it to be continued to be accounted for as heldforsale.
Financial Review continued Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 13 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 In accordance with the requirements of IFRS 5 the holding has been reclassified retrospectively and accounted for as a subsidiary consolidated on a linebyline basis.
Although the impact of the restatement on a net basis is immaterial to the face of the balance sheet see Note 2.8 the change from reporting the holding under the single line item of assets heldforsale to linebyline consolidation has necessitated some restatement of prior year numbers whereby the gross assets of the fund are now included in current assets as investment securities and the interest held by third parties are included in current liabilities as liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
The primary impact on the consolidated profit and loss account of restating the investment in the European Income fund as a subsidiary has been that foreign currency gains and losses on retranslating the Groups investment in this Euro denominated fund are now recorded in equity until such time as the investment is disposed.
This has resulted in 0.5m of unrealised foreign currency translation gains in 2017 2016 0.6m having to be excluded from the consolidated profit and loss account and posted to other comprehensive income see Note 2.8.
Business Risk There are a range of risks and uncertainties faced by the Group which are more fully described in the Strategic
Amongst the major risks to the business strategy is the loss of Assets Under Management due to markets falling poor investment performance or the loss of key investment personnel.
These events will not only have an immediate impact on the management fees earned by the Group but also deprive the Group of possible performance fees.
The Board having considered the impact on the business of the UKs withdrawal from the European Union believe that Brexit should have little impact on the operations of the Group.
The biggest unknown will be the impact on the US DollarSterling exchange rates as the negotiations progress.
Going Concern The Financial Reporting Council has determined that all companies should carry out a rigorous assessment of all the factors affecting the business in deciding to adopt a going concern basis for the preparation of the accounts.
The Directors have reviewed and examined the financial and other processes embedded in the business in particular the annual budget process and the financial stress testing inherent in the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP.
On the basis of such review and the significant liquid assets underpinning the balance sheet relative to the Groups predictable operating cost profile the Directors consider that the adoption of a going concern basis covering a period of at least 12 months from the date of this report is appropriate.
John Mansell Finance Director 26 June 2017 Strategic Report Polar Capital Holdings plc 14 Principal Risks and Uncertainties The Group as any business operating in the financial services sector faces a number of challenges to its successful operation and development.
The principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group are addressed through a risk management framework that provides a structured process for identifying assessing and managing risks associated with the Groups business objectives and strategy.
Risks arise from external sources as well as those which are inherent commercial risks in the market place and business as well as operational risks contained in the systems and processes employed within the business.
The principal risks inherent in the Groups business are economic and market portfolio key staff retention regulatory and operational.
These risks have been explained in further detail below.
Risk Category Description Mitigation Economic and market risk Economic risks arise from the concept design and implementation of the Groups business model.
The Group operates in a highly competitive industry and if it is unable to compete effectively with its competitors its business could be adversely affected.
Polar Capitals key areas for competition include historical investment performance its ability to attract and retain the best investment professionals and quality of service.
The Board reviews the business strategy periodically and considers financial fund performance and operational information regularly.
The Groups reputation is one of its most important assets since it operates in an industry where integrity customer trust and confidence are paramount.
The Groups inhouse compliance and risk teams provide a system of internal controls which seek to ensure that events which could damage or call into question the reputation of the Group its products or staff are prevented.
Portfolio risk Poor fund performance or adverse market conditions could lead to outflows of AUM and consequent damage to the financial position of the Group.
The Group has a formal Risk Committee that convenes monthly and is chaired by the Groups Chief Risk Officer CRO and comprises the Chief Executive the Chief Operating Officer the Global Head of Distribution and Mr
The Committee reviews all the portfolios managed by the Group and has presented to it analysis produced by the CRO relating to portfolio structure exposure concentration returns liquidity and risk.
Portfolio managers present to this Committee on a regular basis or when requested.
Regular contact is maintained with all clients and fund investors and the strategy of the Group is to diversify its earnings streams to be less susceptible to such events.
The Group is also subject to the effects of exchange rate fluctuations as Sterling is the Groups reporting currency but the Groups business is often transacted in jurisdictions which generate revenue expenses and liabilities in other currencies.
A summary of the Groups foreign currency exposures as at 31 March 2017 can be seen in Note 4.3c to the accounts.
The Group looks to hedge an appropriate element of its exposure to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Key staff risk The Group has a number of key fund managers the loss of which could result in significant investor redemptions from the funds they manage and loss of revenue to the Group.
Through the Group culture team support and providing each team with an economic interest in the success of their funds and the overall business the Group offers a highly attractive environment for investment professionals.
Regulatory risk Failure to comply with regulations particularly those issued by the Financial Conduct Authority or the London Stock Exchange could result in the Group losing the ability to operate as a regulated financial services business or its AIM quotation being suspended or withdrawn.
The Groups investment activities are regulated primarily by the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK and the Group is also subject to regulation in the various other jurisdictions in which it operates.
In the context of the current regulatory environment the Board believes its regulated business has sufficient resources for compliance monitoring and to take corrective action when warranted.
The Group seeks to operate within applicable Financial Conduct Authority Principles Rules and Regulations and those issued by the London Stock Exchange to govern the trading of the Companys shares on AIM.
The Board through the work of the Audit Committee receives and reviews regular reports on the compliance controls in place to prevent or detect any noncompliance of the Group with rules and regulations.
The Audit Committee Report on pages 24 to 26 provides further details on the work undertaken.
Operational risk Operational risk arises from potentially inadequate or failed processes from people and also from external events.
Operational risk has financial and nonfinancial impacts and the Groups objective is to manage and mitigate risk exposure by ensuring operational risk policies are developed and applied consistently and effectively throughout the Group.
If any of the Groups financial accounting or other data processing systems do not operate properly or are disabled or if there are other failures in the Groups internal processes people or systems the Group could suffer financial loss business disruption liability to clients regulatory problems or damage to its reputation.
The Group also relies through its outsourcing arrangements on a number of thirdparty providers of administration and other back office functions which expose the Group to the risk of failure of a key third party supplier.
The Groups core businesses have in place disaster recovery plans covering current business requirements which are tested annually to ensure an appropriate level of resilience in the day to day operations and minimise the risk of severe disruption occurring.
The Group is satisfied that the recovery capability remains appropriate.
Furthermore the Group also looks to ensure that its suppliers of administration and IT services and other back office functions have disaster recovery plans and business continuity plans.
The Board regularly reviews statements on internal controls and procedures and has on an annual basis subjected the Group to an annual internal control audit carried out in accordance with ISAE 3402  Assurance Reports on Controls at a Service Organisation.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 15 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Risk Category Description Mitigation Economic and market risk Economic risks arise from the concept design and implementation of the Groups business model.
The Group operates in a highly competitive industry and if it is unable to compete effectively with its competitors its business could be adversely affected.
Polar Capitals key areas for competition include historical investment performance its ability to attract and retain the best investment professionals and quality of service.
The Board reviews the business strategy periodically and considers financial fund performance and operational information regularly.
The Groups reputation is one of its most important assets since it operates in an industry where integrity customer trust and confidence are paramount.
The Groups inhouse compliance and risk teams provide a system of internal controls which seek to ensure that events which could damage or call into question the reputation of the Group its products or staff are prevented.
Portfolio risk Poor fund performance or adverse market conditions could lead to outflows of AUM and consequent damage to the financial position of the Group.
The Group has a formal Risk Committee that convenes monthly and is chaired by the Groups Chief Risk Officer CRO and comprises the Chief Executive the Chief Operating Officer the Global Head of Distribution and Mr
The Committee reviews all the portfolios managed by the Group and has presented to it analysis produced by the CRO relating to portfolio structure exposure concentration returns liquidity and risk.
Portfolio managers present to this Committee on a regular basis or when requested.
Regular contact is maintained with all clients and fund investors and the strategy of the Group is to diversify its earnings streams to be less susceptible to such events.
The Group is also subject to the effects of exchange rate fluctuations as Sterling is the Groups reporting currency but the Groups business is often transacted in jurisdictions which generate revenue expenses and liabilities in other currencies.
A summary of the Groups foreign currency exposures as at 31 March 2017 can be seen in Note 4.3c to the accounts.
The Group looks to hedge an appropriate element of its exposure to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Key staff risk The Group has a number of key fund managers the loss of which could result in significant investor redemptions from the funds they manage and loss of revenue to the Group.
Through the Group culture team support and providing each team with an economic interest in the success of their funds and the overall business the Group offers a highly attractive environment for investment professionals.
Regulatory risk Failure to comply with regulations particularly those issued by the Financial Conduct Authority or the London Stock Exchange could result in the Group losing the ability to operate as a regulated financial services business or its AIM quotation being suspended or withdrawn.
The Groups investment activities are regulated primarily by the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK and the Group is also subject to regulation in the various other jurisdictions in which it operates.
In the context of the current regulatory environment the Board believes its regulated business has sufficient resources for compliance monitoring and to take corrective action when warranted.
The Group seeks to operate within applicable Financial Conduct Authority Principles Rules and Regulations and those issued by the London Stock Exchange to govern the trading of the Companys shares on AIM.
The Board through the work of the Audit Committee receives and reviews regular reports on the compliance controls in place to prevent or detect any noncompliance of the Group with rules and regulations.
The Audit Committee Report on pages 24 to 26 provides further details on the work undertaken.
Operational risk Operational risk arises from potentially inadequate or failed processes from people and also from external events.
Operational risk has financial and nonfinancial impacts and the Groups objective is to manage and mitigate risk exposure by ensuring operational risk policies are developed and applied consistently and effectively throughout the Group.
If any of the Groups financial accounting or other data processing systems do not operate properly or are disabled or if there are other failures in the Groups internal processes people or systems the Group could suffer financial loss business disruption liability to clients regulatory problems or damage to its reputation.
The Group also relies through its outsourcing arrangements on a number of thirdparty providers of administration and other back office functions which expose the Group to the risk of failure of a key third party supplier.
The Groups core businesses have in place disaster recovery plans covering current business requirements which are tested annually to ensure an appropriate level of resilience in the day to day operations and minimise the risk of severe disruption occurring.
The Group is satisfied that the recovery capability remains appropriate.
Furthermore the Group also looks to ensure that its suppliers of administration and IT services and other back office functions have disaster recovery plans and business continuity plans.
The Board regularly reviews statements on internal controls and procedures and has on an annual basis subjected the Group to an annual internal control audit carried out in accordance with ISAE 3402  Assurance Reports on Controls at a Service Organisation.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 16 Board of Directors For the year ended 31 March 2017 Tom Bartlam Nonexecutive Chairman Appointed to the Board in July 2007 and became Chairman in September 2007.
Tom was a managing director of Intermediate Capital Group plc which he cofounded from 1989 until his retirement in 2005.
He is nonexecutive Chairman of Jupiter UK Growth Trust plc.
Tim Woolley
Chief Executive Officer and Founder
Appointed to the Board in 2002 and Chief Executive from November 2009 to 17 July 2017.
Tim has accepted the Boards invitation to remain as a Nonexecutive Director.
Tim joined Henderson Global Investors technology team in 1996 and left with Brian AshfordRussell to establish Polar Capital in 2001.
Nonexecutive Chairman and Executive Directors As at 31 March 2017 John Mansell Chief Operating Officer and Finance Director Appointed to the Board in 2002.
Prior to joining Polar Capital he spent 11 years at Lazard Asset
John is a fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 17 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Hugh Aldous Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit
Appointed to the Board in 2007.
Hugh was a partner in Grant Thornton UK LLP formerly a partner in RSM Robson Rhodes from 1976 where he was latterly head of its financial services team.
He was a member of the Competition Commission formerly the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Hugh is Chairman of SPL Guernsey ICC Ltd Downing Strategic MicroCap Investment Trust plc.
Elderstreet VCT plc.
Brian AshfordRussell Nonexecutive Director and
Appointed to the Board in 2002.
Brian was head of the technology team at Henderson Global Investors from 1987 until September 2000 and is a cofounder of Polar Capital.
He was the appointed fund manager of Polar Capital Technology Trust plc from launch in 1996 until May 2006.
He is a Director of Polar Capital Technology Trust plc.
George Bumeder Nonexecutive Director Appointed to the Board in 2011.
George is senior vice president of XL Group Investments LLC a subsidiary of the XL Group Ltd.
Jamie CayzerColvin Nonexecutive Director Appointed to the Board in 2002.
Jamie is a director of Caledonia Investments plc and Chairman of Henderson Smaller Companies Investment Trust plc.
Win Robbins Nonexecutive Director Appointed to the Board on 22 June 2017 Win is a nonexecutive Director of City Merchants High Yield Trust Ltd.
Committee of St.
James Place Partnership PLC as well as a Trustee Director and Chair of the Investment Committee of NOWPensions and an Independent Trustee on the Institute of Cancer Research Pension Fund.
Michael Thomas Nonexecutive Director Appointed to the Board in 2008.
Michael was a director of Martin Currie Limited and investment manager of the Japanese team until his retirement in 2007.
Nonexecutive Directors Win Robbins was appointed to the Audit Remuneration and Nomination committees on 22 June 2017.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 18 Directors Report and Corporate Governance Report The Directors present their report including a report on the corporate governance arrangements and the audited consolidated financial statements of Polar Capital Holdings plc the Company for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Matters relating to the future developments of the business and identification of branches are given in the Strategic Report.
The Company is incorporated in England and Wales under registered number  and its registered office is at 16 Palace Street London SW1E 5JD.
Directors
Biographies of the Directors who served during the year are set out on pages 16 and 17.
With the exception of Win Robbins all the Directors held office throughout the year under review and up to the signing of this Report.
The remuneration principal terms of employment and the interests of the Directors in the Companys shares and options are detailed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 27 to 33.
The Articles of Association require all Directors who held office at the time of the two preceding AGMs and did not retire by rotation at either of them to retire from office by rotation and all new Directors appointed by the Board are required to seek election by shareholders at the next general meeting of the Company following their appointment.
In accordance with the Articles of Association Win Robbins stands for election at the AGM as it is her first AGM since her appointment on 22 June 2017 and Michael Thomas retires as a Director and being eligible offers himself for reelection at the AGM.
Dividends
The Directors have declared two interim dividends in respect of the financial year ended 31 March 2017 amounting to 25.0p per share 2016 25.0p per share.
The first interim dividend of 5.5p per share was paid on 13 January 2017 to shareholders on the register on 30 December 2016.
The second interim dividend of 19.5p per share will be paid on 21 July 2017 to shareholders on the register on 7 July 2017.
The shares will trade ex dividend from 6 July 2017.
Directors Interests and Conflicts None of the nonexecutive Directors except for Brian AshfordRussell have any interest in any contract with the Group or
Brian AshfordRussell is a nonexecutive director of Polar Capital Technology Trust plc which has contracted with Polar Capital LLP for the provision of investment management services.
Details are provided in Note 4.12.
The Board has approved a policy on the disclosure approval and management of Directors conflicts of interest.
Under this policy Directors are required to disclose all actual and potential conflicts of interest to the Board as they arise for consideration and approval.
The Board may impose restrictions or refuse to authorise such conflicts if deemed appropriate.
The register of conflicts is formally reviewed annually.
Directors are reminded at each Board meeting of their obligations to notify any changes in their statement of conflicts and also to declare any benefits received from third parties in their capacity as a Director of the Company which might give rise to a conflict or potential conflict with the Companys interests.
No Director has declared receipt of any benefits in his capacity as a Director of the Company.
Remuneration Code Disclosure of the Groups Remuneration Code is made alongside its Pillar 3 disclosure which is available on the Groups website site Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 19 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Capital Structure The capital structure of the Company is detailed in Note 4.9.
Of the 91422309 ordinary shares 2016 91216011 in issue at the yearend 1878987 ordinary shares 2016 1076020 are held by the Trustee of the Polar Capital Employee Benefit Trust for the benefit of the Company and employees.
The Trustee has elected to waive all dividends in respect of 1878987 ordinary shares held by the Trustee and it does not vote any of the ordinary shares held by it.
On a show of hands at a general meeting of the Company every holder of an ordinary share present in person or by proxy shall have one vote and each ordinary share has one vote on a poll.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares.
During the year the Company issued 206298 2016 1929738 ordinary shares of which nil 2016 417088 ordinary shares were in connection with the crystallisation of manager preference shares and 206298 2016 1512650 ordinary shares were to cover the exercise of share options.
The Company is subject to the UK City Code on Takeovers and Mergers.
Substantial Shareholdings As at 26 June 2017 the Company had received notices for the purposes of Part 5 of the FCAs Disclosure and Transparency Rules and PDMR notifications from the undernoted shareholders.
The percentage voting rights is calculated based on the number of shares shown in the notice divided by 91462174 the number of shares in issue as at 26 June 2017 Number of ordinary shares shown in notice % of voting rights held Hargreave Hale 9138329 9.99% Fianchetto Limited R Gurner 8078573 8.83% Caledonia Investments PLC 8016640 8.76% XL Bermuda Ltd 7000000 7.65% B J D AshfordRussell 5940000 6.49% T J Woolley 5150000 5.63% Artemis Investment Management 4045000 4.42% In all cases except as disclosed below the interest was held directly.
The interests of Brian AshfordRussell are held partly indirectly.
There have been no changes notified to the Company since 31 March 2017 and the date of this report.
In addition the Board is aware of the following interests in the ordinary shares of the Company of over 3% Blackrock Investment Management 4.86% Unicorn Asset Management 3.06% Annual General Meeting AGM The AGM will be held at 16 Palace Street London SW1E 5JD at 2.30pm on Wednesday 26 July 2017.
Full details of the resolutions and explanations of each resolution are given in the separate notice of meeting sent to shareholders.
Corporate Governance The Board of Directors recognises the importance of good corporate governance and intends that best practice is adopted and applied in so far as it is appropriate for a company and group of its size and stage of development.
As an AIM traded Company the UK Corporate Governance Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council FRC does not apply however the Board intends to comply with the requirements of the Corporate Governance guidelines published by the Quoted Companies Alliance the QCA Guidelines for AIM companies and with certain of the principal requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
This report describes how the Company has applied the principles of good corporate governance throughout the year and steps which are being taken to develop the corporate policies.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 20 Directors Report and Corporate Governance Report continued The Board
With the exception of Win Robbins who joined the Board on 22 June 2017 the Directors who served during the year are listed on pages 16 and 17 together with their individual biographies.
At the date of this report the Board comprises of two executive Directors Tim Woolley and John Mansell and seven Nonexecutive Directors.
As previously announced Gavin Rochussen is joining the Company on 17 July 2017 as Chief Executive and will be appointed a Director.
Tim Woolley will relinquish his executive duties on that date and continue as a nonexecutive Director.
In assessing the independence of nonexecutive Directors at the date of this report the Board took account of their experience character and judgment and their dependence on or relationships with the Group.
In all cases the Board felt the Directors were independent in character and judgment however the guidance issued on independence by both the QCA and the UK Corporate Governance Code generally used to assess independence consider the holding of a previous executive position within the Group or a material business relationship with the Group including shareholdings to impair the perceived independence of the nonexecutive Director.
In light of this the Board has decided that Brian AshfordRussell should not be considered independent as he previously held an executive position with the Group and that Jamie CayzerColvin and George Bumeder should not be considered to be independent due to the fact that the companies that employ them have sizeable shareholdings and investments in the Group.
Tom
Bartlam Hugh Aldous Win Robbins and Michael Thomas are considered independent nonexecutive Directors and are free from any associations or relationships with the Group or its investment funds except for the fees they receive as Directors and any shares they may hold in the Group.
Tim Woolley will not be considered as an independent director when he assumes a nonexecutive role.
Role and responsibilities The Board as a whole is responsible for the Groups objectives and policies and the proper governance of the
The Board has a formal agenda of items for consideration at each scheduled meeting but it may also meet at additional times when required.
The Board provides overall strategic direction to the executive management by monitoring the operating and financial results against plans and budgets reviewing the performance of management assessing the adequacy of risk management systems and monitoring their application setting the Companys values and standards and ensuring that the Companys obligations to its shareholders and others are understood and met.
The posts of Chairman and Chief Executive are held by different Directors.
The Chairmans primary role is to ensure that the Board and individual Directors are able to operate efficiently by setting the agenda style and tone of Board discussions to promote constructive debate and effective decision making.
The Chairman carries out a review of the Board and each Directors performance and reports to the Board his findings.
The role of the Chairman is appraised by Brian AshfordRussell and reported to the Board.
Tim Woolley in his capacity as Chief Executive has led the executive management team which met regularly and is primarily responsible for the implementation of the Boards policies and strategies effective communication with shareholders ensuring that all Board members develop an understanding of the views of investors and for managing the activities of the Company other than in relation to those matters specifically reserved to the Board or delegated to its committees.
The role of the nonexecutive Directors is to challenge constructively and contribute to the development of strategy to scrutinise the performance of management in meeting agreed goals and objectives monitor their performance and through the various committees to satisfy themselves that financial information is accurate and that financial controls and systems of risk management are robust and defensible.
All Directors receive appropriate and timely information to ensure that they are properly briefed in advance of Board meetings and have unlimited access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary and other senior management should further information be required.
The Company Secretary is responsible for advising the Chairman and the Board on governance matters.
A procedure has been established for nonexecutive Directors to have access to independent professional advice at the Companys expense where they judge it necessary to discharge their responsibilities as Directors.
The Group maintains Directors and officers liability insurance which is reviewed annually to ensure that cover is held at an appropriate level.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 21 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 The Board has established guidelines requiring specific matters to be decided by the full Board of Directors including material acquisitions and disposals investments and capital projects.
Matters that are reserved for the Board are generally forwarded to the Board for consideration with a recommendation from the executive management or appropriate committee.
Conflicts of Interests The Companies Act 2006 the Act imposes a duty on Directors to avoid a situation in which they have or could have a conflict of interest or possible conflict with the interests of the Company.
Only Directors not involved in the conflict or potential conflict participate in the authorisation process.
Directors in deciding whether to authorise a situation take into account their duty to promote the Companys success.
The Board as part of its yearend has considered the register of conflicts any conditions imposed on such conflicts or potential conflicts and the operation of the notification and authorisation process.
They concluded that the process has operated effectively during the period and no changes were required.
Directors appointment induction and training In accordance with the Articles of Association all new Directors appointed by the Board are required to seek election by shareholders at the next general meeting of the Company following their appointment and subsequently all Directors are required to retire by rotation.
On appointment new Directors are offered induction and training considered appropriate by the Board and subsequently as necessary.
Details of the Directors retiring at the Annual General Meeting are given in the separate Notice of Meeting.
Internal control The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control including financial operational compliance and risk management controls.
The Groups fund management activity is regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority of the United Kingdom FCA the Jersey Financial Services Commision JFSC and the Securities Exchange Commission of the USA SEC and the Board has adopted procedures and controls designed to ensure its obligations under UK and EU legislation the FCA Rules and the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 as well as the SEC Rules and the Investment Advisors Act are met.
The Groups system of internal control is designed to manage rather than eliminate risk of failure to achieve business objectives.
It is recognised that such a system can only provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Audit Committee as part of its role has reviewed and monitored the effectiveness of the internal controls for the year ended 31 March 2017 and concluded that there was a satisfactory process in place to identify and manage such risks.
Board meetings The Board meets regularly and as required.
There have been seven Board meetings held in the year.
All the Directors attended all Board meetings with one exception when Jamie CayzerColvin who was abroad and was unable to connect by telephone but conferred with the Chairman shortly afterwards.
Board Committees The Board has created and delegated certain specific areas of responsibility to a number of standing committees.
The Board sees minutes of all committee meetings and the chairman of the committee reports to the Board on any significant matters.
The Board also receives copies of all minutes from subsidiary companies for information.
Allotment Committee This committee which is comprised of any two Directors was created to allot and issue shares arising from the exercise of Board approved share awards or shares arising from previously Board approved crystallisations of fund manager preference share arrangements.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 22 Board Committees continued Audit Committee The Audit Committee formally meets at least three times a year.
The Committee is chaired by Hugh Aldous and the other members are Tom Bartlam Jamie CayzerColvin and Michael Thomas.
Only Committee members are entitled to attend meetings however the Chief Executive the Finance Director and Chief Operating Officer other Directors the Head of Compliance and the Chief Risk Officer and may be invited to attend for all or part of the meetings.
The external auditor of the Company will attend the meetings on a regular basis and will have unrestricted access to the Committee and its Chairman.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities for corporate governance risk management financial control and internal controls by reviewing and monitoring risk and internal controls throughout the business.
The Audit Committee also considers and reports on the financial statements going concern and is responsible for the appointment replacement and work of the auditor.
The Audit Committee Report on pages 24 to 26 describes how the Committee has discharged its duties.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee is chaired by Tom Bartlam and the other members are Hugh Aldous Jamie CayzerColvin Michael Thomas and George Bumeder.
The Committee is responsible for all aspects of the appointment of Directors succession planning and appointments to the Board consideration and recommending the reappointment of retiring Directors of the Company together with evaluation of Directors performance and effectiveness.
The Nomination Committee met twice to consider management succession and oversee the selection of Gavin Rochussen and Win Robbins as Directors.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Michael Thomas and other members of the Committee are Jamie Cayzer Colvin Tom Bartlam and George Bumeder.
The Committee has general oversight of all remuneration arrangements for executive Directors and senior managers and it considers all material elements of remuneration policy remuneration and incentives with reference to independent remuneration research and professional advice.
Recommendations are made to the Board on the framework for executive remuneration including the design and implementation of equity based incentive schemes.
The Remuneration Committee met twice to consider the remuneration for Gavin Rochussen as well as bonus salary share option awards and deferment arrangements for staff and the remuneration arrangements for the Executive Directors.
Information on the Directors Remuneration is provided on pages 27 to 33.
Relations with Shareholders The Company welcomes dialogue with institutional shareholders in order to achieve a mutual understanding of objectives.
The Chief Executive and the Finance Director seek meetings with larger institutional shareholders and private client stockbrokers after the announcement of year end and half year results.
The AGM also provides a forum for investors to meet the Directors both formally and informally.
The Chairmen of the Boards Committees will usually be available to answer questions at the AGM of the Company.
The Groups website site contains regularly updated information regarding the Groups funds and is where all announcements and shareholder reports are published.
Directors Report and Corporate Governance Report continued Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 23 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Corporate Social Responsibility The Board recognises that it should take account of the needs of society and the environment and maintain high ethical standards.
It takes collective responsibility for Corporate Social Responsibility CSR policy and has focused on staff welfare respecting the environment and treating customers fairly.
The extent to which individual principles have been formalised is appropriate to the size of the organisation and these are documented in both the staff handbook and the compliance manual.
Appropriate steps have been taken in relation to the anti bribery act and modern slavery act and a statement is available on the Companys website.
The Company also has a whistleblowing policy and has appointed Mr Aldous as a whistleblowers champion.
Staff welfare and gender diversity The Groups success is largely dependent on recruiting retaining and developing the best financial services professionals.
To achieve this the Group seeks to ensure that working conditions are of a high standard and has in place good and effective management and staff communications with the ability for staff to engage in decisions.
The
Group also encourages participation in the success of the business through share options and has a range of benefits to support staff including ill health protection and life cover.
The Group is committed to equal opportunities and diversity in staff selection and opportunities for promotion with appropriate consideration being given to applications for employment from disabled persons.
The Group aims to remunerate staff in line with market practice to provide development opportunities and to encourage staff motivation and retention.
The environment The Group has implemented processes to manage environmental risks so as to reduce reuse and recycle wherever possible waste materials within its place of business.
Approved by the Board on 26 June 2017 By order of the Board Neil Taylor Company Secretary
Polar Capital Holdings plc 24 Audit Committee Report The constitution and composition of the Audit Committee is given below.
There have been no changes over the financial year to 31 March 2017.
The Committee is chaired by Mr Aldous and comprises Mr CayzerColvin and Mr Thomas.
Mr Bartlam is also a member of the Committee in his role as Chairman of the Board not only due to his experience but also to enable him to be kept fully informed of any issues as they arise.
The Board is satisfied that the Committee has sufficient recent and relevant financial experience in the sector in which the company operates to discharge its function effectively.
The experience of the members of the Committee can be assessed from the Directors biographies set out on pages 16 and 17.
During the year the Committee met three times with all members attending each meeting and considered the following issues the appropriateness and any changes to the accounting policies of the Group including any judgements required by such policies and the reasonableness of such the scope of the annual audit and agreement with the external auditor of the key areas of focus the reports from the external auditor concerning their audit of the annual financial statements of the Group the report from the external auditor concerning their review of the description and suitability of the Groups internal controls in accordance with ISAE 3402 the financial disclosures contained in the annual and interim reports to shareholders reports from management and the auditor on the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal financial control including the Risk Map and ICAAP requirements the independence and objectivity of the external auditor and the level and nature of nonaudit services provided by them the performance of the external auditor and the level of fees charged for their services the policy for nonaudit services which may be provided by the auditor and a presentation from the executive management on the ability of the Group to continue operations for the foreseeable future and allow the Board to form an opinion on Going Concern.
Efficacy of Audit Process The Committee monitored and evaluated the effectiveness of the auditor and any changes in the terms of their appointment based on an assessment of their performance qualification knowledge expertise and resources.
Audit independence was also considered along with other factors such as audit planning and accounting standards interpretations.
This evaluation has been carried out throughout the year by meetings held with the auditor review of the audit process and comments from management and others involved in the audit process.
The auditor is provided with an opportunity to address the Committee without the executive management present to raise any concerns or discuss any matters relating to the audit work and the cooperation of the management in providing any information and the quality of that information including the timeliness in responding to audit requests.
Consideration of the Annual Report and Financial Statements The Committee performed its role through monitoring the integrity of the financial statements of the Group and the system of accounting to ensure compliance with relevant and appropriate accounting standards.
The scope of the audit was agreed in advance with a focus on areas of audit risk and the appropriate level of audit materiality.
The auditor reported on the results of the audit work to the Committee and highlighted any issue which the audit work had discovered or the Committee had previously identified as significant or material in context of the financial statements.
Consideration of the Semiannual Report and Financial Statements The Committee considered and reviewed the semiannual report and financial statements which were not audited or reviewed by the external auditor to ensure consistency with the accounting policies used in the annual financial statements.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 25 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Nonaudit Work During the year the Committee established a policy for nonaudit services supplied by the Groups auditor.
The policy has been established to safeguard the independence and objectivity of the Groups external auditor.
The policy provides that certain nonaudit services are not permitted under any circumstances and that the committee will be required to consider and preapprove any nonaudit services before the external auditor is engaged.
The Committee has discussed the specific nonaudit activities provided by the auditor to ensure that none of these services would put the auditor in the position of auditing their own work.
The Committee has also carried out a review of the nonaudit services to satisfy itself that these are provided within the policy and have been delivered in an efficient and cost effective way.
The Audit Committee believes the objectivity and independence of the auditor is maintained notwithstanding that nonaudit work may be undertaken.
Overview of Risk The Committee has responsibility to assist the Board in maintaining an effective internal control environment and to that end examines and receives reports on the Groups regulatory capital adequacy requirements compliance and control procedures and systems for managing risks arising from the operation of the business its financial position or the regulatory environment which governs it.
Risk is managed throughout the business and the Group has established a Risk Map which seeks to identify quantify measure and mitigate as far as possible those risks through a Risk Monitoring Programme RMP.
The Chief Compliance Officer CCO manages the overall RMP and risk maps of all business areas.
The RMP sets the framework under which risks are managed and controlled in adherence with the risk strategy outlined by the Board.
To capture all risks to the Group four business areas Fund Management Sales and Marketing Overseas Offices and Infrastructure are assessed against eight macro control objectives The CCO reports the outcome of the RMP to the Groups Audit Committee as part of the ICAAP.
The Chief Risk Officer monitors risk and chairs the Internal Investment Risk Committee which sits on a monthly basis to review individual fund and group level risks and ensures that fund managers do not exceed the risk and investment parameters.
The Chief Operating Officer COO has responsibility for operational risk.
Risks are identified assessed and monitored.
The COO chairs the Operational Risk Committee which sits on a monthly basis.
Appointment of Auditor and Tenure The Committee also considers by way of meetings and reports the appointment remuneration and work of the auditor.
Ernst and Young LLP have provided audit services to the Group from 2002 and these have continued through the period from its initial public offering in February 2007 to date.
The Committee has considered the need for the rotation of the audit firm and is satisfied with the performance of the auditor and does not consider it necessary to put the external audit out to tender.
There are no contractual obligations restricting the choice of external auditor.
The Committee having considered the above factors consider it appropriate to recommend to the Board and shareholders that Ernst and Young LLP be reappointed as auditor at the AGM.
Ernst and Young LLP have agreed to offer themselves for reappointment as auditor of the Group in accordance with section  of the Companies Act 2006 and a resolution requesting approval of their reappointment and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration will be presented at the AGM.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 26 Significant Issues in Relation to the Financial Statements The Committee held discussions with Group management and the auditor with regards to the significant judgments and estimation uncertainties described in Note 2.4.
Following these discussions and its review of the treatments applied and associated financial statement disclosures the Committee was satisfied that these matters had been appropriately addressed.
Conclusions in Respect of the Annual Report and Financial Statements The production and the audit of the Groups Annual Report and Financial Statements is a comprehensive process requiring input from a number of different contributors.
In order to reach a conclusion that the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable the Board has requested that the Committee advise on whether it considers these criteria satisfied.
In so doing the Committee has given consideration to the following the comprehensive control framework over the production of the Annual Report including the verification processes in place to deal with the factual content the extensive levels of review are undertaken in the production process by the management and the Committee and a clean ISAE 3402 report confirming the effectiveness of internal control.
As a result of the work performed the Committee has concluded that the Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 2017 taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy and has reported on these findings to the Board.
Hugh Aldous Chairman of Audit Committee 26 June 2017 Audit Committee Report continued Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 27 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 The constitution and composition of the Remuneration Committee is given on page 22.
The Company is not subject to the large and Medium Sized Companies and Group Accounts and Reports amendment Regulations 2013 as it is not a company which is listed on a regulated market.
Although the Company does not have to prepare a Policy Report or Implementation Report the Committee wishes to ensure that shareholders have a clear understanding of the remuneration paid by the Company and how the Committee has discharged it obligations.
The Board has also decided to submit this report for shareholders approval at the AGM as a mechanism for shareholders to indicate their views on these arrangements.
The Company will engage with shareholders if there is significant dissent shown over the remuneration paid.
I am pleased to take this opportunity to summarise the Companys remuneration strategy and the way it has been implemented during year under review.
Remuneration Committee Activities During the Year The Remuneration Committee met twice over the past year and discussed the following consideration of the package for the new CEO Gavin Rochussen a review of executive remuneration and consistent with good practice has implemented a more performance based reward system in which the new CEO will participate the remuneration of the Executive Directors of the Group including bonuses for the year recommendations from the executive management for remuneration packages for existing and new fund managers recommended salary levels for 2017 and bonus payments for 201617 across the Group and the requirements for deferment and the method to be used.
Remuneration Payable for the Year Under Review When setting Executive Director remuneration the Committee considers a range of factors including strategic goals the Groups overall success as well as personal performance.
Despite the challenging market conditions the year saw good progress against strategic objectives including the hiring of the UK Value Opportunities team and the successful launch of their first fund a continuing pipeline of recruitment activity and a strong overall financial position for the
These factors are reflected in the Executive Director remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2017 as set out in the Remuneration Implementation Report.
Implementation of the Group Deferred Remuneration Plan During the year the Group implemented its Deferred Remuneration Plan DRP which all Group employees eligible for a bonus over a certain level as determined by the Remuneration Committee are required to participate in.
The
DRP provides for compulsory deferral of a proportion of bonus over a three year vesting period.
The introduction of the DRP will ensure variable compensation is better linked to longterm performance and bring the Group closer to impending regulatory requirements around deferral arrangements.
Appointment of new Chief Executive and Review of Executive Remuneration As announced in January 2017 Gavin Rochussen will be joining Polar as Chief Executive in July 2017.
Gavin brings a wealth of experience to the team and will be fundamental to achieving the ambitious growth plans of the business.
His starting annual base salary has been set at 350000.
On appointment Gavin will be awarded a deferred interest in three million pounds value of ordinary shares in Polar Capital Holdings plc.
The Remuneration Committee also carried out a review of executive remuneration and consistent with good practice has implemented a more performancebased reward system in which the new CEO will participate.
The incentive plan will ensure there is greater alignment between executive pay and Company performance.
Under the plan and consistent with typical practice in the asset management industry the variable remuneration for the CEO and other Executive Directors will be based on a share of an executive variable pay pool with the pool determined as a specified proportion of the Groups pretax and preexecutive variable pay profits.
Remuneration Committee Report Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 28 This executive variable pay pool will be used to deliver both annual bonuses and performancebased longterm incentives.
Up to 200% of salary will be put towards an annual bonus.
The actual amount payable will be based on performance against criteria and targets that are designed and agreed by the Remuneration Committee at the start of each year with a portion of the bonus being delivered in shares which vest over 3 years and are subject to forfeiture provisions.
The remaining balance less 200% of salary put towards the annual bonus will be delivered in the form of performance shares face value of award and structured as nil cost options which will vest depending on performance over a threeyear performance period.
Vested awards will vest in equal tranches over 3 4 and 5 years.
It is expected that Gavin Rochussens first share award under this arrangement will be granted in July 2018 and will be subject to an Adjusted EPS growth measure with demanding EPS hurdles requiring a minimum growth in EPS of 15%p. and full vesting set at 25%p. or higher.
The Committee believes that this represents a very demanding target and therefore provides strong alignment with the interests of shareholders reflecting the Companys desire to grow the business over the mediumterm.
This review has coincided with the expiry of the existing Equity Incentive Plan EIP.
A new Executive Incentive Plan was approved by the Board in December 2016 which renewed the share option plan as well as providing for a Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP.
The LTIP will facilitate the implementation of the above structure and includes recovery and withholding provisions.
Approach to Remuneration in 201718 The general salary increase across the group will be 4% to take effect from 1 April 2017.
Salaries for the Executive Directors remain unchanged.
An award of share options to selected staff will be made at market price.
The allemployee Save As You Earn scheme will continue with an invitation to all employees in 2017 the scheme having been renewed at last years AGM.
The Committee believes that the remuneration approach will both support and motivate our senior team whilst aligning them both to the Companys strategic objectives and to achieving longterm growth for our shareholders.
Michael Thomas Chairman of Remuneration Committee 26 June 2017 Remuneration Committee Report continued Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 29 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Directors Remuneration Policy Summary The overall aim of our remuneration strategy is to provide appropriate incentives that reflect the Groups high performance culture and values.
In summary we aim to attract retain and motivate high calibre high performing employees and encourage strong performance and engagement both in the short and the longterm to enable the Group to achieve its strategic objectives.
The total remuneration package is structured so that a significant proportion is linked to performance conditions measured over both the shortterm and longerterm.
When setting the levels of shortterm and longterm variable remuneration and the balance of equity and cash within the package consideration is given to obtaining the appropriate balance so as not to encourage unnecessary risk taking whilst ensuring that performance hurdles are suitably challenging.
The table below summarises the key aspects of the Companys remuneration policy Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation Base salary To attract and retain executives of a suitable calibre for the duties required by being market competitive.
Reviewed annually by the Committee taking account of Company performance individual performance changes in responsibility and levels of increase for the broader staff population.
The Committee considers the impact of any basic salary increase on the total remuneration package.
Benefits To provide market competitive benefits.
The Company typically provides the following Private medical cover Life Insurance Income protection scheme to cover longterm illness.
Pension To provide market competitive benefits.
Defined contribution or cash in lieu of pension equal to 10% of base salary.
Variable Pay
To drive and reward performance against annual objectives which are consistent with the strategy and aligns to shareholder interests.
An executive variable pay pool is formed based on 12% of the pre tax and executive variable compensation profits.
The Committee determines an individuals allocation of the variable compensation pool.
Of this allocation up to 200% of salary may be earned as annual bonus.
The actual bonus paid is dependent on the overall success of the Company financial and nonfinancial and personal contribution.
No less than 60%of the bonus amount is delivered in the form of a deferred bonus award.
Awards under the deferred bonus award take the form of shares or nil cost options over Polar Capital Holdings plc shares.
Longterm incentives
To encourage and reward delivery of the Companys longterm strategic objectives and provide alignment with shareholders.
The remaining balance of an individuals share of the variable pay pool less the potential to earn 200% of salary in annual bonus will be granted in the form of LTIP awards.
The LTIP awards are structured as nil cost options and will vest subject to performance and continued employment.
Vesting of LTIP awards is determined by reference to performance assessed over a period of at least three years typically based on EPS growth targets.
Prior to each grant the Committee may determine that alternative measures apply as long as they are aligned with the companys strategic objectives and longterm shareholder value.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 30
Remuneration Committee Report continued
Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation
Remuneration
Plan DRP The DRP provides a deferral element to variable compensation above a certain level to ensure there is a link to the longerterm performance of the Company.
All Group employees including Executive Directors eligible for a bonus over a certain level as determined by the Remuneration Committee are required to participate in the DRP.
The plan provides for compulsory deferral of a proportion of bonus over a 3 year deferral period.
Deferrals can be made either into shares in the Company units in the Groups funds or left as cash.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to increase the extent to which variable compensation is deferred if required to satisfy future regulatory requirements.
NonExecutive Director fees Fee paid in cash To attract and retain a high calibre Chairman and Non Executive Directors by offering a market competitive fee level.
The Chairman is paid a single fee for all his responsibilities.
The
NonExecutives are paid a basic fee assessed on their contribution links to substantial investors and level of responsibilities.
The level of these fees is reviewed periodically by the Committee and Chief Executive for the Chairman and by the Chairman and Executive Directors for the NonExecutive Directors with reference to market levels and a recommendation is then made to the Board.
The Committee in reviewing these fees considers the extra work undertaken by the Chairmen of the Board Committees and may pay an additional fee to reflect these responsibilities if felt appropriate.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 31 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Service Contracts and Payments for Loss of Office The Remuneration Committee reviews the contractual terms for new Executive Directors to ensure that these reflect best practice.
Service contracts normally continue until the Directors agreed retirement date or such other date as the parties agree.
The service contracts contain provision for early termination.
Notice periods given by the employing company are limited to 12 months or less.
A Directors service contract may be terminated without notice and without any further payment or compensation except for sums accrued up to the date of termination on the occurrence of certain events such as gross misconduct.
If the employing company terminates the employment of an Executive Director in other circumstances compensation is limited to salary due for any unexpired notice period and any amount assessed by the Remuneration Committee as representing the value of other contractual benefits including pension which would have been received during the period.
Payments in lieu of notice are not pensionable.
In the event of a change of control of the Company there is no enhancement to contractual terms.
The NonExecutive Directors have letters of appointment setting out the terms and conditions of their appointment and their expected time commitment.
It is the Companys policy that NonExecutive Directors should be appointed for an initial period of three years from the next general meeting following their initial appointment in the case of new NonExecutive Directors and that they may be reappointed for further terms of three years each.
Reappointment at the end of such periods should not be considered automatic and each Directors contribution will be carefully assessed.
The letters of appointment provide for termination of the Directors appointment under certain circumstances and in all cases without any compensation.
None of the NonExecutive Directors have any ongoing direct financial or contractual interests in the Company other than their fees and shareholdings as disclosed in this report.
Remuneration Implementation Report
The table below sets out the remuneration received by the Directors for the financial year ended 31 March 2017 and for comparison amounts received in the financial year ended 31 March 2016.
Salary and fees Bonus
Pension payment in lieu of pension
Executive Directors T J Woolley 35telJ B Mansell 25telNonExecutive Directors T H Bartlam 80 80       80 80 H G C Aldous 40 40       40 40 B J D AshfordRussell 55 55   3 3   58 58 J M B CayzerColvin 20 20       20 20 G Bumeder 20 20       20 20 M Thomas 40 40       40 40 Total 85tel247 1290 Under the terms of their appointment the Directors fees may be paid to their principal employers if so elected or to their designee.
The fee for Jamie CayzerColvin was paid to Caledonia Investments plc and the fee for George Bumeder was paid to XL Group Ltd.
Governance
Polar Capital Holdings plc 32
Remuneration Committee Report continued
Share Options Vested in the Financial Year Ended 31 March 2017 No further share options issued to Executive Directors vested in the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
Payments to Past Directors During the year to 31 March 2017 no payments were made to any past Directors.
Annual Bonus for the Year Ended 31 March 2017 Annual bonuses to the Executive Directors for the year ended 31 March 2017 reflect the lower earnings during that period but also successes in other parts of the business.
Mr Woolley received a bonus of 175000 in respect of the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
Mr Mansell received a bonus of 150000 in respect of the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
LTIP Awards Granted During the Year Neither Mr Woolley nor Mr Mansell have been granted a share option in the year ended 31 March 2017.
Directors Interests in the Shares and Options of the Company Options to acquire ordinary shares held by the Directors and changes there to during the year ended 31 March 2017 and up to 26 June 2017 are described below.
EIP awards
At
1 April
Exercised in the year
At
31 March
Latest exercise date
Exercise price T J
20122010 1000000    1000000 31032014 20122020 145.0p 145.0p 27062011 600000    600000 27062015 27062021 191.7p 191.7p 04072013 500000    500000 04072017 04072023 388.0p 388.0p Total 2100000 J B
22012010 500000    500000 31032014 31032020 91.5p 91.5p 26072011 350000    350000 26072015 26072021 197.5p 197.5p 04072013 350000    350000 04072017 04072023 388.0p 388.0p Total 1200000    1200000 Conditions of Option awards The options granted to Tim Woolley and John Mansell are subject to the requirement that in order to exercise the option the option holder must be employed by or be an officer of the Company on the relevant vesting date subject to certain defined good leaver situations.
The options have been issued in accordance with the rules of the Polar Capital Equity Incentive Plan by the use of the provisions relating to Equity Settled Share Appreciation Rights ESARS.
The use of the ESARS provisions allows the Company to issue to the option holder only the number of shares that would equate to the number of shares over which the option becomes exercisable less the number of shares that would have needed to be sold to fund the purchase of that number of shares on the exercise date.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 33 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 No other Directors held share options during the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 nil.
The interests of Directors in the shares of the Company at the end of the financial year were as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 T H Bartlam 50000 50000 H G C Aldous 60000 40000 B J D AshfordRussell beneficial 5690000 6350000 non beneficial 250000 250000 J M B CayzerColvin 4250 4250 J B Mansell beneficial 1712000 1712000 non beneficial 160000 160000 G Bumeder M Thomas 4000 4000 T J Woolley 5500000 5500000 There have been no changes in the interests of the Directors who were in office at 31 March 2017 in the shares of the Company between 31 March 2017 and 26 June 2017.
Win Robbins did not own any shares at the date of her appointment on 22 June 2017.
Share Prices Over the Financial Year The shares have traded at prices between 270p 17 June 2016 and 390p 20 January 2017 per share.
The share price on 31 March 2017 was 349.25p per share.
External Advisors The Committee has access to the advice of independent remuneration consultants when required.
During the year the Committee received advice from New Bridge Street NBS.
NBS is wholly owned by Aon plc.
NBS is a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct and has no other connection with the Company.
The Committee is satisfied that the advice that it receives from NBS is objective and independent.
Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 34 The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the Group financial statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and those International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and for preparing the parent company financial statements in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 102 FRS 102.
The Directors are required to prepare financial statements for each financial year which present a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group and parent company and the financial performance and cash flows of the Group for that period.
In preparing those financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRS and FRS 102 respectively is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups and parent companys financial position and financial performance and state that the Group and parent company have complied with IFRS and FRS 102 respectively subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements.
The Directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Disclosure of Information to the Auditor Each of the Directors at the date of approval of this report confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information being information needed by the auditor in connection with preparing its report of which the Groups auditor is unaware.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors and the Groups auditor each Director has taken all the steps that he is obliged to have taken as a Director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditor is aware of the information.
Going Concern The Board with guidance from the Audit Committee has made an assessment of the Groups position as at 31 March 2017 and the factors impacting the forthcoming year are set out in the Strategic Report and in the Directors Report which incorporates the corporate governance statements.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows and its liquidity position are described in the Financial Review on pages 10 to 13.
Note 4.3 to the financial statements include the Groups policies and process for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of financial instruments and hedging activities.
Exposure to credit risk and liquidity risk are also disclosed.
The Group has considerable financial resources and after making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future despite the continued uncertain economic outlook.
Accordingly the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the annual report and accounts.
For and on behalf of the Board Tom Bartlam
26 June 2017 Statement of Directors Responsibilities in Relation to the Groups Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 35 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 We have audited the financial statements of Polar Capital Holdings plc for the year ended 31 March 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income Consolidated and Company Balance Sheets Consolidated and Company Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated and Company Cash Flow Statement and the related notes 1 to 5.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the group financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the parent Company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective Responsibilities of Directors and Auditor As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 34 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our
International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the Audit of the Financial Statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the groups and the parent Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report and Accounts to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Opinion on Financial Statements In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom General Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable to the UK and Republic of Ireland and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Opinion on Other Matter Prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements. requirements.
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Polar Capital Holdings plc For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 36 Matters on Which we are Required to Report by Exception In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have identified no material misstatements in the Strategic Report or Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Amarjit Singh Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
26 June 2017 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Polar Capital Holdings plc continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 37 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss For the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Revenue 3.1 73766 84182 Other income 3.3 1505 309 Gross income 75271 84491 Commissions and fees payable 5578 7630 Net income 69693 76861 Operating costs before sharebased payments 45161 49944 Profit before sharebased payments and tax 24532 26917 Sharebased payments 3.6 4095 3290 Profit for the year before tax 3.4 20437 23627 Taxation 3.7 4394 5423 Profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders 16043 18204 Earnings per share Basic 3.8 17.8p 20.5p Diluted 3.8 17.0p 19.5p Adjusted basic NonGAAP measure 3.8 21.4p 23.2p Adjusted diluted NonGAAP measure 3.8 20.4p 22.0p Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income For the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders 16043 18204 Other comprehensive income  items that may be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods Reclassification of losses on available for sale financial assets Deferred tax effect 4.2  2 Net movement on cash flow hedges 3.3 47 360 Deferred tax effect 4.2 18 169 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 795 609 Other comprehensive income for the year 766 802 Total comprehensive income for the year net of tax attributable to ordinary shareholders 16809 19006 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
All of the items in the above statements are derived from continuing operations.
The Notes on pages 41 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 38 Consolidated Balance Sheet As at 31 March 2017
31 March 2017
31 March 2016
1 April 2015 Noncurrent assets Property and equipment 4.1 2402 2862 2007 Deferred tax assets 4.2 3478 3654 5136 5880 6516 7143 Current assets Investment securities 4.3 14429 10065 8211 Assets at fair value through profit or loss 4.3 9623 33293 38075 Assets held for sale 4.3   6643 Trade and other receivables 4.5 10107 8025 9367 Cash and cash equivalents 4.6 58539 48862 41614 92698 100245 103910 Total assets 98578 106761 111053 Noncurrent liabilities Provisions and other liabilities 4.7 2169 2132 18 Deferred tax liabilities 4.
Current liabilities Liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 4.3 2170 3249 1379 Trade and other payables 4.8 19741 21259 26276 Other financial liabilities 4.3 1350 2966 5357 Current tax liabilities 1869 1330 2580 25130 28804 35592 Total liabilities 27838 31060 35712 Net assets 70740 75701 75341 Capital and reserves Issued share capital 4.9 2286 2280 2232 Share premium 4.9 18631 18509 16715 Investment in own shares 4.9 3747 746 831 Capital and other reserves 4.9 7840 6919 6630 Retained earnings 4.9 45730 48739 50595 Total equity  attributable to ordinary shareholders 70740 75701 75341 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
The Notes on pages 41 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
The financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 26 June 2017.
Hugh Aldous John Mansell Chairman of the Audit Committee Finance Director Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 39 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 31 March 2017
Issued
Share premium
Capital reserves
Retained earnings
As at 1 April 2015 2232 16715 962 133 6532 50581 75231 Prior period restatement 2.8   131  582 561 110 Prior period restatement 5.2    562  562 As at 1 April 2015 restated 2232 16715 831 695 5950 50580 75341 Profit for the year      18204 18204 Other comprehensive income     802  802 Total comprehensive income     802 18204 19006 Dividends paid to shareholders 4.10      22073 22073 Dividends paid to thirdparty interests      3 3 Issue of shares 4.9 38 1794 84   1825 91 Issue of share capital against preference shares 10     10 Sharebased payment 3.6      3290 3290 Current tax in respect of employee share options     1182  1182 Deferred tax in respect of employee share options     1137  1137 As at 1 April 2016 restated 2280 18509 747 695 6797 48163 75697 Profit for the year      16043 16043 Other comprehensive income     766  766 Total comprehensive income     766 16043 16809 Dividends paid to shareholders 4.10      22549 22549 Dividends paid to thirdparty interests      22 22 Issue of shares 4.9 6 122     128 Shares acquired by EBT   3000    3000 Sharebased payment 3.6      4095 4095 Current tax in respect of employee share options     47  47 Deferred tax in respect of employee share options     465  465 As at 31 March 2017 2286 18631 3747 695 7145 45730 70740 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
The Notes on pages 41 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 40 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement For the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Cash flows generated from operating activities Cash generated from operations 4.6 13437 24790 Tax paid 3662 5298 Net cash inflow generated from operating activities 9775 19492 Investing activities Interest received 28 45 Sale of investment securities 9160 3641 Purchase of investment securities 11479 5846 Sale of assets at fair value through profit or loss 29575 10653 Purchase of assets at fair value through profit or loss 28 178 Purchase of property and equipment 4.1 41 373 Net cash inflow generated from investing activities 27215 7942 Financing activities Dividends paid to shareholders 4.10 22549 22073 Issue of share capital 124 Purchase of own shares 3000 Receipts in relation to own shares  84 Thirdparty subscriptions into consolidated funds 908 10887 Thirdparty redemptions from consolidated funds 2502 8824 Dividends paid to thirdparty interests 22 3 Net cash outflow from financing activities 27041 19929 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 9949 7505 Cash and cash equivalents at start of the year 48862 41614 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 272 257 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year 4.6 58539 48862 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 2.8.
The Notes on pages 41 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 41 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the year ended 31 March 2017 The notes to the consolidated financial statements of Polar Capital Holdings plc and its subsidiaries collectively the Group for the year ended 31 March 2017 have been set out in sections to improve their structuring and cross referencing to the primary financial statements.
Accounting policies are contained and highlighted within each relevant note.
Section 1 Corporate and Group Information This section provides general information about Polar Capital Holdings plc and its subsidiaries.
Corporate information Polar Capital Holdings plc the Company is a public limited company registered in England and Wales whose shares are traded on the Alternative Investment Market AIM of the London Stock Exchange.
Group information The consolidated financial statements of the Group include the operating subsidiaries listed below.
All operating subsidiaries other than Polar Capital Partners Limited were indirectly held.
All operating subsidiaries are wholly owned except for Polar Capital LLP in which Polar Capital Partners Limited has contributed 99.5% of the capital.
Name Country of incorporation Registered office Principal activities Polar Capital Partners
UK 16 Palace Street London Services company Polar Capital Secretarial Services Limited UK 16 Palace Street London Dormant Polar Capital Partners Jersey Limited Jersey 12 Castle Street St Helier Jersey Investment management Polar Capital America
USA 2711 Centreville Road Wilmington USA Investment advisory Polar Capital Limited Liability Partnership UK 16 Palace Street London Investment management The consolidated financial statements of the Group also include the following seed capital investments which were judged to be subsidiaries of the Group as at 31 March 2017
Country of incorporation Registered office
Percentage of ordinary shares held Polar Capital European Income Fund Ireland 4 Georges Court 5462 Townsend Street Dublin UCITS subfund 79% Polar Capital International Alpha Fund Ireland 4 Georges Court 5462 Townsend Street Dublin UCITS subfund 100% Section 2 Basis of Preparation and Other Significant Policies This section provides additional information about the overall basis of preparation that the Directors consider is useful and relevant in understanding these consolidated financial statements Summary of other significant accounting policies affecting the results and financial position of the Group including changes in accounting policies and disclosures during the year.
Standards that have been issued but not yet adopted by the Group.
Basis of preparation The consolidated Group financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modified by the measurement at fair value of certain financial assets and liabilities and derivative financial instruments.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand 000 except when otherwise stated.
Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 42 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the year ended 31 March 2017 Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements of the Group comprise the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries as at 31 March 2017.
Subsidiaries are those entities over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an investee if and only if the Group has power over the investee exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and the ability to use its power over the investee to affect returns.
The Group considers all relevant facts and circumstances in assessing whether it has power over an investee including the purpose and design of an investee relevant activities substantive and protective rights voting rights and potential voting rights.
Seed capital investments in funds that the Group manages are accounted for as subsidiaries associates or financial assets at fair value through profit or loss FVTPL depending on the holdings of the Group on the level of influence and control that the Group is judged to have and whether the Group assesses it is acting as an agent or principal for its holdings in the seed capital investments.
There is no fixed minimum percentage at which the Group consolidates and each exposure is reviewed individually.
Where the Group concludes it is acting as a principal the entity is consolidated.
This assessment is based on the Groups total exposure.
This incorporates direct holdings income earned from management and performance fees and the assessed strength of thirdparty kickout rights.
The Group concludes that it acts as an agent when the power it has over the fund is deemed to be exercised for the benefit of thirdparty investors.
The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which the Group obtains control and continue to be consolidated until the date when such control ceases.
The financial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the parent company and where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of the subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies in line with those of the Group.
All intragroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Where external investors hold redeemable shares in funds controlled by the Group the portion of profit or loss and net assets held by these thirdparty interests is included within other income in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and as financial liabilities at FVTPL in the consolidated balance sheet respectively.
When the Group loses control over a subsidiary it derecognises the related assets liabilities thirdparty interest and other components of equity while any resultant gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss.
Any investment retained is recognised at fair value.
Net cashflows on initial consolidation or deconsolidation are presented as investing activities within the consolidated cashflow statement.
Cashflows from thirdparty interests into consolidated funds are presented as financing activities.
Investment in associates An associate is an entity over which the Group has significant influence.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control or joint control over those policies.
Generally it is presumed that the Group has significant influence where it has voting rights of 20% or more but not control of an investee.
Seed capital investments over which the Group has significant influence but not control are carried in the balance sheet as assets at FVTPL as permitted by IAS 28 Investment in Associates with changes in fair value recognised in the consolidated statement profit or loss.
The fair value of investments in associates is determined by reference to the quoted price or net asset value of the underlying investments at the close of business on the balance sheet date.
The Group has no other investments in associates and therefore no associates are currently accounted for using the equity method.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 43 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Significant accounting judgements estimates and assumptions The preparation of the Groups consolidated financial statements requires management to make critical accounting estimates and assumptions.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The Group bases its assumptions and estimates on parameters available when the consolidated financial statements were prepared.
Where circumstances and parameters change the original estimates and assumptions are modified in the period in which the change occurs.
The areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the Groups consolidated financial statements are set out in the following notes Sharebased payments Note 3.6 Deferred tax Note 4.2 and Consolidation of seed capital investments Note 2.2.
Foreign currency i Functional and presentational currency The Groups consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling which is also the functional currency for the
Each entity in the Group determines its own functional currency and items included in the financial statements of each entity are measured using that functional currency.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded by the Group entities at their respective functional currency rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the functional currency spot rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
Nonmonetary items such as plant and equipment that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates as at the dates of the initial transactions.
Nonmonetary items such as investments in equity instruments measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using exchange rates at the date fair value is determined.
All exchange differences are recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss within operating costs.
On consolidation the assets and liabilities of the Groups overseas subsidiaries whose functional currency is not Sterling are translated at exchange rates prevailing at the reporting date.
Income and expense items are translated at average exchange rates for the accounting period.
Exchange differences arising if any are recognised in other comprehensive income and are reclassified to the consolidated statement of profit or loss on disposal of the relevant overseas subsidiary.
Fair value of financial instruments The fair value of financial instruments that are traded in active markets at each reporting date is determined by reference to quoted market prices or dealer price quotation bid price for long positions and ask price for short positions without any deduction for transaction costs.
For financial instruments not traded in an active market such as forward exchange contracts the fair value is determined using appropriate valuation techniques that take into account the terms and conditions of the contracts and utilise observable market data such as spot and forward rates as inputs.
New standards and amendments not yet effective The following new standards and amendments to existing standards have been published and are mandatory for the Groups accounting periods beginning after 1 January 2018 or later periods but the Group has decided not to early adopt them Standards issued but not yet effective Summary Effective for period beginning on or after IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Classification and Measurement IFRS 9 introduces revised measurement and classification criteria for financial assets and liabilities.
1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 establishes a new fivestep model that will apply to revenue arising from contracts with customers and provides a more structured approach to measuring and recognising revenue.
1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 provides a single lessee accounting model requiring lessees to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases unless the lease term is 12 months or less or the underlying asset has a low value.
1 January 2019 The Group does not expect that the adoption of IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 to have a significant impact on its consolidated financial statements.
The Group is currently assessing the impact of IFRS 16 on its financial statements.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 44 Restatement of comparatives During the year the Group ceased to classify its seed capital investment in the European Income fund as held for sale as the criteria for such recognition were no longer met.
The Group has determined that it controls the fund under IFRS 10 and it is deemed to be a subsidiary of the Group.
As a result the comparatives have been amended retrospectively as though the fund had never qualified as held for sale as required by IFRS 5 and the Group had consolidated the fund on a line by line basis from the date of initial investment.
During the year the group has determined that it controls the Group Employee Benefit Trust EBT and it is deemed to be a subsidiary.
As a result the consolidated financial statements have been restated at 1 April 2015 to reflect cash held by the EBT of 114000 expenses of 19000 and a corresponding credit to reserves of 132000.
The restatements have been made to each of the affected financial statement line items for prior periods as follows Impact on equity increase decrease in equity 31 March 2016 1 April 2015 Investment securities 10065 8211 Assets held for sale 6835 6967 Trade and other receivables 41 33 Cash 100 229 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 3249 1379 Accruals 22 17 Net impact on equity 100 110 Impact on consolidated statement of profit or loss increase decrease in profit 31 March 2016 Revenue 70 Other income 481 Operating costs before sharebased payments 65 Net impact on profit or loss 616 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 616 Thirdparty interests Impact on consolidated statement of other comprehensive income increase decrease in other comprehensive income 31 March 2016 1 April 2015 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 605 581 Impact on earnings per share EPS increasedecrease in EPS 31 March 2016 pence Basic EPS 0.7p Adjusted basic EPS NonGAAP measure 1.7p Diluted EPS 0.6p Adjusted diluted EPS NonGAAP measure 1.6p Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 45 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Section 3 Detailed Information on Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income Items This section provides additional information about individual line items in the statement of profit or loss and statement of comprehensive income including the relevant accounting policies.
Revenue
Revenue recognition Revenue represents fees receivable excluding value added tax during the period for discretionary investment management services.
Management fees are based on a percentage of assets under management as set out in the relevant investment management agreements.
The fees are recognised in the period in which the service is provided and it is probable that the fee will be received.
Performance fees are based on a percentage of investment performance achieved relative to predefined benchmarks as set out in the relevant investment management agreements.
The fees are recognised at the end of the period over which the performance is measured when a reliable estimate of the fee can be made and it is almost certain that the fee will be received.
Interest receivable and similar income Interest receivable is recognised on an accruals basis using the effective interest method.
Commissions and fees payable Commissions and distribution fees payable to third parties are in respect of the management of investment management contracts.
Commissions and distribution fees payable to third parties are recognised over the period for which the service is provided.
31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Investment management fees 73471 77916 Investment performance fees 2718 7206 Loss on forward currency contracts 2423 940 73766 84182 Net gains and losses on forward currency contracts used to hedge management fees derived from nonSterling based AUM see Note 4.3 b and c are included within revenue.
This presentation better reflects the substance of these transactions and provides more relevant information about the Groups revenue.
Operating segments The Group is a specialist investment management group offering professional and institutional investors a range of geographical and sector investment opportunities.
The Groups assets under management are separated into products and services but as the strategic and financial management decisions are determined centrally by the Board the Group only has one class of business being the provision of investment management and advisory services.
The Groups revenue generating operations are in London with small offices in Tokyo Jersey Connecticut and Geneva that do not generate any revenue.
The financial information provided to the chief operating decision maker the Board of Directors the Board is on an aggregated basis.
Strategic and financial management decisions are determined centrally and on this basis the Group is a single segment investment management business.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 46 Geographical analysis of revenue based on the residency of source 31 March 2017
31 March 2016 UK 13238 11213 Ireland 54922 64410 Cayman 5316 7628 Europe 2713 1871 Loss on forward currency contracts 2423 940 73766 84182 Components of Other income and Other Comprehensive Income a Components of other income 31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Interest income on cash and cash equivalents 28 45 Net loss gain on other financial liabilities  short positions and futures 3191 2694 Net loss on forward currency contracts 2439 863 Net gainloss on financial assets at FVTPL  seed investments 5878 953 Net gainloss on investment securities 1471 899 Other lossesgains  attributed to thirdparty holdings 242 285 1505 309 b Components of other comprehensive income 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Cash flow hedges  Forward currency contracts Losses arising during the year 2471 580 Reclassification adjustments for losses included in the consolidated statement of profit or loss 2424 940 No ineffective gains or losses arose on cash flow hedges during the year.
Profit before taxation a Profit before taxation is stated after charging the following significant costs Operating leases A lease that transfers substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership to the Group is classified as a finance lease.
An operating lease is a lease other than a finance lease.
Amounts payable under operating leases are charged to the statement of profit or loss on a straightline basis over the lease term.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Staff costs including partnership profit allocations Note 3.5 35994 39951 Depreciation 501 499 Auditors remuneration Note 3.4b 163 167 Operating lease rentals  land and buildings 1263 1288 Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 47 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 b Auditors remuneration 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Audit of Group financial statements 50 50 Other fees local statutory audits of subsidiaries 39 44 GIPS review 23 22 internal controls review .5.
Staff costs and average number of staff
The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme covering the majority of its staff.
The costs of the pension scheme are charged to the statement of profit or loss in the period in which they are incurred.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Salaries 11999 11382 Social security costs 834 1322 Pension costs 538 505 Partnership profit allocations 18528 23452 Sharebased payments Note 3.6 4095 3290 35994 39951 Pension costs outstanding at the yearend amounted to nil 2016 nil.
Where variable compensation is deferred the cost of the award is spread over the vesting period and included within staff costs.
The liability is revalued at each balance sheet date to the expected settlement amount being the current market value of the underlying fund unit.
Any increase or decrease in value is recognised in the income statement within staff costs.
The liability is included in the balance sheet as part of accrued expenses within trade and other payables.
Where deferrals are made into Company shares or fund units the Group hedges its exposure to price fluctuations by purchasing the Company shares or fund units at the date of grant.
Company shares held are shown as a deduction from equity and accounted for as a share based payment.
Fund units are included within financial assets at FVTPL on the balance sheet.
Any change in the fair value of the units is recognised in the income statement within staff costs.
During the year the Group implemented its Deferred Remuneration Plan DRP which all Group employees eligible for a bonus over a certain level as determined by the Remuneration Committee are required to participate in.
The DRP provides for compulsory deferral of a proportion of bonus over a specified vesting period.
Deferrals can be made either into shares in the Company units in the Groups funds or as cash.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Average number of partners and full time employees including executive directors Fund Management 55 53 Administration All employees are directly or indirectly engaged in the Groups business.
Details regarding the total remuneration of paid to Directors who served during the year as required by the Companies Act 2006 is disclosed in the Remuneration Committee Report.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 48 A summary of the charge to the income statement for each sharebased payment arrangement is as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Preference shares 3206 2371 Equity Incentive Plans 889 919 4095 3290 The fair value of equitysettled share options granted is estimated at the date of grant using a BlackScholesMerton option pricing model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Dividend yield % 7.82 5.79 Expected share price volatility % 34.1 30.8 Risk free interest rate % 0.22  0.35 1.49 Weighted average share price  3.16 4.32 Expected life of option  Preference Shares 6 6 Expected life of options  Equity Incentive Plans Vesting period Vesting period The share price volatility was calculated by reference to the Companys historic share price.
No other features of options granted were incorporated into the measurement of fair value.
Certain employees of the Group and partners of Polar Capital LLP hold Manager Preference Shares or Manager Team Member Preference Shares together Preference Shares in Polar Capital Partners Limited a group company.
The preference shares are designed to incentivise and retain the Groups fund management teams.
These shares provide each manager with an economic interest in the funds that they run and ultimately enable the manager at their option and at a future date to convert their interest in the revenues generated from their funds to a value that may at the discretion of the parent undertaking Polar Capital Holdings plc be satisfied by the issue of ordinary shares in Polar Capital Holdings plc.
Such conversion takes place according to a predefined conversion formula that considers the relative contribution of the manager to the Group as a whole.
The equity is awarded in return for the forfeiture of a managers current core economic interest and is issued over three years from the date of conversion.
The issue of the Preference Shares constitutes a sharebased payment under IFRS 2 and the cost is the estimated fair value at the date of issue of the preference shares of the effective entitlement to the ordinary shares.
At each reporting date the estimated number of ordinary shares to be ultimately issued upon conversion will vary and the holder initially and the Group ultimately determines the start of the three year period Crystallisation over which the ordinary shares are awarded following conversion.
The start of this period will always be at least three years after the end of the financial accounting period in which the preference shares are issued.
At 31 March 2017 three sets of preference share have the right to call for conversion.
The Group enters into sharebased payment transactions in respect of services receivable from certain employees by granting options over shares subject to certain vesting options and exercise prices.
These are accounted for as equitysettled share based payments.
The cost of the awards is determined by the fair value of the share options at the date of grant using an option pricing model the key inputs to which are disclosed in the note below and is recognised as an expense over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of the number of shares that will eventually vest.
These estimates are reviewed regularly and the charge to the consolidated statement of profit or loss is adjusted accordingly.
The corresponding credit is recognised in retained earnings within total equity.
Where an award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any cost not yet recognised is charged to the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest.
Sharebased payments Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 49 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 The following table illustrates the number of and movements in the estimated number of ordinary shares to be issued.
Estimated number of ordinary shares to be issued on conversion 31 March 2017
31 March 2016
At 1 April 2016 5704112 3976768
Movement in the year 1342656 1727344 As at 31 March 2017 7046768 5704112 Number of ordinary shares to be issued on converted preference shares 31 March 2017
31 March 2016
Outstanding at 1 April 2016  417088 Issued in the year crystallised  417088 Outstanding as at 31 March 2017 In the year to 31 March 2017 there were no new conversions of preference shares into Polar Capital Holdings equity 2016 nil whereas in the year to 31 March 2014 one conversion was initiated.
The product of the 2014 event was that a total of 1.39m shares were to be issued of which 0.98m shares had been issued as at 31 March 2015 with the remaining tranche of 0.41m shares issued during the year ended 31 March 2016.
As part of an ongoing program to retain and incentivise employees the Group issues share options under the following schemes i Save as you Earn scheme Share options in Polar Capital Holdings plc are granted to employees under a HMRC taxadvantaged Save as You Earn scheme.
These shares have a vesting period of five to seven years and the exercise price for each option is the market value of the shares on the date the option was granted subject to a discount of up to 20%.
The scheme is linked to a SAYE savings contract.
Share options in Polar Capital Holdings plc are granted to employees under a HMRC taxadvantaged arrangement up to a value at the date of grant of 30000.
These shares have a vesting period of either three or four years from the date of grant and the exercise price for each option is the market value of the shares on the date it was granted.
In cases where the terms of the schemes above cannot be met unapproved share options are granted under the terms of the Groups Equity Incentive Plan or 2016 Executive Incentive Plan.
These options vest in either four to five years and are granted at a price agreed by the Directors of the Group.
The contractual term of all company share options except for those issued under the SAYE scheme is 10 years.
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices WAEP of and movements in share options during the year.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 50 Sharebased payments continued 2017 2016 Number WAEP Number WAEP Outstanding at beginning of the year 11777517 137p 14034270 242p Granted during the year 1235156 300p 97320 356p Exercised during the year 290438 131p 2312903 131p Lapsed during the year 94441 360p 41170 323p Outstanding at end of the year 12627794 271p 11777517 265p Exercisable at end of the year 6449517 149p 5011979 137p Under the rules of the Group Equity Incentive Plan unapproved share options may be issued as equity settled share appreciation rights thereby enabling the Group to issue a net number of shares to employees on the exercise of options.
During the year 206298 shares Note 4.9 were issued to satisfy the total number of options exercised 2016 1512650 shares.
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year was 0.42 2016 0.85.
For options exercised during the year the weighted average share price at the date of exercise was 3.16 2016 4.06.
The weighted average remaining contractual life of the share options outstanding as at 31 March 2017 was 5.5 years 2016 6 years.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding at the end of the year was Earliest exercise date
Vested as at 31 March 2017 6459276 92p  198p Year ending 31 March 2018 4559853 147p  191p Year ending 31 March 2019 344548 311p  446p Year ending 31 March 2020 6211 396p Year ending 31 March 2021 997750 315p Year ending 31 March 2022 260156 244p Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 51 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax payable for the reporting period current tax and a charge relating to tax payable for future periods due to income or expenses being recognised in different periods for tax and accounting purposes deferred tax.
With effect from 1 April 2015 the UK corporation tax rate changed from 21% to 20%.
The major components of Corporation tax for the years ended 31 March 2017 and 2016 are a Tax recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 UK Corporation tax UK Corporation tax on profits of the year 4356 5373 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 143 166 Total current tax 4213 5207 Foreign Tax Current year 82 20 Prior year adjustment 44 Deferred tax Originating and reversal of temporary differences 127 192 Rate change adjustment 29 96 Prior year adjustment 299 92 Total tax recognised in consolidated statement of profit or loss 4394 5423 Current tax The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the period.
Taxable profit differs from profit as reported in the statement of profit or loss because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Tax relating to items charged or credited directly to equity is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is recognised on differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is charged or credited to the statement of profit or loss except when it relates to items charged or credited to other comprehensive income or directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in the statement of other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 52 Taxation continued b Tax recognised in the consolidated statement of other comprehensive incomeequity Current and deferred tax recognised in the consolidated statement of other comprehensive income and the consolidated statement of changes in equity is shown on the face of those statements.
The tax assessed on the profit on ordinary activities during the year differs from the standard rate of corporation tax of 20% 2016 20%.
The differences are reconciled below 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Profit on ordinary activities before taxation 20437 23627 Tax on profit on ordinary activities at standard rate of 20% 2016 20% 4087 4725 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 112 146 Rate change adjustment 46 97 Disallowed expensesincome 537 106 Other  share based payments 778 641 Total tax at an effective rate of 22% 2016 23% 4394 5423 Earnings per share The calculation of basic earnings per ordinary share is based on the profit for the year of 16043000 2016 18204000 and on 90136239 2016 88685262 ordinary shares being the weighted average number of ordinary shares.
The calculation of diluted earnings per ordinary share is based on the profit of the year of 16043000 2016 18204000 and 94426045 2016 93493781 ordinary shares being the weighted average number of ordinary shares allowing for all options of 4289806 2016 4808519 which are dilutive.
The calculation of adjusted basic earnings per ordinary share is based on profit for the year of 16043000 but adjusted for the cost of sharebased payments on preference shares of 3205900 2016 profit of 18204000 adjusted for the cost of sharebased payments on preference shares of 2370800 and on 90136239 2016 88685262 ordinary shares being the weighted average number of ordinary shares.
The calculation of adjusted diluted earnings per ordinary share is based on profit for the year of 16043000 but adjusted for the cost of sharebased payments on preference shares of 3205900 2015 profit of 18204000 adjusted for the cost of sharebased payments on preference shares of 2370800 and 94426045 2016 93493781 ordinary shares being the weighted average number of ordinary shares allowing for all dilutive options.
As at 31 March 2017 the fully diluted number of ordinary shares which would be in issue if all outstanding options were exercised is 93833128 2016 94948510 shares.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 53 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Section 4 Detailed Information on Consolidated Balance Sheet Items This section provides additional information about individual line items in the balance sheet including the relevant accounting policies.
Property and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less depreciation and accumulated impairment provisions.
Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to write off the cost of each asset over its expected useful economic life.
The carrying value of property plant and equipment is assessed annually and any impairment is charged to the statement of profit or loss.
Depreciation is charged from the date that the asset is brought into use on a straight line basis as follows Leasehold improvements 10% Computer equipment 33% Office furniture 33%
Improvements
Computer
Equipment
Office
Furniture
Total
Cost
As at 1 April 2016 2705 411 388 3504 Additions  38 3 41
As at 31 March 2017 2705 449 391 3545
As at 1 April tel132 642 Charge for the year Disposals As at 31 March tel259 1143 Net book value at 31 March 2017 2153 117 132 2402
Improvements
Computer
Equipment
Office
Furniture
Total
Cost
As at 1 April 2015 2340 691 445 3476 Additions 1082 141 125 1348 Disposals 717 421 182 1320 As at 31 March 2016 2705 411 388 3504
As at 1 April tel196 1469 Charge for the year 27telDisposals 717 422 187 1326 As at 31 March tel132 642 Net book value at 31 March 2016 2431 175 256 2862 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 54 Deferred tax assets and liabilities Deferred tax is recognised based on differences between the carrying value of assets and liabilities for accounting purposes and their tax values See Note 3.7.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are only recognised to the extent that the Group considers them to be recoverable which is determined by reference to estimates that future taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
The Finance No.
2 Act 2015 in the UK reduced the main rate of Corporation taxation to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and as part of the Finance Act 2016 a further reduction to 17% with effect from 1 April 2020 was substantially enacted on 6 September 2016.
The effect of these reductions is reflected in the Groups deferred tax balances as the rate was substantively enacted before 31 March 2017.
An analysis of the Groups deferred tax assets and liabilities is as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Deferred tax asset Sharebased payments 2245 2727 Unutilised capital losses 977 Assets held for sale  9 Assets at FVTPL  93 Other financial assets and liabilities 256 825 3478 3654 Deferred tax liability Capital allowances 78 124 Assets at FVTPL 461 Deferred tax movements recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and the consolidated statement of other comprehensive income were as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Deferred tax income expense during the period recognised in profit or loss Sharebased payments 16 87 Capital allowances 46 22 Assets held for sale  2 Assets at FVTPL 563 8 Other financial assets and liabilities 447 77 Unutilised capital losses 837 Deferred tax income expense during the period recognised in other comprehensive income Deferred tax on available for sale financial assets  2 Deferred tax on other financial assets and liabilities 18 169 Deferred tax income expense during the period recognised in equity Deferred tax on sharebased payments 465 1137 Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 55 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial assets and liabilities held at fair value Financial instruments A financial instrument is any contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a financial liability or equity instrument of another entity.
Financial assets and liabilities are recognised on the Groups consolidated balance sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the assets have expired or where they have been transferred and the Group has also transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the obligation under the liability has been discharged cancelled or has expired.
Financial assets The Groups financial assets include seed capital investments trade and other receivables cash and equivalents and derivative financial instruments.
The classification adopted by the Group depends on the purpose for which the financial assets were acquired and is determined at initial recognition.
Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value being the consideration given plus any directly attributable transaction costs except in the case of financial assets recorded at fair value through profit or loss where transaction costs are immediately recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
Purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised at trade date being the date when the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset.
Investment securities Investment securities represent securities other than derivatives held by consolidated funds.
These securities are designated as FVTPL and are measured at fair value with gains and losses recognised through the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at FVTPL include financial assets held for trading and financial assets designated upon initial recognition at FVTPL.
Financial assets are classified as held for trading if they are acquired for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the near term.
The Groups investments in the funds that it manages but does not control are classified as financial assets at FVTPL.
Such assets are subsequently carried at fair value with any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value being recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
Assets heldforsale The Group classifies assets as held for sale if their carrying amount will be recovered principally through a sale which is highly probable and the asset is available for immediate sale rather than through continuing use.
Such assets held for sale are measured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Costs to sell are the incremental costs directly attributable to the sale.
Assets and liabilities classified as held for sale are presented separately in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Financial liabilities The Groups financial liabilities include trade and other payables derivative financial instruments and thirdparty interests in funds that have been consolidated as subsidiaries.
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Financial liabilities at FVTPL are carried at fair value with gains and losses recognised in the consolidated income statement within other income in the period in which they arise.
Financial liabilities at FVTPL relate to thirdparty interests in consolidated funds which are designated as at FVTPL.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 56 Financial assets and liabilities held at fair value a Seed capital investments The Group ordinarily provides seed capital in order to provide initial scale and facilitate marketing of new funds to thirdparty investors.
Where the Group invests seed capital into funds that it controls and the Group is actively seeking to reduce its investment and it is considered highly probable that it will relinquish control within a year the interests in the funds are treated as heldforsale and are recognised as financial assets and financial liabilities heldforsale.
Investments cease to be classified as heldforsale when they are no longer controlled by the Group.
A loss of control may happen either through sale of the investment andor dilution of the Groups holding.
When investments cease to be classified as heldforsale they are classified as financial assets designated as FVTPL.
No such funds were transferred to the FVTPL category during the year 2016 one fund was transferred to the FVTPL category after the Group reduced its interests following investment inflows from third parties.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 9623 33293 The Groups financial assets at FVTPL include seed capital investments in funds that it manages but does not control.
This includes seed capital investments in funds that are classed as associates see Note 2.3 where the Group has significant influence but does not control the fund.
At 31 March 2017 there were no funds classed as associates 2016 2 funds.
During the year the Group redeemed its seed capital investments from 3 funds classed as assets at FVTPL 2016 no seed capital investments were redeemed for a total cash consideration of 30 million.
The fair values of such financial assets are derived from quoted market prices in active markets.
As at 31 March 2017 the Group has consolidated 2 funds 2016 1 fund over which it is deemed to have control See Note 2.2.
Consolidated funds represent seed capital investments where the Group has held its position for a period greater than one year andor its interest represents a controlling stake in the fund in accordance with IFRS 10.
Consolidated fund assets and liabilities are presented line by line after intercompany eliminations.
The table below sets out an analysis of the carrying amounts of interests held by the Group in consolidated investment funds 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Investment securities 14429 10065 Cash and cash equivalents 244 Other 1 19 Financial liabilities at FVTPL  Thirdparty interests in consolidated funds 2170 3249 Consolidated seed capital investments 12502 6835 Investment securities are designated as FVTPL and include listed equities held by consolidated funds.
Other includes trade receivables trade payables and accruals.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 57 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 b Derivatives Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting The Group uses forward currency contracts to hedge the risks associated with foreign currency fluctuations.
Such derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at fair value.
Derivative financial instruments are classified as financial assets when the fair value is positive and as financial liabilities when the fair value is negative.
Forward currency contracts used for currency hedging purposes are treated as cash flow hedges and the effective portion of the gain or loss on the hedging instrument is recognised in other comprehensive income while the ineffective portion is taken to the statement of profit or loss.
Amounts recognised as other comprehensive income are transferred to the consolidated statement of profit or loss when the hedged items affect profit or loss.
At the inception of a hedge relationship the Group formally designates and documents the hedge relationship to which the Group wishes to apply hedge accounting and the risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedge.
The documentation includes identification of the hedging instrument the hedged item or transaction the nature of the risk being hedged and how the entity will assess the effectiveness of changes in the hedging instruments fair value in offsetting the exposure to changes in the hedged items fair value or cash flows attributable to the hedged risk.
Such hedges are expected to be effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows and are assessed on an ongoing basis to determine that they actually have been effective throughout the financial reporting periods for which they were designated.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments Foreign exchange forward contracts 56 86 Securities  short positions and futures 348 1982 Derivatives designated as cash flow hedges Foreign exchange forward contracts 946 898 Other financial liabilities 1350 2966 Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments reflect the changes in fair values of foreign currency exchange forward contracts and short positions of securities that are not designated in hedge relationships but are nevertheless intended to reduce the level of foreign currency and price risk respectively on the Groups seed investments as described in Note 4.3c.
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments reflect the changes in fair values of foreign exchange forward contracts designated as cash flow hedges to hedge highly probable forecast revenue in US dollars USD and Japanese Yen JPY as described in Note 4.3c.
The main areas of risk arising from the Groups financial instruments are credit risk liquidity risk market risk and capital risk.
Each of these risks is discussed in detail below.
The Group monitors financial risks on a consolidated basis and intraGroup balances are settled when it is deemed appropriate for both parties to the transaction.
The Company is not exposed to material financial risk and separate disclosures for the Company have not been included.
The Group has designed a framework to manage the risks of its business and to ensure that the Directors have in place risk management practices appropriate for a listed company.
The management of risk within the Group is governed by the Board and overseen by the Audit Committee.
Credit risk is the risk of financial loss if a counterparty fails to settle its debt to the Group.
Fees due from funds managed by the Group are invoiced monthly or quarterly and are settled within 30 days of the invoice date.
No trade receivables at year end are impaired and to date there have been no settlement issues with any funds.
The risk is therefore regarded as low.
Amounts placed on deposit are invested according to a treasury policy that is designed to reduce concentration and counterparty risk.
Investments in assets at FVTPL are monitored regularly.
The carrying value of the Groups financial assets represents its maximum exposure to credit risk at the year end.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 58 Financial assets and liabilities held at fair value continued ii Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group may be unable to meet its payment obligations as they fall due.
The Group maintains significant liquid resources in the form of cash or cash deposits in order to meet working capital and regulatory needs.
The Groups treasury policy is designed to align the duration period of the cash deposits to the working capital requirements of the Group with no deposits being placed for a period of more than three months.
The Groups financial liabilities comprise trade and other payables derivative instruments and thirdparty interests in funds that have been consolidated as subsidiaries.
The maturity dates for all financial liabilities fall within either one year or are repayable on demand.
Price risk is the risk that changes in market prices will affect the Groups income or value of its investments.
The Group holds financial assets at fair value through profit or loss consisting of seed investments in funds that it manages as well as investment securities held by consolidated funds which are sensitive to movements in market equity prices.
Should the market move by   10% and all the funds and hence the Groups investments move by this same amount it would result in a change to the carrying value of the assets of   2m 2016 4m.
This movement would be recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or cash flows related to financial instruments will fluctuate because of changes to market interest rates.
The Groups cash and shortterm deposits earn nominal amounts of interest at a floating rate and any change in market interest rates would result in negligible change to profit before tax.
The Group has no borrowings.
Foreign currency risk is the risk that changes in foreign exchange rates will cause the Group to suffer losses.
Although the majority of management fees are received in Sterling a certain amount of those fees are generated from assets based in other countries in particular US dollarbased assets and a smaller amount of Yen based assets.
In order to hedge the risk associated with the management fees receivable in the next reporting period the Group enters into a number of forward foreign currency contracts over a period of 12 months.
At year end the Group had five 2016 four open contracts to sell US dollars totalling USD 20900000 2016 USD 23250000 for a total of 15526331 2016 15337156.
There was one open Sterling Yen contract to sell a total of 57000000 2016 78000000 for a total of 356607 2016 427046.
The Group also holds assets at FVTPL consisting of investments in its own funds.
Where such investments are made in assets denominated in a currency other than the Groups functional currency Sterling the Group is exposed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
At the year end there are two 2016 four investments in a nonhedged product and the Group has therefore hedged against the risk of exposure to changes in the foreign currency exchange rates caused by the underlying US DollarEuro assets within these investments.
The Group has one further 2016 three forward currency contract for the sale of USD 4900000 2016 USD 18000000 to purchase 3886113 2016 12604089 and one forward currency contract for the sale of 6700000 2016 6000000 to purchase 5713311 2016 4592400.
The Groups hedging policy serves to substantially mitigate its exposure to foreign currency risk on its revenue and balance sheet investments.
Any changes in foreign exchange rates will have an equal and opposite effect on the hedged items and open forward currency contracts.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 59 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 vi Capital management All companies within the Group are managed as going concerns and have sufficient capital to meet their daytoday needs and to fulfil any externally imposed capital requirements.
The capital of the Group and the Company consists of equity attributable to equity holders of the parent company comprising issued share capital share premium reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in Note 4.9.
The Group is supervised by the Financial Conduct Authority and submits appropriate returns on the capital adequacy of both the Group and the regulated entity Polar Capital LLP.
Throughout the year the Group and Polar Capital LLP held surplus capital over the regulated requirement.
The Group uses the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing the fair value of financial instruments by valuation technique Level 1 quoted unadjusted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 other techniques for which all inputs which have a significant effect on the recorded fair value are observable either directly or indirectly.
Level 3 techniques which use inputs which have a significant effect on the recorded fair value that are not based on observable market data.
The fair value hierarchy of financial assets and liabilities which are carried at fair value of year end is as follows 2017 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Financial assets Investment securities 14429   14429 10065   10065 Assets at FVTPL 9623   9623 33293   33293 24052   24052 43358   43358 Financial liabilities Liabilities at FVTPL 2170   2170 3249   3249 Other financial liabilities 348 1001  1349 984  2966 1001  3519 984  6215 During the reporting period there were no transfers between levels in fair value measurements.
Interests in Structured Entities The Group acts as fund manager to investment funds that are considered to be structured entities.
These structured entities typically consist of unitised vehicles such as openended Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities UCITS funds closedended investment trusts and alternative funds which entitle investors to a percentage of the vehicles net asset value.
The Group has an interest in funds that it manages as a result of the management of assets on behalf of its clients and this interest is reflected in the Groups AUM.
The main risk the Group faces from its interest in AUM managed on behalf of clients is the loss of fee income as a result of the withdrawal of funds by clients.
A reconciliation of AUM reported by the Group within unconsolidated structured entities is shown below 31 March 2017 bn 31 March 2016 bn AUM within consolidated funds 0.01 0.01 AUM within unconsolidated funds 9.26 7.29 Total AUM 9.27 7.30 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 60 31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Cash at bank 58199 48761 Cash held by EBT and consolidated funds 340 101 58539 48862 Cash at bank earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates.
The fair value of cash and cash equivalents at year end was 58539142 2016 48862371.
As at 31 March 2017 the Group had placed 2700000 2016 2700000 of its cash at bank with counterparties to fulfil the collateral requirements for derivatives contracts related to short positions see Note 4.3b.
Interests in Structured Entities continued b Interests arising from investment in unconsolidated structured entities Where the Group has an equity holding in a fund it manages the maximum exposure to loss constitutes the future and uncollected management fees plus the fair value of the Groups investment in that fund.
The table below shows the carrying values of the Groups interests in unconsolidated structured entities recognised in the Group balance sheet which are equal to the Groups maximum exposure to loss from those interests.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Seed capital investments 9623 33293 Management fees receivable at yearend 7905 6410 Trade and Other Receivables Trade receivables are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently carried at the lower of original fair value and their recoverable amount.
A provision for impairment is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables.
When a trade receivable is uncollectable it is written off against trade receivables and the amount of the loss is recognised in the statement of profit or loss.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Trade debtors 8048 6410 Other receivables 589 205 Prepayments 1470 1410 10107 8025 Trade receivables are noninterest bearing and payable on demand.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at banks and in hand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
For the purpose of the consolidated cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as defined above.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 61 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Other noncurrent liabilities 1194 1157 Dilapidations provisions 975 975 2169 2132 a Other noncurrent liabilities The Group has benefited from a rent free period as part of the lease agreement for the premises at 16 Palace Street.
The liability represents the accumulated amount which has been charged to the consolidated statement of profit or loss as at 31 March 2017 and which will be released on a straight line basis over the remaining term of the lease which expires in October 2024.
As part of its operating lease agreement for the premises at 16 Palace Street the Group has an obligation to pay for dilapidation costs at the end of the lease term.
Noncurrent provisions 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 As at 1 April 2016 975 Arising in the year  975
As at 31 March telCash generated from operations A reconciliation of profit before taxation to cash generated from operations is as follows 31 March 2017
31 March 2016 Profit on ordinary activities before taxation 20437 23627 Interest receivable and similar income 28 45 Depreciation of noncurrent property plant and equipment 501 499 Increasedecrease in fair value of investment securities 1006 1222 Increasedecrease in fair value of assets at FVTPL 5878 2230 Increase in other financial liabilities 1659 2030 Net gain on assets held for sale  1278 Increasedecrease in receivables 2082 1342 Decrease in trade and other payables 1518 5017 Increase in provisions 37 1139 Sharebased payment 4095 3290 Increasedecrease in liabilities at FVTPL 508 178 Other noncash items 30 11 Cash generated from operations 13437 24790 Noncurrent provisions and other liabilities Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
The expense relating to a provision is presented in the statement of profit or loss net of any reimbursement.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 62 Trade and Other Payables Trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Other creditors 13793 13928 Accruals 5948 7331 19741 21259 Issued share capital and reserves a Issued share capital Group and Company 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Allotted called up and fully paid 91422309 ordinary shares of 2.5p each 2016 91216011 ordinary shares of 2.5p each 2286 2280 The increase in share capital arises from 206298 2016 1512650 shares issued on exercise of employee share options.
There were no shares issued during the year 2016 417089 in connection with the crystallisation of manager preference shares as described in Note 3.6.
Share premium records the difference between the nominal value of shares issued and the full value of the consideration received.
At 31 March 2017 there were 1878987 shares of 2.5p each 2016 1076020 shares of 2.5p each held by the Employee Benefit Trust for the purpose of satisfying share option obligations to employees.
The capital reserve represents a share capital repurchase reserve.
Other reserves relate to movements in current and deferred tax that arise on sharebased payments movements in the fair value of other financial assets arising on Forward Foreign Exchange Contracts classified as cash flow hedges and exchange differences arising on translation of foreign operations.
Share capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares are shown in equity as a deduction from the proceeds.
Own shares held The Group operates and funds by way of loan an employee benefit trust for the purpose of satisfying certain share awards to employees.
Own shares held are equity shares of the Company acquired and held by this trust.
Such shares are recognised at cost and are presented in the Group balance sheet as a deduction from equity.
No gain or loss is recognised on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of the Companys own shares.
Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 63 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Dividends paid and proposed Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised in the accounting period in which the dividends are paid.
Dividends on ordinary shares declared and paid during the year 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 First interim dividend for 2017 5.5p per share 2016 5.5p per share 4966 4885 Second interim dividend for 2016 19.5p per share 2015 19.5p per share 17583 17188 Total dividend paid and charged to equity 22549 22073 Dividends on ordinary shares proposed for approval by the Board of Directors not recognised as a liability at 31 March 2017 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Second interim dividend for 2017 19.5p per share 2016 19.5 per share 17625 17583 The Board has declared a second interim dividend of 19.5p 2016 19.5p to be paid in July 2017.
Together with the first interim dividend of 5.5p paid in January 2017 the total dividend for the year amounts to 25.0p 2016 25.0p.
Operating lease commitments As at 31 March 2017 the Group had operating lease commitments in respect of its rented premises as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Amounts payable within one year 1461 1264 Amounts payable between two and five years 5184 5184 Amounts payable in more than five years 3540 4835 The material lease relates to the rental of the Groups premises at 16 Palace Street in London and expires in October 2024.
Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 64 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 March 2017 B J D AshfordRussell is a member of Polar Capital LLP the Partnership and a director of the Polar Capital Technology Trust plc the Trust.
The Partnership is the appointed investment manager of the Trust.
The total fees received by the Group as investment manager of the Trust were 9640154 2016 7905839.
The amounts receivable at the year end in this respect was 1831680 2016 1319041.
The investments in financial assets at fair value through profit or loss disclosed in Note 4.3 are in affiliated funds that are managed by a subsidiary of the Group.
Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of key management which includes the Executive and Nonexecutive Directors is summarised below.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Shortterm employee benefits 1187 1237 Defined contribution pensions 60 53 Sharebased payment benefits 108 132 1355 1422 At the end of the year the Group had balances owing to or in regard to key personnel of 5000 2016 5000.
This amount relates to an amount owed to another company for the services of a nonexecutive director.
Options to acquire ordinary shares held by the Directors during the year ended 31 March 2017 are disclosed in the
Remuneration Committees Report.
Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties of the Group have been eliminated on consolidation and are not included in this Note.
Related party transactions Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 65 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 2017
31 March 2016
31 March 2015 Noncurrent assets Investments 5.3 14920 10825 7556 Current assets Trade and other receivables 5.4 27042 27076 27059 Cash and cash equivalents 11291 12 12 38333 27088 27071 Current liabilities Net assets 53253 37913 34627 Capital and reserves Issued share capital 2286 2280 2232 Share premium 18631 18509 16715 Retained earnings 32336 17124 15680 Shareholders funds 53253 37913 34627 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 5.2.
The Notes on page 68 form part of these financial statements.
The Companys profit for the year after tax was 33666000 2016 22338000.
The Company financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board on 26 June 2017 and signed on its behalf by Hugh Aldous John Mansell Chairman of the Audit Committee Finance Director Registered number Company Balance Sheet For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 66
Issued
Share premium
Retained earnings
As at 1 April 2015 2232 16715 562 9154 27539 Adjustment on correction of sharebased payment Note 5.2   562 6526 7088 As at 1 April 2015 restated 2232 16715  15680 34627 Profit for the year    22338 22338 Dividends paid to shareholders    22073 22073 Adjustment on correction of sharebased payment Note 5.2    3269 3269 Distributions received from subsidiary    255 255 Issue of shares 48 1794  1835 7 As at 1 April 2016 restated 2280 18509  17124 37913 Profit for the year    33666 33666 Dividends paid to shareholders    22549 22549 Share based payment    4095 4095 Issue of shares 6 122   128 As at 31 March 2017 2286 18631  32336 53253 Certain amounts shown here do not correspond to the 2016 annual financial statements and reflect adjustments made as described in Note 5.2.
The Notes on page 68 form part of these financial statements.
Company Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 31 March 2017 Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 67 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Cash flows generated from operating activities Cash generated from operations 5.5 33700 22066 Net cash inflow generated from operating activities 33700 22066 Financing activities Equity dividends paid 22549 22073 Issue of share capital 128 7 Net cash outflow from financing activities 22421 22066 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 11279 Cash and cash equivalents at start of the year 12 12 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year 11291 12 The Notes on page 68 form part of these financial statements.
Company Cash Flow Statement For the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements Polar Capital Holdings plc 68 Section 5 Notes to the Company Financial Statements Basis of preparation The Company financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis in accordance with FRS 102.
No profit or loss account is presented for the Company as permitted under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The Company financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention and are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand 000 except when otherwise stated.
The accounting policies for the Company are the same as those for the Group except where specifically stated in the following notes.
Prior period restatement The Company accounts have been restated to record share based payments for awards granted to employees of subsidiary entities where the Company is the grantor of the awards or settles them with its own equity.
FRS 102.26 1A requires the Company to recognise the arrangement as an equitysettled sharebased payment when it has an obligation to settle a sharebased payment transaction where another entity in the same group receives goods or services.
The Company accounts have also been restated for intragroup recharges for share awards and accounted for as a return of capital contribution.
Amounts paid in excess of the original contribution recorded by the Company is treated as a distribution.
As part of this restatement for intragroup recharges other reserves of 562000 have been transferred to retained earnings.
The prior years financial statements have been restated to reflect the cumulative increase in retained earnings as of 1 April 2015 of 7088000 with a further credit to retained earnings for the year to 31 March 2016 of 3269000 and a corresponding debit to investment in subsidiaries.
Investments
Investments in subsidiaries are held at the lower of cost and recoverable amount.
The carrying value is reviewed for impairment when there is an indication that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
The investment is the Companys wholly owned subsidiary Polar Capital Partners Limited.
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 At 1 April 2016 Restated  See Note 5.2 10825 7556 Sharebased paymentscontributions 4095 3269 At 31 March 2017 14920 10825 Share based payments for awards granted to employees of subsidiary entities where the Company is the grantor of the awards or settles them with its own equity are accounted for as capital contributions by the Company to Polar Capital Partners Limited with a corresponding credit to equity in the Company financial statements.
Trade and other receivables Other receivables for the Company are due from Polar Capital Partners Limited and Polar Capital LLP and are non interest bearing and repayable on demand.
Cash generated from operations A reconciliation of profit before taxation to cash generated from operations is as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Profit on ordinary activities before tax 33666 22338 Distributions from subsidiary  255 Decreaseincrease in receivables 34 17 Cash generated from operations 33700 22066 Related party transactions The Company has intercompany balances with Polar Capital Partners Limited and with Polar Capital LLP.
The balance receivable from Polar Capital Partners Limited of 27042651 2016 26989258 and the balance of nil receivable from Polar Capital LLP 2016 81362 relate to cash movements by the subsidiaries on behalf of the Company.
Notes to the Company Financial Statements For the year ended 31 March 2017 Strategic Report Overview Governance Financial Statements 69 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 Polar Capital Holdings plc
Strategic Report Highlights 01 At a Glance 02 Strategy and Business Model 04
Chairmans Statement 05
Chief Executives Report 08
Financial Review 10
Principal Risk and Uncertainties 14
Board of Directors 16 Directors Report and Corporate Governance Report 18 Audit Committee Report 24
Remuneration Committee Report 27
Statement of Directors Responsibilities in Relation to the Groups Financial Statements 34 Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Polar Capital Holdings plc 35 Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss 37 Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income 37 Consolidated Balance Sheet 38 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 39 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 40 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 41 Company Balance Sheet 65 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 66 Company Cash Flow Statement 67 Notes to the Company Financial Statements 68 Shareholder Information and Advisers 69 Shareholder Information and Advisers Company No.
Registered office 16 Palace Street London SW1E 5JD tel Company Secretary Neil Taylor
Annual General Meeting 26 July 2017 Please see separate AGM Notice for details.
Dividends
Where possible it is recommended that dividend payments are made directly into a bank account to provide improved security and faster access to funds.
You may give instruction via the registrars website site or in writing.
First interim dividend For the financial year ended 31 March 2017
5.5p per ordinary share Exdividend date 29 December 2016 Record date 30 December 2016 Payment date 13 January 2017 Second interim dividend For the financial year ended 31 March 2017
19.5p per ordinary share Exdividend date 6 July 2017 Record date 7 July 2017 Payment date 21 July 2017
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Shareholder helplinetel 44tel
Auditors
Ernst and Young LLP 25 Churchill Place Canary Wharf London E14 5EY
HSBC Bank plc Nominated Adviser and Corporate Broker Canaccord Genuity 88 Wood Street London EC2V 7QR Joint Corporate Broker Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall
EC2Y 5ET
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP Exchange House Primrose Street London EC2M 2EG
The shares are traded on the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock Exchange and information on the share price and the Company can be accessed via the Companys website or at site  code POLR or Bloomberg POLR LN.
ISIN number
