Real estate for retail Annual Report and Accounts 2017 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Business model Business reviews CEO review
Responsibile Business Strategic report Our story 01 Performance highlights 02
Chairmans statement
At a glance 04 Chief Executives review 12 Marketplace 18 Business model 22 Key performance indicators 24 Investment review 26 Asset management and development 30 Financial review 34 Risk management 40 Viability statement 41 Our approach to Responsible Business 48
Introduction from the Chairman 58 Governance at work 59 Board of Directors 60 Leadership 62 Relations with shareholders 68 Effectiveness 70 Nomination Committee report 70 Accountability 75 Audit Committee report 75 Remuneration 82 Remuneration Committee report 82 Report of the Directors 108 Directors responsibility statement 1 1 1 Financial statements Independent Auditors report 1 13 Group nancial statements 1 17 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements 121 Company nancial statements 138 Notes forming part of the Company nancial statements 140 Supplementary information 143 Glossary 148 Notice of Annual General Meeting 149 Financial calendar 154 Shareholder information 154 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our story We own create and build desirable real estate that meets occupiers demands in a rapidly evolving retail environment.
Our strong retailer relationships shape our decision making.
See more on p06 See more on p08 See more on p10 Portfolio overview Total valuation 1534 million A portfolio focused on retailerled distribution We specialise in retailerled distribution out of town and convenience retail with a focus on strong income and adding value through asset management initiatives and shortcycle development opportunities.
We have 12 million sq ft under management and a high proportion of our portfolio is invested in retailerled distribution.
3%
5%
4%
13% Retail Parks 100% owned 6% Convenience Retail 62%
7% Retail joint ventures 01 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EPRA EPS 8.2p 5% Reported prot 63.0m 24%
12.8 years Net rental income 81.8m 5% EPRA net asset value per share 149 .8p 1 % Net assets 1 006.9m 1 2% Dividend per share 7.5p 3%
99 .6% Performance highlightstel 2017 8.2ptel 2017 81.8tel 2017 7.50ptel 2017 63.0tel 2017 149.8ptel 2017 99.6% 99.7% 99.3% 99.6%tel 2017 12.8 12.8tel 2017 1006.9 Total property return 7.4 %tel 2017 17.0% 17.5% 10.5% 7.4% The Group nancial statements are prepared in accordance with IFRS where the Groups interests in joint ventures are shown as a single line item on the income statement and balance sheet and all subsidiaries are consolidated at 100%.
Management reviews the performance of the business principally on a proportionately consolidated basis which includes the Groups share of joint ventures on a line by line basis.
The key nancial performance indicators are also presented on this basis.
Alternative performance measures are nancial measures which are not specied under IFRS but are used by management as they highlight the underlying recurring performance of the Groups property rental business and are based on the EPRA Best Practice Recommendations BPR reporting framework which is widely recognised and used by public real estate companies.
Therefore unless specically stated the performance metrics and nancial results reected above and in the Strategic report reect the Groups wholly owned assets and its share of joint venture assets.
Further details and reconciliations between EPRA measures and IFRS equivalents can be found in the Financial review on page 35 and in note 8 to the Group nancial statements.
02 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements We will continue to build the foundations for future dividend progression.
Chairmans statement
Whilst political and economic uncertainty was a signicant distraction for the markets in the year the attraction of secure income continued to grow.
Not only are we living in a low growth low interest rate environment but ageing demographics are accentuating the search for income and alternatives to low yielding government bonds.
This need has already risen substantially and will grow further in the years to come.
High quality companies offering wellcovered and growing dividends ought to become ever more highly prized.
Our signicant and increasing investment in distribution is delivering excellent returns sustainable income growth and long term value for our shareholders.
The sector is beneting strongly from structural support as UK consumers continue to migrate to online.
Conversely physical retail continues to face signicant challenges from this online shift with the inevitable space overcapacity this brings to the retail market.
This ongoing structural demand for distribution and lack of meaningful supply has given us the condence to increase our investment across all distribution subsectors of mega box regional and urban logistics.
We continue to see good investment and short cycle development opportunities particularly in urban logistics and we have now fully committed the proceeds of our recent equity placing into sensible accretive assets.
Our distribution exposure is expected to exceed 70% within the current nancial year.
Exposure to the best real estate sectors is driving demand for our space resulting in high occupancy good like for like income growth and strong ERV uplifts.
Our sector leading portfolio metrics have been maintained thanks to our strong occupier and property relationships.
Over the last four years through management activity our occupancy level has been above 99% and our unexpired lease term has remained at 12.8 years with only 1% of our leases due to expire within the next three years.
Our predictable repetitive and growing income streams have allowed us to progress the dividend again this year by 3.4%.
An attractive dividend needs to be adequately covered by operating earnings and Im pleased that we have maintained the 1.1x dividend cover we achieved last year.
We will continue to build the foundations for future dividend progression.
Contractual rental uplifts are embedded in over 50% of the portfolio we are achieving strong rent review uplifts and are adding new income from short cycle developments.
LondonMetric is well placed and I am genuinely excited by its outlook and look forward to the year with condence.
Patrick Vaughan
31 May 2017 Our objective is to own good assets with strong real estate fundamentals.
They must generate income in excess of our dividend and have a higher value in ve years time.
Dividend per share 3.4% 03 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 At a glance Our strategic focus on structurally supported real estate has seen our distribution exposure increase to 62% of the portfolio and the business deliver sustainable income growth and long term value growth.
Business activity in 201 7 Key facts Number of assets EPRA topped up net initial yield 5.4%
Capital return 1 .7% LFL income growth 4.6% Investment activity Asset management activity Development activity
12m sq ft Total property return 7 .4%
99 .6% ERV growth 3.8% We are focused on retailerled distribution
Distribution 107.0m Retail 9.2m
Retail and leisure 136.7m Distribution 54.4m Non core residential 10.8m New lettings 1.3m sq ft WAULT 18.2 years Rental uplift 5.8m Rent reviews 4.1m sq ft Rental growth 4.3% above ERV Rental uplift 1.3m
1m sq ft Rent 7.9m Yield on cost 6.5% Under construction 0.7m sq ft Rent 4.9m Yield on cost 6.3%
2017  1534m 2016  1521m
4%
5%
5% Retail Parks 100% owned 20% Convenience Retail 4%
54% Retail joint ventures 8%
3%
5%
4% Retail Parks 100% owned 13% Convenience Retail 6%
62% Retail joint ventures 7% Includes assets under development 04 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Where our assets are located
Retail and Leisure Marlow Office
Value
EPRA topped up NIY 5.0% EPRA topped up NIY 5.8% Total return 9 .9% Total return 1 %
100%
99 .3%
Retail and leisure Valuation performance Uplift 21m 56% valuation movement attributable to asset management activity 10bps yield compression across the portfolio Portfolio NIY of 5.4% compared to IPD of 4.9%
56% Market yield movement 23%
21% Excludes developments 05 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We own create and build desirable real estate that meets occupiers demands in a rapidly evolving retail environment.
Our strong retailer relationships shape our decision making.
Portfolio area 12.0m sq ft Portfolio area rated BREEAM Very Good 3.0m sq ft Our investment in end to end logistics
99 .6% Weighted average lease length 12.8 years
Large scale modern distribution units greater than 500000 sq ft located close to major arterial routes.
Strategically located to serve the customer and attract labour pools
Mid size units between 100000 sq ft and 500000 sq ft serving as regional hubs and creating the connecting link in any modern supply chain Urban logistics Smaller logistics units allowing the nal journey of delivery.
Strategically located in or close to dense areas of population to meet increasing consumer demands for next and same day delivery 06 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements We have built on our early move into distribution and have further increased our exposure to this strongly performing sector.
Our investment activity is focused on urban logistics and we continue to create value through developing regional and mega distribution warehouses.
Valentine Beresford Investment Director Our 53000 sq ft urban logistics warehouse in Crawley let to Barker and Stonehouse on a 15 year lease 07 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We own create and build desirable real estate that meets occupiers demands in a rapidly evolving retail environment.
Our strong retailer relationships shape our decision making.
Parcel deliveries last year 1.2bn UK most sophisticated online shopper 7 6% online
10% pa Oversupply of physical retail space 12% vacancy rate Online retail sales non food Forecast to be 50bn by 2020 High Street footfall 1 5% since 2008 08 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Nick Heath Development Manager Our 357000 sq ft regional distribution development in Warrington let to Amazon for 15 years Last year was a record for distribution warehousing take up driven by the rapid growth in online retailing.
Our letting to Amazon at Warrington occurred just five weeks after we completed the development.
This warehouse will be integral to their same day and next day delivery proposition.
09 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We own create and build desirable real estate that meets occupiers demands in a rapidly evolving retail environment.
Our strong retailer relationships shape our decision making.
Logistics  the engine of retailing Our occupierled approach ensures we gather market intelligence through our relationships with retailers allowing us to better understand future trends and make the right asset decisions generating superior returns.
It is through this intel that we believe logistics is the engine of retail.
Income from Retailers 77% Leases signed in the year Average lease length on leases signed 18 years Number of retail occupiers 10 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our 436000 sq ft regional distribution warehouse in Dagenham let to Eddie Stobart Leveraging our expertise and relationships in logistics is enhancing our strong portfolio metrics.
Mark Stirling Asset Director 11 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chief Executives review Our focus as a REIT is to collect and compound our long and strong income and to enhance its repetitive reliable and secure characteristics.
Our portfolio is positioned around strong fundamentals of owning highly desirable assets let to good companies and where over time the income will grow.
Distribution weighting 70% by next year Income growth with structural support We continue to live in a world characterised by both political and economic uncertainty.
The prolonged low interest rate environment and unorthodox monetary policy has created an almost desperate search for yield across a widening spectrum of investment classes.
Our focus as a REIT is to collect and compound our long and strong income and to enhance its repetitive reliable and secure characteristics.
We expect this strategy to outperform more traditional hyperactive development and trading models where volatile and uncertain returns are diluted by income interruption and frictional costs.
Technological advancement and innovation is having a profound impact on many businesses as they attempt to remain relevant in an evolving world where the pace of change is accelerating.
The real estate sector is not immune.
In recent years we have seen a signicant shift in consumer shopping habits with customer expectations of efficiency speed and convenience driving omnichannel retailing.
This has signicantly increased the proportion of non food retail sales online which is expected to reach 26% by 2020 compared to just 13% in 201 1 a growth rate of 10% per annum.
These structural changes in how people shop are driving retailer demand for logistics.
We have responded to these trends by actively pivoting our investment focus from retail parks into the logistics and distribution sectors which we expect to account for over 70% of our portfolio by the end of the current nancial year.
We remain disciplined and unemotional in our investment approach and will continue to dispose of assets where we think growth prospects are less exciting.
These actions have put us on the right side of the changing retail landscape and consequently we expect to be a strong beneciary.
We believe that the favourable demandsupply metrics for logistics will exist for some time leading to high occupancy long leases and attractive income.
Our portfolio is positioned around strong fundamentals of owning highly desirable assets that are beneting from structural trends let to good companies and where over time the income will grow and the returns will compound.
This will allow us to deliver ongoing dividend growth over the next few years.
Andrew Jones Chief Executive 12 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements We continue to maintain our very strong portfolio metrics. equivalent basis.
This demonstrates not only the attractive dynamics of our buildings but increasingly the growing importance that occupiers are putting on logistics and fullment.
Structural changes impacting shopping habits and occupier demand Technology is disrupting many long established industries and real estate is no exception.
Structural trends in consumer behaviour and shopping patterns continue to drive retail sales online leading to c.10% per annum online growth.
Retailers are therefore increasingly committing more of their capital expenditure into improving the efficiencies of their fullment operation with more investment in digital infrastructure and distribution warehousing.
Today it is estimated that retailers and third party logistics operators account for 6070% of all distribution warehousing real estate take up.
The benchmark continues to be set by Amazon which doubled its UK logistics footprint in 2016 and accounted for c.20% of take up in 2016.
The urban logistics infrastructure that they are building is evidence of the importance they attach to same day even same hour delivery something that the rest of the market will also have to address to stay competitive.
The impact of this evolution on traditional retail has never been more pronounced and as retailers seek to right size their store portfolios their demand for physical retail space falls.
There is clearly going to be pain felt across the sector as retailers continue to adjust to the growth of online shopping.
Department stores and apparel retailers feel the most at risk and whilst the stronger destinations will inevitably fare better even the owners of superprime locations will not be immune as they have to deal with increasing polarisation impending lease expiries building obsolescence andor tenant defaults.
The property markets are increasingly aware of the shifting tectonic plates and are beginning to price in these changes.
Average lease lengths on new lettings 18 years Behaving as a REIT With interest rates hovering not far from all time lows and a growing number of people retiring every year the demand for alternative sources of income is on the rise.
We take comfort in having made the right structural calls focusing on income and income growth and our alignment to the logistics sector will continue to provide a highly repetitive predictable and reliable income stream and deliver exactly what a REIT was designed to do.
Ten years on from the introduction of REITs its notable how few companies have fully embraced the REIT structure.
Our income focus remains central to our investment thesis and we aim to own assets where the net income exceeds the dividend and the terminal value will be higher in ve years time.
Our ultimate priority is to pass on income generated from our tenants to our shareholders in the form of a dividend.
Since merger in 2013 our EPRA earnings have grown from 3.9p to 8.2p per share which has allowed us to not only cover our dividend comfortably but also progress it for the second year running.
Enhancing our strong portfolio metrics We continue to maintain our very strong portfolio metrics with long average lease lengths of 12.8 years high occupancy at 99.6% high gross to net income ratio of 98.6% and with only 1.2% of our rent due to expire in the next three years.
Over 50% of our portfolio is now subject to contractual rental increases.
Continued renement of our portfolio has delivered a strong performance in the year with a total property return of 7 .4% outperforming the IPD All Property by 280bps and ERV growth of 3.8%.
These robust metrics are reective of our sector calls the strength of our occupier relationships and the high occupier appeal of our real estate.
In the year we delivered 69 asset management activities generating like for like income growth of 4.6%.
New lettings achieved an average lease length of 18.2 years helped by new leases to Amazon Michelin and Eddie Stobart.
Open market rent reviews on distribution assets were particularly strong and we settled 26% of non food retail sales are expected to be online by 2020 compared to just 1 3% 13 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chief Executives review continued Distribution investments Increasing focus on urban logistics As part of our end to end logistics strategy our investment focus in the year was on building our platform in urban logistics.
Urban logistics is an essential part of modern distribution and enables the retailer and parcel operator to get closer to its point of delivery and full orders quickly.
Operators are increasingly looking to move closer to their end customer albeit there are some severe supply constraints.
The functionality of urban logistics has evolved from a location which previously stored products to an operation today that is designed to maximise speed of delivery.
Rising consumer expectations have reduced average delivery times down from 28 days to just a few days with next day delivery now common.
Looking forward delivery times are likely to fall further as expectations grow and more demanding younger shoppers in particular millennials account for a larger proportion of retail spend.
Half of shopping by millennials is expected to be online by 2019.
Vacancy across the urban logistics market is already very low and new supply is very limited especially around the major UK cities.
According to the UK Warehousing Association there has been a 46% reduction of industrial space across Greater London since 1980.
This is expected to fall by a further 30% over the next 20 years.
Achieving scale in this subsector is not easy which in itself creates barriers to entry.
Over the year our urban logistics portfolio increased from eight to 23 assets valued at 160.8 million the majority of which are located around major UK cities.
We have made a further 23.9 million of acquisitions since the year end and expect this portfolio to grow quickly to c.
250 million in value.
Acquisition yield on our urban logistics investments 6.2% 100bps higher than Big Box assets Urban logistics portfolio across 23 assets Urban logistics is an essential part of modern logistics and enables the retailer to get closer to its point of delivery and full orders quickly.
Aligning our portfolio further towards distribution through investment and development We have been a signicant beneciary of an early move into the logistics and distribution sectors where demand supply dynamics have strengthened considerably over recent years.
Our strategy is aligned to the structural benets of the distribution sector whilst overlaying a tactical approach to ensure we invest in the sub sector that offers the most compelling investment proposition.
After a record year for distribution take up in 2016 occupier demand remains strong across the UK.
Supply remains highly restricted there is limited speculative development and estimates suggest that there is only four to ve years of land available to accommodate warehouse demand.
These macro trends and attractive dynamics have seen investor demand for the asset class increase globally.
Despite a more competitive landscape we have again made strong progress in growing our footprint across this sector whilst remaining patient disciplined and rational.
Over the year we acquired a further 107 .0 million of new distribution investments and developments at an average yield of 6.2%.
As at the year end our distribution portfolio was valued at 950.2 million which represented 62% of our whole portfolio against 54% a year ago.
This has increased to 64% including post period end activity.
14 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Distribution developments completed in the year 0.9m sq ft Distribution developments under construction 0.6m sq ft We have previously commented on the very attractive property fundamentals underpinning the strong pricing of mega and regional distribution warehouse investments.
Investing further in that market has therefore been less compelling of late and we have shifted our sights to growing our exposure through well located short cycle development opportunities where the returns are signicantly more attractive.
In Wakeeld our 527 000 sq ft development completed in September 2016.
This was prelet to Poundworld on a new 15 year lease with contracted rental uplifts linked to RPI.
In Warrington our 357 000 sq ft regional distribution development completed in November 2016.
Five weeks later we let the building to Amazon on a new 15 year lease with contracted rental uplifts linked to CPI.
We continue to look at relling our development hopper but will only do so where the demandsupply dynamics are attractive and our exposure to market timings are short.
Therefore to minimise development risk we only commit to developments once planning consent has been received and once prelets are agreed or where we have strong condence of a letting before practical completion.
Today we are committed to 0.6 million sq ft of developments at Dagenham Stoke and Crawley delivering an anticipated yield on cost of 6.2%.
We have secured pre lettings on over half of the space.
Above Our 527000 sq ft development for Poundworld in Wakeeld The warehouse was developed at a yield of 6.3%.
Poundworld signed a 15 year lease with the rent subject to ve yearly compounded RPI rent reviews between 2.55.0%.
The building is rated BREEAM Very Good.
Above 137000 sq ft development for Michelin in Stoke Michelin has signed a new 15 year lease with ve yearly rent reviews at the higher of open market and guaranteed xed uplifts.
The anticipated yield on cost is 6.3% and we are leveraging our occupier relationships to progress a full build out of the 277000 sq ft development.
The building will be rated BREEAM Very Good.
This will become a major automated fullment centre for Amazon and will employ c.1200 people.
We also completed a 53000 sq ft distribution facility in Crawley which is let to furniture retailer Barker and Stonehouse on a new 15 year lease.
15 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chief Executives review continued Retail park disposal at Kings L ynn Further reducing our retail portfolio Our further push in the distribution sector has largely been funded by the sale of mature retail parks where business plans have been fully executed.
Despite the political and economic uncertainty we have continued to see strong buying interest for our assets with our retail disposals totalling 127 .6 million.
These disposals crystallised a geared IRR on average of 13%.
As a result of this activity our retail park weighting has halved over the last two years to 13% of the overall portfolio.
We will continue to monetise further retail assets upon completion of various asset management initiatives during the year.
Post year end we disposed of our Morrisons foodstore in Loughborough for 32.5 million reecting a net initial yield of 4.3% and a prot on cost of 26.0%.
Opportunistic retail acquisitions We fully recognise the competitive nature of the retail market and therefore increasingly view this sector opportunistically.
We will therefore limit our involvement to new convenience food opportunities and those where we partner with our retail customers in securing new outlets that they consider integral to growing their business.
Over the period we completed the development of seven convenience retail stores mainly let to Aldi and MandS.
The average yield on cost for all of our retail developments was 6.7% and the average lease length achieved was 13.4 years.
During the year we also acquired two single let retail assets for our long income MIPP Joint Venture at an average yield of 6.8% and with a lease length of over 15 years.
Above 74000 sq ft retail park in Kings Lynn sold for 24.0 million at a NIY of 5.8% The property was purchased in 2011 for 15.1 million and has undergone complete refurbishment with six new lettings to Next BandM DFS Tapi Poundland and Greggs.
Since purchase the rental income has increased by 47% and the WAULT has risen from 4.3 years to 13.3 years.
Retail park weighting 13% halved over two years Retail disposals 16 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Finances strengthened and diversied Our nancing arrangements remain aligned to our property strategy and we have continued to strengthen our debt facilities with new lenders and exible arrangements.
During the year we entered into a 130 million private debt placement at a blended coupon of 2.7% and a weighted average maturity of 8.3 years.
This increased headroom available under our facilities which as at 31 March 2017  was 299.7 million.
In addition our 95 million equity raising in the year has given us the exibility to accelerate our distribution investments and developments without impacting on our conservative approach to gearing.
As at 31 March LTV was 30% average debt maturity was 5.2 years and our cost of debt was 3.5% with a marginal cost on drawing further debt of just 1.5%.
US private debt placement 2.7% blended coupon LTV reduced 30% as at year end Our disciplined investment approach We focus on achieving attractive riskadjusted returns which are structurally supported and underpin a steady long term income return prole The sustained low interest rate and uncertain environment has driven strong demand for long duration assets with stable cash ows that are less sensitive to economic cycles.
However not all income is the same.
Whilst strong and sustainable income with structural support will endure weak and overrented income will be exposed as structurally challenged assets see their income shortening.
We are therefore increasingly wary over the pricing of some assets where cash ows are at risk from continuing defensive capital expenditure and ongoing structural change.
The yield gap between the very good and the poor assets has arguably compressed too far.
As such we believe that structural changes will put some of these capitalisation rates under outward pressure.
Our disciplined investment approach continues to focus on delivering attractive riskadjusted returns which are structurally supported and underpin a steady long term income return prole for our shareholders.
We will behave rationally through maintaining a margin of safety in our actions whilst retaining appropriate portfolio liquidity and exibility.
We continue to see attractive investment opportunities where we can leverage our relationships and expertise and we remain condent in our business model and ability to deliver on our strategic objectives and priorities.
Outlook
17 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Marketplace The UK economy remains relatively robust however recent GDP numbers are trending lower and ination measures are trending higher as ripples of political and economic uncertainty continue.
Uncertain times lead many to seek those things that are more certain.
In an uncertain world with strong tailwinds we believe that providing a strong income proposition underpinned by a structurally supported real estate sector in assets with strong fundamentals creates certainty providing organic growth over time.
Here we explain more.
The Macro Environment The retail landscape continues to evolve and is in a state of ux.
Almost a decade on from the global nancial crisis in 2008 consumer attitudes and shopping habits have changed driven by the continued accelerating pace of technological change and a shift in the traditional paradigm that each generation can expect to enjoy a better standard of living.
Online continues to gain market share from 13% of all non food retail sales in 201 1 to an expected 26% by 2020.
1.2 billion parcels were delivered last year with next day delivery options increasing and a reduction in order cut off times.
Todays consumer environment makes it ever more crucial for retailers to adapt to keep up.
The pace of change has never been this fast before but is likely to never be this slow again.
The compounding impact of technological change is creating an accelerating pace of change.
A decade on from the introduction of the iPhone the consumer is increasingly comfortable with the interaction of technology throughout life and recognises the benets it brings and the ability it has to reduce frictional factors of everyday life.
The growth of new technologies devices and channels is increasing the number of ways in which a consumer can engage with retailers and the route to purchase is no longer one dimensional through the store.
As a result retailers are having to invest heavily in their digital infrastructure and logistics and fullment offer.
The major shifts at play have unsurprisingly taken their toll on retailers.
Across the sector operating margins have shrunk as cut throat competition and the cost of meeting consumer expectations for retail theatre as part of an instore experience and a seamless omnichannel offer weighs on the operating costs of the business.
As retailers seek to grow revenue by meeting consumer demands through multiple interaction points and building brand loyalty retailers are also having to reduce costs in other areas to ensure it delivers the level of investment required to remain relevant.
As a result real estate has become more in focus than ever before.
Store portfolios are shrinking as footfall and store sales decline with heavy investment into distribution and logistics operations to meet the continued growth of online sales.
The Technology
The Consumer
The Retailer
18 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The Winning Sectors of Retail The change in the retailing landscape and wider structural mega trends are driving demand for a range of different types of warehousing.
We look to invest tactically across the logistics sector to benet from the characteristics and investment propositions of each of the subsectors.
Mega
Distribution
Regional
Distribution
Urban
Logistics
Large scale modern distribution units greater than 500000 sq ft located close to major arterial routes.
Strategically located to serve the customer and attract labour pools.
Mid size units between 100000 sq ft and 500000 sq ft serving as regional hubs and creating the connecting link in any modern supply chain.
A smaller logistics unit allowing the nal journey of delivery.
Strategically located in or close to dense areas of population to meet increasing consumer demands for next and same day delivery.
The UK convenience sector is a long standing feature of UK communities however it is changing  from being shops used largely for emergency or distress purchases to being a regular part of many consumers grocery shopping repertoire.
Footfall has declined by 15% across the high street since 2008 however convenience retail continues to perform strongly as online shoppers look to top up shop on a more regular basis to inll their larger shopping needs.
Retailers continue to expand their exposure with retailers such as MandS Simply Food targeting in excess of 200 additional stores in an environment where they continue to consolidate general merchandising stores across the wider estate.
Distribution and Logistics Convenience Led Retail and Long Income Amazons UK business generated 7 .4 billion of revenue in 2016 which was an increase of 21% on 2015 and represents 7% of its worldwide sales.
Since 2010 Amazon has invested 6.4 billion in its UK operations and it employs nearly 20000 people.
Amazons UK logistics capabilities are unrivalled.
It doubled its UK logistics footprint in 2016 and accounted for c.20% of take up.
The urban logistics infrastructure that they are building is evidence of the importance they attach to same day even same hour delivery setting new benchmarks for the competition to match.
19 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Real Estate Impact sq ft millionsteltel 2010 201 1teltel
Secondhand Newearly marketed Long term average Source CBRE sq ft millions Secondhand New Source CBREteltel 2010 201 1teltel
Long term average Demand across the logistics market 100000 sq ft remains above long term averages of c.20 million sq ft per annum driven mainly by retailers third party logistics companies and major parcel carriers.
In total these occupiers accounted for 73% of total take up in the year to March 2017 .
Together with the more traditional occupiers such as construction food and automotive industries total take up was 31.0 million sq ft for the 12 months to March 2017 with grade A at 23.6 million sq ft.
Amazon is believed to have accounted for c.20% of all take up in 2016 and although this is not expected to be repeated in 2017  the depth of demand is broad and robust suggesting another very strong year to come.
The resultant demand has led to an acute shortage of supply.
CBRE estimate that only 10.8 million sq ft or six months new and grade A supply is available in the market across properties greater than 100000 sq ft with another 10.3 million sq ft second hand space available.
With limited speculative development ongoing at 4.3 million sq ft the supply constrained market dynamics are likely to continue.
In more urban areas land is completing for alternative uses such as residential together with an increase in demand.
This is causing further pressure on rental levels leading to strong rental growth in land constrained markets such as the regional and urban logistics sub sector.
As the need for increased and more timely deliveries continues as more consumers adopt online shopping environmental considerations become increasingly important.
Increased traffic congestion CO 2 emissions and often noise pollution mean that urban neighbourhoods are historically incompatible.
The market is beginning to respond positively to these challenges and is considering new and innovative ways to continue to meet modern day requirements whilst remaining sympathetic to our environment.
This is likely to lead to further demand in other locations adding increased pressure to a supply constrained market.
UK logistics takeup UK logistics availability
Marketplace continued 20 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The retail market evolution continues with distribution logistics and convenience retail real estate sectors winning out as the shift to online is further embraced.
Total return for the distribution sector was 8.1% in the year to 31 March 2017 according to IPD outperforming the overall property market by 350bps.
The UK is the most sophisticated online shopping market in the world with over 75% of UK shoppers actively online.
The proportion of non food retail sales online in 2020 is expected to be 26% compared to 20% now.
This will place further pressure on occupiers to be t for purpose and ensure they win at least their share of the growth.
Technology will continue to evolve to the benet of the online shopping experience and drive further growth.
Demand and supply imbalances within the market fuelled by this shift to online shopping suggests that the relative property performance will continue.
We anticipate another strong year with demand and supply constraints causing further rental pressure delivering a year of solid total returns.
Longer term trends will persist providing strong long durable cash ows in a winning sector.
Investment Considerations Summary and Outlook 11 tel%
Apr
Aug
Aug
Dec
Dec
Apr
Aug
Dec
London
South East
North and Scotland Source CBRE %
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Prime distribution Greater London Industrial Estate Industrial Estate excluding Greater London Good secondary Source CBRE The demand and supply imbalance is leading to rental pressure across the logistics market.
According to IPD rental growth for the distribution sector as a whole for the 12 months to March 2017 recorded 3.0%.
Rental growth varies across the specic sub sectors of the logistics market as well as across different regions of the UK.
Urban or close to urban locations are seeing particularly strong rental growth as the land competes for alternative uses and occupiers ght to take the locations that meet the delivery demands of the end consumer.
The distribution and logistics sector continues to attract a high level of investor interest.
Attracted by the structural and mega trends that benet the sector the additional benets of long lease length limited gross to net income leakage and robust covenant strengths mean that investment yields have continued to fall during the period.
According to CBRE prime distribution yields stand at 5.0% compared to 5.8% three years ago.
UK Industrial rental growth UK Industrial yields 21 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business model The business is positioned around strong fundamentals of owning highly desirable real estate that is structurally supported let to good companies and that will generate reliable and growing income.
We use our property expertise and occupier relationships to deliver outperformance.
Our business model evolves to adapt to the changing world that we live in.
Investing in structurally supported real estate We allocate capital to sectors that we believe are supported by longer term structural mega trends.
Compounding our income We focus on delivering reliable repetitive and growing income derived from strong tenants and long leases.
Investing wisely and adding value We invest in sectors with structural support with a tactical overlay to take advantage of pricing imperfections.
We add value through derisked asset management and short cycle development to build a portfolio of desirable real estate.
Being nancially astute We employ a conservative nancing strategy with a debt structure that is aligned to our property strategy.
The quality of our tenants ensures that we can service our debt comfortably.
Increase weighting to distribution The digital world we live in is driving structural mega trends resulting in a need for more efficient distribution real estate at the expense of traditional physical retail.
Our priority is to increase our weighting to this sector further particularly urban logistics where we see strong supplydemand dynamics.
Realising income growth potential We aim to grow our income through Contractual rental uplifts both xed and ination linked Capturing open market rent review uplifts Development and asset management where we deliver a superior return on our investment Maintaining strong portfolio metrics We aim to own create and build desirable real estate.
We achieve strong portfolio metrics through buying well ensuring occupier contentment and gathering superior intelligence through our relationships and continually reviewing the quality of our portfolio.
Delivering short cycle developments Through our expertise we are able to add value from our development activity.
Developments are short cycle typically BREEAM Very Good rated and derisked with planning approved and prelets agreed.
The fundamentals Our strategic priorities Our unique approach
Our strong occupier relationships shape our decision making.
We aim to be the partner of choice across the distribution and retail sectors.
Our occupier relationships shape our decision making.
Forensic approach We are forensic about the quality of our assets and the strength of our tenants.
Our due diligence at the time of acquisition and the constant evaluation of our portfolio ensure that we minimise macro risks and also asset and tenant specic risks.
People and expertise People are central to our business and we look to attract and retain the best people in our industry.
We have a talented and committed team across real estate and nance.
22 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Additional income from lettings and rent reviews 1 m Like for like income growth 4.6% ERV growth 3.8% Total Property Return 7.4 % BREEAM Very Good achieved on developments 1.0m sq ft
EPRA Earnings growth 5.3% Dividend growth 3.4% EPRA net assets per share growth 1.4% Total Accounting return 6.4% The value created People and expertise Management team with 25 years retail and property experience Supported by a committed and talented team
Strong balance sheet High quality tenants and assets Security of income paramount
99.6% occupied portfolio 69 occupier deals delivered Over 1 deal per week 23 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key performance indicators We continue to track seven key performance indicators to monitor the performance of the business which include our share of joint ventures.
The KPIs are also used to determine how Executive Directors and senior employees are evaluated and remunerated.
Objective KPI measurenumbers Performance Deliver long term shareholder returns Total shareholder return %tel Total Shareholder Return TSR being the share price movement together with the dividend in the four years post merger was 88% outperforming the FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector of 46% by 1.9 times.
12 month TSR delivered 4.4% compared to the FTSE 350 Super Sector return which was a fall of 0.3%.
Maximise long term total accounting return Total accounting return %tel Total Accounting Return TAR of EPRA NAV movement together with dividend charge in the year.
12 month TAR delivered a return of 6.4%.
Maximise property portfolio returns Total property return %tel Unlevered Total Property Return TPR including capital and income return of the portfolio as calculated by IPD.
12 months TPR delivered a return of 7 .4% compared to the IPD benchmark of 4.6%.
Deliver sustainable growth in EPRA earnings EPRA earnings per share ptel Recurring earnings per share from core operational activities have grown by 5.1% over the last 12 months.
In the four years post merger EPRA earnings per share has grown by 1 10.3% from 3.9p to 8.2p per share.
Drive like for like income growth through management actions Like for like income growth %tel Year on year movement of net rental income on properties owned through the period increased by 4.6%.
Maintain strong occupier contentment EPRA vacancy %tel Occupancy rate of investment portfolio of 99.6% against IPD all property benchmark of 93.1%.
Maintain a higher than market benchmark weighted average unexpired lease term
WAULT years Weighted average unexpired lease term across the investment portfolio excluding residential and development of 12.8 years as at 31 March 2017 which outperformed the IPD all property benchmark of 12.2 years.
24 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Remuneration 201718 ambition Under the Remuneration Policy 37 .5% of LTIP awards are subject to TSR growth compared with the FTSE 350 Real Estate sector excluding agencies and operators.
The TSR component of the 2013 LTIP award vested in full in the year and the TSR component of the 2014 LTIP award is expected to vest in full.
Three year TSR performance to be in the upper quartile of the FTSE 350 Real Estate companies excluding agencies and operators.
Under the Remuneration Policy 37 .5% of LTIP awards are subject to TAR growth compared with the FTSE 350 Real Estate sector excluding agencies and operators.
Three year total accounting return to be in the upper quartile of FTSE 350 Real Estate companies excluding agencies and operators.
35% of annual bonus award is subject to TPR outperforming the IPD Quarterly Universe index.
This year TPR outperformed the IPD benchmark delivering a 35% bonus payout.
One year TPR outperformance against Quarterly Universe index.
35% of annual bonus award is subject to an EPRA EPS growth target.
This year EPRA EPS outperformed its growth target securing a 74% bonus payout.
25% of LTIP awards vest after three years subject to an EPS growth target.
The EPS component of the 2013 LTIP award vested in full in the year and the EPS component of the 2014 LTIP award is expected to vest in full.
Deliver and sustain EPRA earnings growth and dividend progression.
Forms part of EPRA earnings per share which as noted above is a key nancial performance measure for the Companys variable incentive arrangements.
Deliver like for like income growth ahead of ination plus 1.5%.
Linked to individual personal objectives representing 30% of the annual bonus performance conditions.
Maintain high occupancy across the investment portfolio targeting 99%.
Linked to individual personal objectives representing 30% of the annual bonus performance conditions.
Maintain high weighted average unexpired lease term targeting 12 years.
Other performance indicators
Risk management
The achievement of our seven KPIs is inuenced by the identication and management of risks which might otherwise prevent the attainment of our strategic priorities.
The relationship between our principal risks and KPIs is reviewed in the Risk management section on pages 40 to 47 .
Remuneration
The table on page 94 shows how our KPIs are reected in and therefore aligned to remuneration and incentive arrangements.
LTV ratio %tel Debt maturity yearstel EPRA topped up net initial yield %tel EPRA cost ratio %tel Cost of borrowing %tel
Risk management
Remuneration Policy see page 88 25 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Investment review We invest in structurally supported real estate that delivers repetitive dependable and growing income.
Our investment activity in the year was focused on urban logistics investments largely funded by mature retail park sales.
Valentine Beresford Investment Director Distribution investments Structural support for distribution We have been a signicant beneciary of an early move into distribution.
The demandsupply dynamics for this sector have strengthened considerably and remain highly attractive.
2016 was a record year for occupier take up and supply remains restricted with limited speculative development.
This is driving sustainable rental growth.
High quality distribution portfolio The value of our distribution assets including developments increased to 950.2 million representing 62% of the total portfolio.
This is expected to grow to over 70% as we complete developments and further investments.
Our distribution investments are 100% let and have a WAULT of 12.9 years with 57 .8% of income subject to contractual uplifts.
Disciplined investing in distribution The investment market for mega and regional warehousing remains competitive particularly where assets are let to strong covenants on long leases.
We have however remained disciplined and not chased the market.
Despite the sale of our HUT Group warehouse we increased our mega and regional exposure in the year through further development completions.
We spent 71.0 million on our Wakeeld and Warrington developments achieving a blended yield of 6.6% which is c.150bps better than completed investment yields.
We also acquired a regional warehouse let to One Stop in Wakeeld for 9.5 million.
97 million of investments in urban logistics During the year we increased our urban logistics portfolio signicantly to 160.8 million through 15 acquisitions.
These acquisitions have enhanced our end to end logistics portfolio.
They are typically 50100000 sq ft and provide spoke operations for larger hubs.
They are well located and facilitate next day and same day delivery to major cities and conurbations.
They are increasingly critical to the distribution networks for retailers third party logistics providers and other operators in meeting rising consumer delivery expectations.
Our average yield on acquisitions was 6.2% which is c.100bps better than for larger warehouse investments.
These assets offer strong rental growth prospects as evidenced by the ERV growth of 9.5% achieved on our existing assets.
We remain excited by the opportunities in urban logistics where we continue to leverage our relationships to often secure off market purchases.
Since the year end we have acquired a further 23.9 million of assets.
Distribution portfolio split As at 31 March 2017 Mega Regional Urban logistics Typical warehouse size 500000 sq ft 100500000 sq ft 50100000 sq ft
Yield
4.8% 5.0% 5.8% Contractual uplifts 74% 60% 9% Including developments Topped up NIY Percentage of portfolio that benets from contractual rental uplifts Urban logistics 17%
33%
50% Yield on urban logistics distribution investments 6.2% 26 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Retail sales Investment activity by sub sector Acquisitions Disposals Cost at share
Proceeds at share
Distribution 107.0 6.2 54.4 6.5 Leisure   9.1 5.5 Residential   10.8 2.4 Signicant further retail sales As at 31 March 2017  our retail parks represented 13% of the overall portfolio and this weighting has more than halved over two years.
Our long income JV retail assets represented 7% and our convenience retail assets accounted for 6% of the portfolio.
Retail disposal activity was particularly strong in the year at 127 .6 million.
The key retail disposals were at Newry Kings Lynn and Christchurch which totalled 89.2 million and represented the opportunity to monetise several of our larger retail park investments following intense asset management activity and where business plans had been fully executed.
Post year end we disposed of our Morrisons retail asset in Loughborough at a very attractive yield of 4.3%.
Leisure asset sales During the year we sold an Odeon cinema in Taunton for 9.1 million.
Post year end we sold a further cinema in Birkenhead for 5.8 million.
The sales have reduced our cinema ownership to six which account for 3.5 million of income per annum 100% of which is RPI linked and have a WAULT of 21.3 years.
We continue to see strong buying appetite for our cinema portfolio.
Opportunistic retail acquisitions Our MIPP Joint Venture acquired two single let warehouses for 18.4 million Group Share 9.2 million at a yield of 6.8% and continues to see opportunities in selective high quality assets that are smaller lot sizes and offer the potential to generate stable consistent income returns.
Following discussions with our Joint Venture partner we have agreed to extend the term of the MIPP Joint Venture by a further three years to 2023.
21 Residential disposals At Moore House in Chelsea our last remaining residential asset in which we have a 40% share we continue to patiently sell down individual units.
Purchaser interest has remained strong since last autumn and we sold 13 units in the second half of the year taking the number sold in the year to 21.
A further two units have been sold post period end and ten are currently under offer.
There are 58 units remaining of the original 149 owned.
Two urban logistics acquisitions in Leeds for 12 million During the year we acquired two modern and well located urban logistics warehouses in Leeds.
The warehouses are 100000 sq ft and 49000 sq ft in size and are let to Vision Alert pictured and Siemens.
The aggregate price paid was 1 1.9 million reecting a blended NIY of 6.0% and a reversionary yield of 6.5%.
Retail parks halved over two years to 13% of total portfolio 27 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Investment review continued
Investment activity 107.0m acquired NIY 6.2% WAULT 8.7 years 54.4m disposed NIY 6.5% WAULT 14.0 years
114000 sq ft in Crawley Speculative development acquired at an anticipated cost of 20 million reecting a 6.3% yield on cost 53000 sq ft in Crawley Prelet development in Crawley acquired for 10.7 million at a yield on cost of 5.2% let to Barker and Stonehouse with a WAULT of 15.0 years
382000 sq ft portfolio 26.0 million acquisition of six assets in established distribution locations.
Acquired at a NIY of 6.5% and with a WAULT of 7 .0 years 120000 sq ft in Wakeeld 9.5 million acquisition of a regional warehouse let to
Acquired at a NIY of 5.7% and with a WAULT of 6.2 years 100000 sq ft in Leeds 7 .9 million acquisition of a warehouse let to Vision
Acquired at a NIY of 6.0% and with a WAULT of 14.8 years 89000 sq ft in Hemel
8.3 million acquisition of a warehouse let to
Acquired at a NIY of 6.4% and with a WAULT of 8.3 years 74000 sq ft in Stevenage 7 .3 million acquisition of a warehouse let to Dixons
Acquired at a NIY of 6.3% with a WAULT of 8.7 years 49000 sq ft in Leeds 4.0 million acquisition of a warehouse let to Siemens.
Acquired at a NIY of 6.0% with a WAULT of 3.0 years 49000 sq ft in Dartford 6.3 million acquisition of a warehouse let to Antalis.
Acquired at a NIY of 6.0% with a WAULT of 10.0 years 41000 sq ft in Basildon 3.8 million acquisition of a warehouse let to Modular Heating Group.
Acquired at a NIY of 6.5% with a WAULT of 4.0 years 30000 sq ft in Bicester 3.2 million acquisition of a warehouse let to DPD.
Acquired at a NIY of 5.9% and with a WAULT of 9.5 years
Post period end 51000 sq ft in Crawley 6.4 million acquisition of an urban logistics warehouse let to
Acquired at a reversionary yield of 6.2% and with a WAULT of 6.4 years 90000 sq ft in Coventry 5.7 million acquisition of an urban logistics warehouse let to DHL for ten years at a NIY of 7 .0% 120000 sq ft in Huyton 1 1.8 million acquisition of an urban logistics warehouse let to Antolin Interiors for 15.0 years at a yield on cost of 6.1% 690000 sq ft in Warrington Following an option exercise in the prior year by the occupier The Hut Group acquired its warehouse for 53.7 million reecting a NIY of 6.5% The yield on cost for the development was 8.0%.
The sale completed in November 2016 and generated a 22% geared IRR 2.2 acre site in Yeovil We disposed of a small site for 0.7 million
28 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Retail and leisure Investment activity 9.2m acquired NIY 6.8% WAULT 15.0 years 136.7m disposed NIY 6.2% WAULT 10.9 years
11 assets sold for 152.9 million Group share 136.7 million
The 165000 sq ft Damolly Retail Park was sold for 30.7 million at a NIY of 7 .4%.
During ownership new lettings were signed with Lidl Pets at Home Home Bargains and Costa
The 104000 sq ft retail park was sold for 34.5 million reecting a NIY of 5.7%.
The property was purchased in 2013 for 27 .1 million and since then new lettings had been signed with Costa DFS Home Bargains and
The WAULT was 7 .0 years Kings Lynn The refurbished 7 4000 sq ft Pierpoint Retail Park was sold for 24.0 million at a NIY of 5.8%.
New lettings had been signed with Next BandM DFS Tapi Poundland and Greggs increasing the rental income by 47% and the WAULT from 4.3 years to 13.3 years
The 66000 sq ft Alban Retail Park was sold for 14.3 million reecting a NIY of 5.9%.
The property was acquired in 2010 for 9.2 million and following asset management initiatives with BandM Dunelm and Gym Group rental income had increased by over 30%.
The WAULT was 8.3 years
The 20000 sq ft Fordton Retail Park was sold for 6.6 million at a NIY of 5.4% St Albans The 25000 sq ft retail asset was sold for 5.8 million at a NIY of 6.1% Chatham Bridgwater and Grimsby Our MIPP Joint Venture sold three properties for 15.9 million Group share 8.0 million at a NIY of 5.7%
A DFS property was sold for 12.0 million Group share 3.7 million on behalf of our DFS joint venture reecting a NIY of 7 .5%.
The property was acquired in March 2014 as part of a portfolio of DFS stores off an overall NIY of 9.3%.
The joint venture retains 12 assets
One Odeon Multiplex Cinema was sold for 9.1 million at a NIY of 5.5%
Post period end
32.5 million disposal of a 55000 sq ft Morrisons store at a NIY of 4.3% The asset had been extended recently and a new 25 year lease had been agreed with
Our prot on cost was 26.0%
5.8 million disposal of a Vue cinema at a NIY of 7 .2%
2.8 million disposal of a retail park in Newcastle Under Lyme at a NIY of 8.0% Our MIPP joint venture acquired two assets for 18.4 million Group share 9.2 million
9.4 million acquisition of a 71000 sq ft warehouse at a NIY of 7 .5% let to BandQ with a WAULT of 12 years
9.0 million acquisition of a 40000 sq ft warehouse at a NIY of 6.2% let to Wickes who signed a new 20 year lease on acquisition
29 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Asset management and development Our portfolio metrics continue to remain strong as our underlying income becomes more resilient and we deliver sustainable income growth.
Our asset management and development activity continue to deliver value driven by our occupational intelligence.
Mark Stirling Asset Director
12.8 years Delivering long term sustainable income As an important driver of our repetitive income we continued to achieve long lease lengths from our activity.
The 33 lettings in the year were agreed at an average lease length of 18.2 years and our lettings to Amazon and Eddie Stobart in the year were particularly signicant transactions.
This activity helped to maintain our WAULT at 12.8 years 12.1 years to break which remains one of the longest in the sector.
Only 1.2% of our income expires over the next three years and over 17% of income has a WAULT of 20 years or greater.
Protecting the reliability of our income Maintaining a strong tenant list with high occupier satisfaction is a key priority.
Our occupancy rate at the year end was 99.6% a high level that has been maintained for several years.
We have a high quality list of tenants as reected in our top ve tenants which account for 34% of income and consist of Primark Dixons Carphone MandS Argos and Eddie Stobart.
Our gross to net income ratio of 98.6% reects our further alignment to distribution where operational requirements are minimal.
Achieving income growth Through 69 occupier transactions we generated 7 .1 million of additional income and like for like income growth of 4.6%.
The 33 new lettings delivered 5.8 million of income whilst contractual income uplifts and open market rent reviews helped to generate 1.3 million of additional income.
With 52% of our rental income beneting from xed or ination linked uplifts our portfolio has certainty of income growth.
1115 years 27% years 16% 20 years 17% 410 years 39% 03 years 1% Lease expiry prole
43%
5%
28%
24% Contractual rent reviewstel 2017 2014 Occupancy Rate 99.6% 99.3% 99.7% 99.6% 95.0% Like for like income growth 4.6%
99 .6% 30 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Eddie Stobart Distribution Dagenham 26 year lease on an enlarged warehouse Development of a new 180000 sq ft warehouse New 26 year lease across 436000 sq ft Increased rent with ve yearly RPI reviews Development to be completed within 12 months Delivers marginal yield on cost of c.5.75% Additional contracted income from 33 lettings
33 lettings were undertaken in the year generating additional contractual income of 5.8 million of which 3.8 million related to distribution developments.
Lettings were achieved with an average lease length of 18.2 years.
Distribution lettings Five distribution lettings or regears were signed at Dagenham where a new 26 year lease was signed with Eddie Stobart Warrington where a 15 year lease was signed with Amazon at our recently developed 357 000 sq ft warehouse Stoke where a 15 year prelet was signed with Michelin on 137 000 sq ft at our development.
The c.277 000 sq ft scheme is under construction and we continue to engage with potential tenants on the remaining space Nottingham where Hillarys Blinds extended their lease to ten years Newark where we installed 1MW of solar generating additional income of 0.1 million per annum.
At our 1 14000 sq ft development in Crawley a prelet has been agreed on 35000 sq ft and we expect to sign the letting shortly.
Retail lettings 26 retail lettings were signed during the year.
The key lettings were at Tonbridge where the former BandQ unit is fully prelet following lettings with Home Bargains GoOutdoors Jollyes Costa and most recently with Carpetright Launceston where the former BandQ unit is fully prelet following lettings with BandM MandS and Costa in the second half of the year Kirkstall where lettings were signed with Peacocks Holland and Barrett Shoezone and Specsavers Dartford where Wickes has signed a 20 year lease on 40000 sq ft at our recently acquired investment Ipswich where Wickes signed a 15 year lease on 21000 sq ft at our development and Costa has signed a 15 year lease on 2000 sq ft.
We are under offer on letting the remaining space At our last remaining office in Marlow two leases were signed across 21000 sq ft.
The property is 96.7% occupied.
Rent reviews Including contractual uplifts 36 rent reviews were agreed across 4.1 million sq ft adding 1.3 million of income at 4.6% above passing and 4.3% above ERV.
Rental growth on our distribution assets was strong and we settled nine reviews at 5.0% above previous passing three of which were open market reviews on urban logistics and regional warehouses where the average uplift was 16.9% above passing on a ve yearly equivalent basis.
On our retail and leisure assets we settled 27 rent reviews at 3.0% above previous passing and 6.5% above ERV.
The majority of these reviews were ination linked rent reviews and seven were open market reviews which were settled at 4.4% above previous passing.
Growth in passing rent from 36 rent reviews 4.6% 31 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Asset management and development continued Developed in the year 1 million sq ft Short cycle developments Following the completion of 1.9 million sq ft of developments last year we successfully completed 1.1 million sq ft of further developments in the period representing 7 .9 million of additional income.
The blended yield on cost for these developments was 6.5%.
Committed developments currently total 0.7 million sq ft of which 0.6 million sq ft relates to distribution developments at Dagenham Stoke and Crawley all of which are expected to be completed within 612 months.
The blended yield on cost for all committed development is anticipated to be 6.3%.
We continue to derisk our pipeline developments.
At Bedford where the site has planning for up to 700000 sq ft a six month extension has been agreed to purify the conditions of purchase with the council.
We anticipate completing the land purchase by the end of 2017 .
Property valuation and return Despite continued political and economic uncertainty we generated a positive valuation movement of 21.0 million for the year.
Our
44.0 million valuation gain in the second half more than reversed the 23.0 million valuation loss that we saw in the rst half.
Our actions accounted for 77 .1% of the total valuation uplift for the year.
Our sector leading occupancy rates and lease lengths within the structurally winning real estate sectors continue to provide strong support to our valuations delivering a total capital return of 1.7% and signicantly outperformed the IPD All Property return measure of 0.1%.
Development summary Scheme Sector
Additional rent
Practical completion date
Wakeeld Distribution 527 2.5 6.3 Sept 16 Warrington Distribution 357 2.1 7.1 Nov 16 Crawley Distribution 53 0.6 5.2 March 17 Liverpool Retail 29 0.5 6.2 July 16 St Margarets Leicester Retail 29 0.4 8.1 July 16 Aldi Leicester Retail 19 0.3 6.0 August 16 Coventry Retail 18 0.3 8.0 Feb 17 Tonbridge Retail 18 0.4 10.5 Oct 16 Loughborough1 Retail 12 0.5 5.1 Jan 17 Ferndown Retail 11 0.3 5.4 May 16 1073 7.9 6.5 Under construction Stoke2 Distribution 277 1.4 6.3 Q1 18 Dagenham Distribution 180 0.9 5.7 Q2 18 Crawley2 Distribution 114 1.3 6.3 Dec 17 Tonbridge ex BandQ Retail 53 0.3 6.1 July 17 Ipswich2 Retail 31 0.7 7.1 Q4 17 Launceston Retail 30 0.3 6.2 Q4 17 Sold post year end Based on anticipated rents Distribution real estate continues to see healthy demand in both the investment and occupational market.
As a result it is one of the best performing real estate subsectors and delivered a capital return of 2.8%.
Our distribution assets strongly outperformed the subsector generating a capital return of 4.4% as a result of both the quality of our assets and our development and asset management action.
The Companys retail and leisure portfolio saw a 0.5% valuation increase with a 2.9% decline in the retail park portfolio offset by the strength in our long income retail convenience and leisure assets.
Our last two noncore buildings in Marlow and Moore House saw adverse valuation impacts over the year.
Overall our office and residential assets fell in value by 10.5%.
The valuation uplift combined with the portfolios sustainable and growing income helped us to deliver a total property return of 7 .4% substantially beating the IPD All Property return measure of 4.6%.
We believe that income will be the major component of total returns going forward and we expect that the portfolios strong income characteristics will help to deliver further total return outperformance.
32 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key responsible development activities completed in the year Strategic report Governance Financial statements Current responsible development activities committed
527 000 sq ft distribution mega warehouse prelet to Poundworld Completed September 2016 BREEAM Very Good Roof lights on 50000 sq ft Roof designed for future tting of solar panels
357 000 sq ft regional distribution warehouse let to Amazon Completed November 2016 BREEAM Very Good Roof lights on 50000 sq ft Roof designed for future tting of solar panels
53000 sq ft urban logistics warehouse Completed March 2017 BREEAM Very Good
180000 sq ft regional distribution warehouse BREEAM Very Good
1 14000 sq ft regional distribution warehouse BREEAM Excellent
277 000 sq ft regional distribution warehouse BREEAM Very Good
30000 sq ft retail redevelopment MandS and Aldi Liverpool 29000 sq ft convenience retail development Completed July 2016 BREEAM Very Good Responsible development in action Building a new way for everyones future For responsible development overview see page 52 For local community activity see page 55 33 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial review Martin McGann Finance Director Our commitment to repositioning the portfolio into our preferred distribution sector has delivered growth in secure and sustainable income and property values this year.
EPRA earnings per share
We have achieved both earnings and NAV growth this year and have strengthened and derisked our nancing position through a private debt placement and an equity placing.
EPRA earnings have increased by 5.3% to 51.0 million or 8.2p per share compared with 48.5 million or 7 .8p last year.
Reported prot under IFRS has fallen by 19.7 million to 63.0 million primarily as a result of lower valuation gains this year.
EPRA NAV is 1030.5 million or 149.8p per share an increase of 1 1.8% or 1.4% on a per share basis which reects the impact of the equity placing.
In September we entered into a new 130 million private debt placement which diversied our funding sources and provided further capacity for investment.
We supplemented this in March by an equity placing of 62.8 million ordinary shares which raised gross proceeds of 95.5 million.
Our loan to value ratio has improved as a result of the debt raised and equity issued in the year falling to 30% from 38% last year.
Other nancing metrics remain strong with average cost of debt unchanged at 3.5% and loan maturity despite the passing of a year of 5.2 years 2016 5.6 years.
We have 299.7 million of undrawn debt facilities up from 69.9 million last year.
Our strong nancial results and robust portfolio metrics have enabled us to increase the dividend for the year to 7 .5p per share up 3.4% from last year.
Three quarterly payments totalling 5.4p per share have been made to date and a further 2.1p is proposed for payment on 10 July 2017 .
The dividend continues to be fully covered by EPRA earnings at 109%.
A scrip alternative to a cash dividend payment was offered to shareholders for all dividends declared in the year to 31 March 2017 and it is our intention to continue to offer shareholders this choice.
Dividend per share EPRA net assets per share EPRA EPS 8.2p 5% Dividend per share 7.5p 3%tel 2017 8.2ptel 2017 EPRA net asset value per share 149 .8p 1 %tel 2017 34 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Alternative performance measures The Group uses EPRA earnings and EPRA net assets as alternative performance measures as they highlight the underlying recurring performance of the Groups property rental business.
The EPRA alternative measures are widely recognised and used by public real estate companies and seek to improve transparency comparability and relevance of published results.
The Groups key EPRA measures are summarised in the table below and also in note 8 to the nancial statements and Supplementary notes i to vii.
Denitions of EPRA alternative performance measures are also given in the Glossary on page 148.
Alternative performance measure
EPRA earnings Recurring earnings from core operational activities.
It excludes items considered to be non recurring or exceptional in accordance with EPRA Best Practice Recommendations including property and derivative valuation movements prots and losses on disposal of properties and nancing break costs.
It is presented as it is one of the Groups KPIs an industry standard comparable measure and supports the level of dividend payments.
A reconciliation between EPRA earnings and IFRS reported prot is provided in note 8 to the nancial statements.
EPRA net assets EPRA net asset value is a key measure of the Groups overall performance reecting both income and capital returns.
It excludes the fair valuation of derivative instruments that are reported in IFRS net assets.
A reconciliation between EPRA net assets and IFRS reported net assets is provided in note 8 to the nancial statements.
Presentation of nancial information The Group nancial statements on pages 1 17 to 137 are prepared in accordance with IFRS.
We account for our interests in joint ventures using the equity method as required by IFRS 1 1 which means the results and investment in joint venture entities are presented as a single line item in the consolidated income statement and balance sheet.
Management monitors the performance of the business on a proportionally consolidated basis which includes the Groups share of income expenses assets and liabilities of joint ventures on a line by line basis in the income statement and balance sheet.
The gures and commentary in this review are consistent with our management approach as we believe this provides a more meaningful analysis of overall performance.
2017 2016 EPRA EPS 8.2p 7.8p EPRA NAV per share 149.8p 147.7p EPRA triple NAV per share 146.4p 143.9p EPRA vacancy rate 0.4% 0.7% EPRA cost ratio 16% 17% EPRA NIY 4.5% 4.9% EPRA topped up NIY 5.4% 5.4% The denition of each of these measures can be found in the Glossary on page 1 48.
EPRA highlights Cost of debt 3.5% Loan to value 30% Reported prot 35 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The table below reconciles the movement in EPRA earnings in the year.
EPRA earnings 2016 48.5 7.8 Net rental income 4.1 0.7 Management fees 0.3 0.1 Administrative costs 0.4 0.1 Net nance costs 1.7 0.3 EPRA earnings 2017 51.0 8.2 Net rental income The growth in EPRA earnings was driven by additional net rental income of 4.1 million which increased by 5.3% in the year to 81.8 million.
Movements in net rental income are reected in the table below.
Net rental income 2016 77.7 Existing properties Developments 5.1 Acquisitions 6.1 Disposals 7.9 Property costs 0.1 Net rental income 2017 81.8 Based on properties held throughout 2016 and 2017 on a proportionately consolidated basis to exclude the distortive impact of acquisitions disposals and development completions in either period The existing portfolio generated 0.7 million of additional income and the Groups completed developments delivered a further 5.1 million.
Net disposals reduced income by 1.8 million offset by marginal savings in property costs of 0.1 million.
Our net income as a percentage of gross rents has increased marginally to 98.6%.
Administrative costs Administrative costs have fallen by 2.9% to 13.4 million after capitalising staff costs of 1.8 million 2016 1.5 million in respect of time spent on development activity in the year.
EPRA cost ratio The Groups cost base continues to be closely monitored and the EPRA cost ratio is used as a key measure of effective cost management.
EPRA cost ratio including direct vacancy costs EPRA cost ratio excluding direct vacancy costs The EPRA cost ratio for the year including direct vacancy costs was 16% compared with 17% last year.
The ratio reects total operating costs including the cost of vacancy as a percentage of gross rental income.
The full calculation is shown in Supplementary note iv on page 144.
Net nance costs Net nance costs excluding the costs associated with repaying debt and terminating hedging arrangements on sales and renancing in the year were 18.4 million an increase of 1.7 million over the previous year.
This was due to decreases in interest receivable from forward funded development projects and interest capitalised on developments of 0.4 million and 0.7 million respectively.
In addition increased Group bank interest costs of 1.4 million associated with higher average levels of debt were offset by lower joint venture interest costs of 0.8 million as a result of repaying debt facilities.
The movements are shown in notes 5 and 10 to the nancial statements.
Our interest rate exposure is hedged by a combination of xed and forward starting interest rate swaps and caps as discussed on page 39.
Share of joint ventures EPRA earnings from joint venture investments were 5.8 million a reduction of 0.8 million over last year due to the impact of disposals as reected in the table below.
For the year to 31 March MIPP 3.4 4.0 Retail Warehouse 2.2 2.4 Residential 0.2 0.2 In addition the Group received net management fees of 1.0 million for acting as property advisor to each of its joint ventures 2016 1.3 million.
Taxation
As the Group is a UK REIT any income and capital gains from our qualifying property rental business are exempt from UK corporation tax.
Any UK income that does not qualify as property income within the REIT regulations is subject to UK tax in the normal way.
The Groups tax strategy is compliance oriented to account for tax on an accurate and timely basis and meet all REIT compliance and reporting obligations.
We seek to minimise the level of tax risk and to structure our affairs based on sound commercial principles.
We strive to maintain an open dialogue with HMRC with a view to identifying and solving issues as they arise.
Income statement EPRA earnings for the Group and its share of joint ventures are detailed as follows For the year to 31 March Group
Group
JV
Gross rental income 73.9 9.1 83.0 67.9 11.1 79.0 Property costs 0.8 0.4 1.2 0.8 0.5 1.3 Net rental income 73.1 8.7 81.8 67.1 10.6 77.7 Management fees 1.7 0.7 1.0 2.2 0.9 1.3 Administrative costs 13.3 0.1 13.4 13.6 0.2 13.8 Net nance costs 16.3 2.1 18.4 13.8 2.9 16.7 EPRA earnings 45.2 5.8 51.0 41.9 6.6 48.5 Financial review continued 36 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements EPRA cost ratio 16 % For the year to 31 March Group
Group
JV
EPRA earnings 45.2 5.8 51.0 41.9 6.6 48.5 Revaluation of investment property 22.2 1.2 21.0 51.1 1.3 49.8 Fair value of derivatives 0.2 0.1 0.3 16.7 0.1 16.8 Debt and hedging early close out costs 3.5 0.1 3.6 0.1 0.4 0.5 Lossprot on disposal 4.5 1.0 5.5 2.4 0.3 2.1 Other items IFRS reported prot 59.4 3.6 63.0 78.2 4.5 82.7 Other items include amortisation of intangible assets The tax risk identication and management process is documented in the Risk Register and Internal Control Evaluation which is reviewed annually by the Audit Committee who reports its ndings to the Board.
The Board also considers risk at a high level at each quarterly meeting via a risk dashboard.
The Finance Director has overall responsibility for the execution of the tax strategy.
We pay business rates on void properties and stamp duty land tax.
In addition we collect VAT employment taxes and withholding tax on dividends and pay these over to HMRC.
We continue to monitor and comfortably comply with the REIT balance of business tests and distribute as a Property Income Distribution 90% of REIT relevant earnings to ensure our REIT status is maintained.
Our formal tax strategy has been published on the Groups website at site
The Directors have approved a fourth quarterly interim dividend of 2.1p per share payable on 10 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 9 June 2017 bringing the total amount paid and payable for 2017 to 7 .5p an increase of 0.25p compared with the previous year.
This year the Company has commenced a quarterly dividend payment cycle and has offered shareholders a scrip alternative to cash payments.
The rst two quarterly payments totalling 3.6p per share were paid as Property Income Distributions PIDs in the year.
The third quarterly dividend of 1.8p per share has since been paid as a PID.
The fourth quarterly dividend will comprise a PID of 1.3p per share and an ordinary dividend of 0.8p per share and a scrip alternative will be offered.
IFRS reported prot The Groups reported prot for the year was 63.0 million compared with 82.7 million last year.
The reduction was primarily due to lower property valuation gains realised offset by a favourable movement in derivatives compared with the previous year as reected in the table below.
Other movements in reported prot include the loss on sale of properties and associated debt and hedging break costs which together reduced prot by 9.1 million this year as opposed to increasing prot by 1.6 million last year.
Disposals of mature retail parks principally at Newry Kings Lynn and Christchurch generated losses over book value of 4.5 million.
The total prot over original cost on sales in the year was 7 .4 million or 3.8% 2016 37 .9 million or 23.0%.
Disposals are discussed in detail in the Investment review section of the Strategic report on pages 26 to 29.
In April 2016 we bought down 66.3 million of legacy out of the money interest rate swaps at a cost of 3.5 million as reected in the table as hedging close out costs.
The IFRS reported prot excluding the fair value of derivatives together with the dividend charge in the year of 43.7 million represents a total accounting return of 6.4%.
A full reconciliation between EPRA earnings and IFRS reported prot is given in note 8a to the nancial statements and is summarised in the table below.
Valuation gain Net rental income 37 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EPRA net assets increased in the year by 108.4 million or 1 1.8% to 1030.5 million.
On a per share basis and after reecting the impact of the equity placing net assets increased by 2.1p or 1.4% to 149.8p.
The chart highlights the principal movements in the year.
IFRS reported net assets increased by 108.7 million in the year to 1006.9 million.
A reconciliation between IFRS and EPRA net assets is detailed in note 8c to the nancial statements on page 128.
Balance sheet EPRA net assets for the Group and its share of joint ventures are as follows As at 31 March Group
Group
JV
Investment property 1373.4 160.4 1533.8 1346.2 174.7 1520.9 Other net liabilitiesassets 20.4 1.3 21.7 11.7 4.1 7.6 EPRA net assets 922.7 107.8 1030.5 802.1 120.0 922.1 EPRA net asset value m and pence per share
EPRA earnings
Equity placing
1030.5 Financial review continued Portfolio valuation The Groups portfolio including its share of joint venture properties grew to 1533.8 million over the year with investment in distribution assets including those under development increasing to 62% of the portfolio compared with 54% last year as reected in the table below and in Supplementary note ix on page 145.
As at 31 March 2017 Distribution 927.4 784.4 Retail 404.8 474.8 Leisure 63.2 69.0 Offices 70.0 80.2
1465.4 1408.4 Residential 41.1 55.9
Property value 1533.8 1520.9 Distribution 22.8 million Retail 4.5 million 2016 Distribution 40.0 million Retail 16.6 million Investment in development assets has fallen as developments at Ferndown Liverpool Leicester Wakeeld and Warrington completed on schedule in the year and have been reclassied as investment assets.
We have retained our remaining office at Marlow and have continued to sell down residential assets.
The movement in the investment portfolio is explained in the table below.
Portfolio value1 Opening valuation 2016 1520.9 Acquisitions 90.2 Developments 68.7 Capital expenditure on completed properties Disposals 198.2 Revaluation 21.0 Lease incentives 12.7 Closing valuation 2017 1533.8 Further detail on the split between Group and joint venture movements and the EPRA capital expenditure analysis can be found in Supplementary note vii on page 145 Despite the market uncertainty over the past year we have seen property values increase by 21.0 million and have delivered a total property return of 7 .4% compared to the IPD index of 4.6%.
Further detail can be found in the Asset management and development review on page 32.
The Groups commitment to development activity is demonstrated by the signicant spend of 68.7 million in the year which included 52.7 million on forward funded developments principally at Warrington Wakeeld and Crawley.
At the year end the Group had capital commitments of 57 .8 million as reported in note 9 to the nancial statements relating primarily to committed developments in progress at Dagenham Crawley Stoke and Ipswich.
Further detail can be found in the Asset management and development review on pages 30 to 33.
The Group acquired 16 distribution assets and two retail assets through its MIPP joint venture in the year as reported in the Investment review on pages 26 to 29.
It has continued to dispose of mature retail assets that have delivered their business plans and recycle capital into end to end distribution units which offer attractive yields strong rental growth prospects and asset management opportunities.
The disposal of 13 commercial and 21 residential assets in the year generated proceeds of 201.9 million and reduced the carrying value of property by 198.2 million.
Included within the trade and other receivables balance of 18.8 million on the Group balance sheet is 14.3 million due on completion of the sale of Alban Retail Park Bedford.
Other movements include loss on sales 5.5 million debthedging break costs 3.6 million sharebased awards 3.6 million offset by scrip shares issued 2.2 million 38 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
The performance indicators used to monitor the Groups debt and liquidity position are shown in the table below.
As at 31 March 2017 Gross debt 527.7 637.9 Cash 46.1 46.7 Net debt 481.6 591.2 Loan to value 30% 38% Cost of debt 3.5% 3.5% Undrawn facilities 299.7 69.9 Average debt maturity years years
87% 84% LTV includes 14.3 million of deferred consideration receivable on sales 2016 10.2 million Cost of debt is based on gross debt and including amortised costs but excluding commitment fees Based on the notional amount of existing and forward starting hedges and total debt facilities The Group and joint venture split is shown in Supplementary note iii on page 143.
In September 2016 the Group entered into a private placement at a blended coupon of 2.7% and a weighted average maturity of 8.3 years.
The proceeds were used to repay existing unsecured debt which remained available to draw in full.
In March 2017  the group completed a successful equity placing of 62.8 million ordinary shares raising gross proceeds of 95.5 million.
It used the proceeds in part to further repay its existing unsecured facility increasing available undrawn facilities to 299.7 million at the year end.
The Groups share of joint venture gross debt has fallen by 8.4 million or 13.4% since last year as a result of sales and consequent debt repayments.
The Moore House debt facility was repaid in full in December 2016.
The Groups key nancial ratios remain strong with loan to value falling to 30% and the average cost of debt remaining stable at 3.5%.
We intend to keep LTV below 40% to provide sufficient exibility to take advantage of opportunities and execute transactions whilst maintaining sufficient headroom under our gearing covenants should property values decline.
The Groups policy is to substantially derisk the impact of movements in interest rates by entering into hedging arrangements.
Independent advice is given by J C Rathbone Associates.
At 31 March 2017  87% of our exposure to interest rate uctuations was hedged by way of current and forward starting swaps and caps assuming existing debt facilities are fully drawn 2016 84%.
We continue to monitor our hedging prole in light of forecast interest rate movements.
The Group has comfortably complied throughout the year with the nancial covenants contained in its debt funding arrangements and has substantial levels of headroom.
Covenant compliance is regularly stress tested for changes in capital values and income.
The Groups unsecured facility and private placement loan notes contain gearing and interest cover nancial covenants.
At 31 March 2017  the Groups gearing ratio as dened within these funding arrangements was 43% compared with the maximum limit of 125% and interest cover ratio was 4.5 times compared with the minimum level of 1.5 times.
Cash ow During the year the Groups cash balances increased by 0.3 million as reected in the table below.
As at 31 March 2017 Cash ows from operating activities Cash ows from investing activities Cash ows from nancing activities Net increase decrease in cash and cash equivalents Cash ows from operating activities have increased by 19.9 million compared to last year as a result of higher net rental income and changes to net working capital requirements.
Cash ows from investing activities reect property acquisitions including those classied as forward funded developments of 147 .3 million and capital expenditure of 25.9 million offset by net proceeds from disposals of 165.0 million and distributions from joint ventures of 16.1 million.
Net repayment of bank facilities in the year of 101.8 million and cash dividends paid of 43.7 million was offset in part by net proceeds received from the equity placing of 92.8 million.
Further detail is provided in the Group Cash Flow Statement on page 120.
Net debt Available facilities Portfolio value 39 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risk management As an income focused REIT our strategic priorities continue to be the delivery of sustainable progressive earnings and long term capital growth.
Every business faces inherent risk and uncertainty.
Whilst risk cannot be completely eliminated we recognise that effective risk management reduces the negative impact of risk on our business and improves our prospects for achieving our strategic objectives.
Our risk management process The Board operates a culture of embedding risk consideration into its decision making processes.
It recognises its responsibility to undertake a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company and the extent to which it is willing to accept some level of risk in achieving its strategy.
Risk appetite is low where it prejudices strategic objectives and controls are in place to minimise the level of residual risk.
The Board considers risk at a high level at each meeting via a risk dashboard.
The dashboard monitors material issues so that key risks can be managed appropriately and new risks identied early enabling action to be taken to remove or reduce the risk and any potential negative impact.
The Board also considers the long term viability of the Company in the context of the principal risks it faces and its Viability statement is prepared in accordance with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The responsibility for detailed assurance on the risk management process has been delegated by the Board to the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee carries out a detailed review of the risk register and internal controls at least once a year to consider the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control processes and reports its ndings to the Board.
The risk register was last presented to and considered by the Audit Committee in March 2017 .
The Executive Committee is responsible for the identication of risk and the design implementation and maintenance of the systems of internal controls assisted by senior management.
Appropriate mitigation plans are developed based on an assessment of the impact and likelihood of a risk occurring.
Members of the Executive Committee are closely involved in day to day matters and the Company has a relatively low number of personnel all operating from one office location.
This and the at management structure enable risks to be quickly identied so appropriate responses can be put in place.
The risk register rates the signicance and probability of each risk identied by management as having either a high medium or low impact.
Greater weighting is applied the higher the signicance and probability of a risk.
These weightings are then mathematically combined to produce an overall gross risk rating which is colour coded using a traffic light system.
Specic risk management safeguards for each risk are identied detailed and rated as strong medium or weak with greater weighting applied the stronger the safeguard.
Risk management framework
Reporting to Board Ongoing monitoring Mitigation action plan Risk identication Assessment and quantication
Audit
Committee
Executive
Committee
Senior Managers The gross risk rating and strength of safeguards against that risk are then combined to produce a resultant overall net risk.
Consideration is given to the implementation of further action to reduce risk where it is considered necessary.
Finally each risk is allocated an owner and details of how the safeguards are evidenced is noted.
The Board has limited control over certain external factors such as the heightened level of uncertainty associated with major political events such as the EU Referendum and the triggering of Article 50 the UK election outcome and the cyclical nature of the property market.
The Boards strategy over the last few years has however been to reshape its UK only portfolio into more resilient asset classes closely aligned to rapidly changing consumer shopping habits.
40 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The principal risks and uncertainties affecting the Company are those risks identied as having the potential to cause material harm to the business and its ability to execute the strategic objectives or exceed the Boards risk appetite.
The risks identied and reported on pages 42 to 47 and in the matrix opposite are categorised in a manner consistent with the Boards risk dashboard which it considers at each meeting.
The rationale for perceived movements in the risks identied are contained within the commentary for each risk category.
Viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the prospects of the Group and future viability over a three year period being longer than the 12 months required by the Going Concern provision.
The Board conducted this review taking account of the Groups long term strategy principal risks and risk appetite current position asset performance and future plans.
This period was chosen for the following reasons The Groups nancial business plan and detailed budgets cover a rolling three year period.
The business plan includes budgeted prot and cash ows and also considers capital commitments dividend cover loan to value loan covenants and REIT compliance metrics.
These are updated and reviewed at least quarterly against actual performance It reects the short cycle nature of the Groups developments and asset management initiatives.
Six forward funded developments completed in the year at Ferndown Leicester Liverpool Wakeeld Warrington and
All of these developments were completed within one year.
The other committed developments in progress at the end of the year including those at Crawley Stoke and Dagenham are expected to complete next year The average length of asset management initiatives involving signicant reconguration of retail parks is under one year The Groups weighted average debt maturity at 31 March 201 7 was 5.2 years Three years is considered to be the optimum balance between long term property investment and the inability to accurately forecast ahead given the cyclical nature of property investment The Groups business model consists of a base case scenario which only includes deals under offer and also an assumed case which factors in reinvestment.
A sensitivity analysis was carried out which involved exing a number of key assumptions to consider the impact of changes to the Groups principal risks affecting the viability of the business being Changes to macroeconomic conditions impacting rental income levels and property values Changes in the retail environment impacting occupancy levels and lettings Changes in the availability of funds impacting committed expenditure and investment transactions The business model was stress tested to validate its resilience to property valuation and rental income decline as well as increases in future libor and swap rates.
It assessed the impact of these movements on future performance liquidity and solvency and the ability to nance forecast transactions and committed capital expenditure and renance maturing debt.
It took into account the exibility of capital expenditure and disposal plans and hedging in place.
In addition further stress testing assessed the limits at which key nancial covenants and ratios would be breached or deemed unacceptable.
Property values would need to fall by approximately 30% to reach the loan to value covenant threshold under the existing debt facilities.
The Directors have also taken into account the strong nancial position at 31 March 201 7  signicant cash and available facilities low LTV and the Groups ability to raise new nance.
Based on the results of their review the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the three year period of their assessment.
Risks which the Board considers have increased since last year 2  Economic and political outlook 8  Valuation risk Risks which the Board considers have remained broadly unchanged since last year 1  Strategy 3  Human resources 4  Systems processes and nancial management 5  Regulatory and tax framework 6  Investment risk 9  Transaction and tenant risk Risks which the Board considers have reduced since last year 7  Development risk 10  Capital and nance risk Perceived likelihood of occurrence after mitigation Rare Low Medium High Potential impact
Low Medium High Extreme LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate risks Risk impact appetite How it is managed Commentary 1 Strategy That the Companys strategy is unclear or unrealistic for the current stage of the property cycle and the economic climate
Suboptimal returns for shareholders.
A potential inability to take advantage of opportunities and effectively manage threats.
The Company may not be able to ensure that the people resources and systems are in place to ensure ongoing success.
Appetite
The Board views this as fundamental to the business and the Companys reputation.
The Board review and update strategy and objectives regularly adapting to changes in economic conditions and opportunities as they arise.
The Executive Directors are closely involved in day to day management and the Company operates from one office location with a relatively at organisational structure making it easier to identify market changes.
Management have an entrepreneurial approach and extensive experience in real estate.
Research is commissioned into consumer shopping patterns and occupational markets to assist strategic decision making.
Financial forecasts are updated in light of strategic changes and reported to the Board and Executive Committee regularly.
The Group has a rolling three year forecast.
Management has a substantial investment in the Company with interests aligned with external shareholders.
The Companys staffing plan is focused on experience and expertise necessary to deliver its strategy.
The Company has transitioned its portfolio so that 62% is now in the distribution sector.
This and convenience retail are strong performing sectors with real prospects for rental and capital growth due to a supply demand imbalance driven by structural changes in consumer shopping habits.
Completed developments of 1.1 million sq ft of space in the year added rent of 7 .9 million per annum.
Development in progress of 0.7 million sq ft is expected to add a further 4.9 million of rental income.
Like for like income growth was 4.6% over 69 lettings and rent reviews.
These strong operational metrics supported EPRA earnings of 8.2p per share an increase of 5.1% on the prior year.
Executive Directors hold 10.0 million shares between them and have unvested interests over a further 6.1 million shares and comfortably meet the Companys increased shareholding guidelines as shown on page 106.
No signicant change from 2016 Investment review see page 26 Asset management and development review see page 30
Financial review
Governance see page 57 42 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Risk impact appetite How it is managed Commentary 2 Economic and political outlook A downturn or specic sector turbulence may result from economic and political factors
Poorer than expected performance asset values may fall tenant demand and asset liquidity may reduce.
Debt markets may be impacted.
Appetite
Market conditions are outside of the Companys control.
Research is commissioned into economic matters and market volatility is monitored.
The Company only invests in the UK and has little exposure to the London market.
A signicant proportion of the Companys portfolio is in a resilient asset class with a supplydemand imbalance.
The weighted average unexpired lease term is high reducing reletting risk.
The vacancy rate is low due to strict investment and development criteria.
The tenant base is diversied.
Acquisition due diligence considers tenant covenant strength.
Developments and asset management initiatives are usually undertaken on a prelet basis or where a researched supplydemand imbalance exists.
The Company has medium term exible funding with signicant headroom in covenant levels and no reliance on sales.
The Company has a weighted average unexpired lease term of 12.8 years and an EPRA vacancy rate of 0.4%.
This continues to be amongst the highest and lowest respectively in the industry.
Distribution assets now represent 62% of the portfolio.
Logistics space is still heavily under supplied.
52.7 million of expenditure in the year related to forward funded and prelet opportunities.
Successful equity placing in March increased available facilities for further investment to 299.7 million.
The Board is condent that economic and political risk is mitigated through the makeup of the portfolio with its strong focus on distribution and convenience retail.
The strong portfolio metrics and nancial returns provide protection in the form of a sustainable long term income return to investors.
This risk has increased since the last year end.
Heightened economic and political uncertainty exists from major events such as the triggering of Article 50 and the upcoming UK election Investment review see page 26 Asset management and development review see page 30 3 Human resources An inability to attract motivate and retain high calibre staff
That the Company doesnt have staff with the skills and experience to deliver its business plan.
Appetite
The Board views it as vitally important that the Company has the appropriate level of leadership expertise and experience to deliver its objectives and adapt to change.
The Company maintains an organisational structure with clear responsibilities and reporting lines.
The remuneration structure is aligned to long term performance targets for the business with long term share based incentive arrangements in place.
Senior management shareholdings in the Company are signicant.
Annual appraisals identify training requirements and assess performance.
Specialist agencies are contracted where appropriate if there are perceived short term skills shortfalls.
The Chairmans contract was extended to 31 March 2018.
Further consideration will be given to the position of Chairman during the course of the current year.
The Executive Directors have a signicant shareholding and unvested share awards in the Company to incentivise performance and retention providing stability in the management structure of the business.
Senior managers are incentivised in the same way as reected in the table on page 96.
No signicant change from 2016 Directors Remuneration Policy see page 88 43 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risk impact appetite How it is managed Commentary 4 Systems processes and nancial management There are weak controls for safeguarding assets and supporting strategy
Inadequate asset security.
Potentially suboptimal returns and decisions made on inaccurate information.
Appetite
Appetite for such risk is low and management continually strives to monitor and improve processes.
The Company has a strong control culture.
Systems security is in place supported by a specialist advisor.
Business continuity plans are up to date with adequate back up which is tested.
Procedures are in place to ensure accuracy of the property database and data capture.
Assets are safeguarded with appropriate levels of insurance.
Appropriate segregation of duties and controls over nancial systems are in place.
Financial information is provided to management on a timely basis for approval and decision making purposes.
Costs are controlled with procedures to ensure that expenditure is valid properly authorised and monitored.
An extension of the property database was implemented in the year to improve administrative and reporting procedures.
The risk posed by cyber attacks continues to grow as attacker capabilities become increasingly sophisticated and open to an ever widening and global organised crime network.
The Board however considers that the delivery of the Companys strategy is not dependent on the operation of its technology.
Strategic risk therefore is not materially increased as a result of a cyber attack.
IT security is an integral part of the Companys risk management and control processes and the Audit Committee has considered the safeguards in place.
There is a rolling programme in place for IT improvements and updates to ensure security systems and equipment remains t for purpose.
No signicant change from 2016 Audit Committee report see page 75 5 Regulatory and tax framework Non compliance with legal or regulatory obligations
Fines penalties sanctions and reputational damage which may impact investor demand in the Company.
Potential loss of REIT status.
Increased costs.
Impact
Appetite
The Board has no appetite where non compliance risks injury or damage to staff tenants assets shareholders and reputation.
There is a clear focus on obligations under the Companys responsible business strategy and regulatory inuences on the business such as Health and Safety environmental employment anticorruption related legislation and the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Responsibility for specic obligations is allocated to individuals and overseen by the Executive Committee.
External specialists provide advice and support.
Staff training is provided.
The Company receives external specialist tax advice.
Compliance with REIT legislation is monitored on an ongoing basis for decision making purposes and reported.
The impact of legislative changes is considered in strategic terms.
The Company may be affected in the future by proposed tax changes to loss relief should there be any future prots which are not covered by its REIT exemption.
These however are unlikely to be material.
Changes relating to taxation of residential property particularly the rate of SDLT has in addition to economic factors led to a slowdown in the London residential market to which the Company still has some exposure through its 40% joint venture interest in Moore House.
The joint venture has continued to sell down ats with 21 being sold in the year.
No signicant change from 2016
Financial review
Corporate risks continued 44 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Risk impact appetite How it is managed Commentary 6 Investment risk Investment opportunities cannot be sourced at attractive prices
Ability to implement strategy and deploy capital into value and earnings accretive investments at risk.
Appetite
This risk is largely affected by matters outside of the Boards control but is minimised by having the right people and funding in place to take advantage of opportunities as they arise.
Managements extensive experience and their strong network of connections provide insight into the property market and opportunities.
Managements relationship with retailers and its ability to forward fund assets is an important factor in generating deal ow given the difficulty in nding value in income generating assets due to yield compression in the market.
The Company acquired 1 16.2 million of property with a number of signicant off market transactions.
The Company recycled capital out of mature and non core retail leisure and residential assets with disposals totalling 147 .5 million in the year.
No signicant change from 2016 Investment review see page 26 7 Development risk Excessive capital is allocated to activities with development risk.
Developments fail to deliver expected returns due to inconsistent timing with the economic cycle adverse letting conditions increased costs planning or construction delays
Poorer than expected performance.
Appetite
The Board is willing to take some speculative development and planning risk if it represents a relatively small proportion of the total portfolio and is supported by robust research in respect of demand and a high likelihood of planning approval.
The Company only considers short cycle and relatively uncomplicated development although management have signicant experience of more complex development.
Exposure to development and phasing of projects is regularly considered.
The overall level of exposure to development is low as a percentage of the total portfolio.
Standardised appraisals and cost budgets are prepared for developments with regular monitoring of expenditure against budget to highlight potential overruns at an early stage.
External project managers appointed.
Procurement processes include tendering and the use of highly regarded rms with track records of delivery to minimise uncertainty over costs.
Developments are only undertaken in areas of high occupier demand.
Signicant prelets are secured where possible before commencement to derisk projects.
Where possible development sites are acquired with planning approval in place.
The 357 000 sq ft speculative development at Warrington was let within ve weeks of completion to Amazon.
Development only represents 1.8% of the portfolio at the year end.
Ten developments representing 1.1 million sq ft of space were delivered in the year on time and budget.
Committed development at the year end of 0.7 million sq ft was over 50% prelet.
This risk has reduced from 2016 Asset management and development review see page 30 Property risks 45 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Property risks continued Risk impact appetite How it is managed Commentary 8 Valuation risk Assets may devalue
Pressure on NAV growth and potentially loan covenants.
Appetite
This is an inherent risk in the industry.
There is no certainty that property values will be realised.
As reported the Boards strategy has been to transition the portfolio into resilient asset classes.
The property cycle is continually monitored with investment and divestment decisions made strategically in anticipation of changing conditions.
Property portfolio performance is regularly reviewed and benchmarked on an asset by asset basis.
Focus is on income security.
Lettings to high quality tenants within a diversied portfolio of well located assets and a high weighted average unexpired lease term reduces the risk of negative movements in a downturn.
Valuations should continue to be supported by a supplydemand imbalance in the Companys preferred sector.
The valuation decline at the Interim stage following the outcome of the EU Referendum had been recouped by the year end with an overall gain in the year of 21.0 million.
Delivery of developments on time and budget supported valuation assumptions.
The top ten tenants contribute 51.8% of contracted commercial rental income.
Increased risk due to greater economic uncertainty Asset management and development review see page 30 9 Transaction and tenant risk Property purchases are inconsistent with strategy.
Inadequate due diligence is undertaken.
Lettings are made to inappropriate tenants
Pressure exerted on NAV earnings and potentially loan covenants.
Appetite
The Boards appetite for risk arising out of poor due diligence processes on acquisitions disposals and lettings is low.
Acquisitions are thoroughly evaluated through a detailed nancial legal and operational appraisal prior to Board approval.
Asset management initiatives undergo costbenet analysis before implementation.
External advisors ensure appropriate pricing of lease transactions and assist acquisition due diligence.
Tenant covenant strength and concentration are assessed for all acquisitions and leasing transactions.
An experienced property management team work closely with tenants and consider action for slow payers.
Rent collection is closely monitored and reported to identify potential issues.
The Group has a diverse tenant base and limited exposure to individual occupiers in bespoke properties.
The Company has a very low level of tenant default and high occupancy levels.
The EPRA vacancy rate at the year end was 0.4%.
There were no signicant trade debtors considered at risk at the year end.
The tenant base has been further diversied during the year with the covenant strength of the top ten tenants increasing.
The Board considers that the occupational market is strong in the distribution and convenience retail sectors.
No signicant change from 2016 46 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Financing risks Risk impact appetite How it is managed Commentary 10 Capital and nance risk The Company has insufficient funds and credit available to it
Implementation of strategy is at risk.
Appetite
The Board has no appetite for imprudently low levels of available headroom in its reserves or credit lines.
It accepts a low degree of market standard inexibility in return for the availability of credit.
Assets which have achieved target returns and strategic asset plans are considered for sale.
Cash ow forecasts are monitored closely to ensure sufficient funds are available to take advantage of investment opportunities and meet nancial commitments.
Relationships with a diversied range of lenders are nurtured and loan facilities regularly reviewed.
The availability of debt and the terms on which it is available is considered as part of the strategy and analysis for each acquisition and development.
Loan facilities incorporate covenant headroom appropriate cure provisions and sufficient exibility to implement asset management initiatives.
Headroom is actively monitored and incorporated into forecasts.
Non nancial covenants are also closely monitored.
Gearing levels are carefully considered and stress tested before entering into new arrangements.
A modest level of gearing is maintained overall.
The impact of disposals on secured loan facilities covering multiple assets is considered as part of the decision making process.
Interest rate derivatives are used to x or cap exposure to rising rates.
Hedging recommendations are received from a specialist advisor.
The Company has joint ventures with well capitalised partners.
Joint venture partners are chosen with care to ensure that strategies are not misaligned which may impact asset value and liquidity.
A private placement was entered into in September 2016 at a blended rate of 2.7% and a weighted average maturity of 8.3 years diversifying the Companys lending partners.
An oversubscribed placing of 95.5 million completed in March 2017 to predominantly fund distribution acquisitions and a distribution development pipeline.
Headroom on the Companys 443.8 million unsecured revolving credit facility has been increased as a result of the private placement placing and sales providing greater operational exibility.
76% of the facility has been extended for a further year to April 2022.
Disposals of 201.9 million and acquisitions of 1 16.2 million in the year demonstrate our ability to recycle capital.
At 31 March 2017  the Group had hedging in place covering 87% of total available debt facilities including joint venture arrangements.
The Company has complied with and has signicant headroom in all nancial covenants.
The Companys diversied and predominantly unsecured lending base and its derivatives insulate it from credit risks associated with one off shocks from any single asset.
Risk reduced since 2016
Financial review
47 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our approach to Responsible Business Responsible Business is an important priority for LondonMetric and we continue to work hard to fully integrate Responsible Business policies and procedures across our core business activities.
Our approach to Responsible Business Our Responsible Business Policy was rst published in 2014 following a detailed review of the sustainability risks and opportunities which are most material to our business.
Our Responsible Business Strategy sets out our sustainability priorities across four core business activities i our business operations ii our property investments iii property development iv asset management It is supported by the foundations of good risk management.
Key targets are set for each of our sustainability priority areas on an annual basis.
The delivery of these targets is overseen by our Working Group and progress is monitored on a quarterly basis through our Responsible Business meetings attended by key representatives from across the business.
We also receive support from our external real estate sustainability advisor.
In 2017  we approved our Working Group terms of reference.
Responsible Business training is carried out across relevant employees annually to make sure we effectively deliver on our targets and continue to optimise our Responsible Business approach.
We actively engage with stakeholders investors joint venture partners occupiers communities and local authorities on Responsible Business themes and relevant materials are included in investor roadshows.
Importance of Responsible Business Critical to managing sustainability risks Important in generating sustainable value from our portfolio and enhancing protability Helps us to mitigate any potential long term risks posed by less resource efficient assets Enables us to successfully and sustainably deliver on our developments Promotes excellent stakeholder relationships and assists them in delivering on their own responsible business objectives Responsible Investment Asset Management and Development We have made good progress towards achieving our 20162018 targets and this is allowing us to build further on our sustainability achievements Martin McGann Finance Director For the full Responsible Business 2017 report see site
Development
Futureproong our pipeline
Asset Management Responding to occupier needs
Investment
Generating sustainable value Responsible Business Managing stakeholder relationships and risk well 48 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Key achievements in the year Our Responsible Business activities are enabling us to build on our signicant achievements from previous years.
The successful rolling out of our Responsible Business Strategy has resulted in the achievement of a GRESB Green Star award and we maintained our EPRA sustainability BPR Gold award.
Last year we set 33 new two year targets and have made good progress towards achieving these.
82% targets achieved ongoing or in progress at year end 100% See page 50 See page 53 See page 52 See page 53 See page 53 See page 53 See page 52 See page 51 See the full Responsible Business 2017 Report Awarded GRESB Green Star and maintained EPRA sBPR Gold award Car park lighting LED replacement programme completed Collection of tenant energy usage and monitoring performance on developments Monitoring Responsible Procurement and development Carbon footprint reduced by 17% Targets 201618 BREEAM Very Good certication on completed developments Solar PVs installed Assets rated E or above for MEES purposes 1 7% on a like for like basis 1.0m sq ft 1.
1MW Excludes a recently refurbished convenience asset where a rating is expected shortly 49 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Continued recognition of our focus on sustainability The signicant improvement in our sustainability performance and practices made over recent years has been rewarded through our EPRA sBPR Gold award for environmental performance reporting as well as the achievement of a Green Star award from GRESB for the rst time proving that two leading industry bodies recognise the soundness of our Responsible Business approach.
Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark 2016 66% 2015 50% 2014 34% Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark GRESB Achieved 66% score in 2016 survey and achieved green star status Up from 34% in 2014 and 50% in 2015 In 2016 we achieved improvements in seven out of eight GRESB segments with our biggest improvements in Risk and Opportunities and Building Certication where our energy efficiency activities and better environmental ratings of our assets helped in particular Further actions undertaken to maintain status in the 2017 survey for stakeholder engagement and new constructionmajor renovations criteria EPRA Sustainability Best Practice Recommendations sBPR Framework for reporting standardised environmental data For rst time in 2015 we reported in a format required by the EPRA sBPR and received special commendation for improvement made In 2016 we were one of only ten listed UK companies to receive a Gold award
Assessment for inclusion in the FTSE4Good Index In 2016 our most recent assessment we scored 3.0 out of 5.0 Signicant improvement on the 2015 score of 1.4 Exceeded target score of greater than 2.0 Narrowly missed inclusion in index and working to make further improvements to achieve inclusion in index LondonMetric Property Peer group average GRESB average Performance in 2016 GRESB Survey % Management and policy Implementation and measurement 50 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The marketbased method uses an emissions factor that is specic to the electricity which has been purchased or where not available a national residualmix factor is applied.
Marketbased emissions factors are taken from the latest Association of Issuing Bodies European Residual Mixes .
The total carbon footprint and emissions intensities have been calculated using locationbased Scope 2 emissions.
Data for the year to 31 March 2016 has been restated including associated intensity metrics as additional energy consumption data has been obtained since the previous report was published.
Scope 1 data does not include refrigerant emissions as these have been determined to not be material represent 2% of total emissions owned eet does not apply.
Due to issues accessing energy data we have also excluded the emissions for the vacant units of our residential asset Moore House.
Last year this asset accounted for just 2% of total emissions.
Environmental performance highlights In 201 5 we established a baseline and benchmarks for measurement of the environmental performance of our portfolio.
Since then we have signicantly reduced our energy consumption and GHG emissions enabling us to save over 3 1 7 000 in costs.
For full environmental performance reporting see the Responsible Business 2017 Report site Mandatory GHG emissions reporting 201617 201516 Direct greenhouse gas emissions in tonnes of CO 2e combustion of fuel and operation facilities Scope 1 275 Indirect greenhouse gas emissions in tonnes of CO 2e purchased electricity heat steam and cooling Scope 2  locationbased 1719 Scope 2  marketbased 1629 Total carbon footprint in tonnes of CO 2e Total scope 1 and 2 1995 Scope 1 and 2 intensity tonnes of CO 2e per m net income after administration costs Scope 1 and 2 intensity 32 Greenhouse gas GHG emissions 2 1 50 tCO Down 18% on absolute basis On a like for like basis GHG emissions were down by 17% as a result of both the reduction in energy consumption and the annual reduction to UK emissions factors.
We have also reduced our Carbon Reduction Commitment CRC liabilities from 43382 to 38748 since last year.
Energy consumption 651 1 MWh Down 6% on absolute basis We have also reduced our total like for like energy consumption electricity and natural gas by 6% compared to 201516.
A key initiative which helped us to achieve this was upgrading car park lighting across a number of our retail park assets.
Excluding Moore House Data qualifying notes We have reported on all of the emission sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013.
We have used the main requirements of ISO14064 Part 1 and the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard Revised Edition for our methodology using energy consumption data from our owned and occupied properties.
We have chosen to report greenhouse gas emissions under our operational control.
These sources fall within our consolidated nancial statements.
We do not have responsibility for any emissions sources that are not included in our consolidated nancial statements.
The guidance on the reporting of Scope 2 GHG emissions under the Greenhouse Gas Protocol was updated in 2015 and we are now required to report two different values to reect the locationbased and marketbased emissions resulting from purchased electricity.
The locationbased method uses an average emission factor for the entire national grid on which electricity consumption occurs.
Locationbased emissions factors are taken from the latest UK Government DEFRA conversion factors for company reporting .
51 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Responsible development Managing risks and futureproong our assets Development is a signicant activity of ours.
It is therefore important that we carry out our development work responsibly and give proper consideration to environmental sustainable and social matters.
Our Responsible Procurement Policy and Development Requirements Checklist have expanded our sustainability efforts.
This year we have made great progress in monitoring their implementation and have further enhanced these requirements for the coming year.
Tom Pinder Responsible Business BREEAM Very Good or Excellent 1.0m sq ft across 5 assets 0.6m sq ft expected on assets under construction Environmental standards The majority of our developments are designed to meet BREEAM Very Good as the minimum certication standard.
In the year we achieved ve BREEAM Very Good certications.
In addition we continued to integrate a range of sustainable features including solar PV into our portfolio.
Active supply chain management Responsible Procurement Policy Supply chains remain under a high level of scrutiny.
In 2015 we developed a procurement policy to ensure that our supply chain and our procurement practices meet good practice standards and deliver social and environmental benets.
Responsible Development Requirements Checklist All of our contractors are obliged to adhere to our development checklist which sets minimum requirements for working on our development projects and includes Requirements for on site Health and Safety management Compliance with the Considerate Constructors Scheme Environmental impact monitoring Management and reporting of progress against the checklist Promoting employment opportunities for local people and fair remuneration UKs Modern Slavery Act The UKs Modern Slavery Act was introduced in 2015 and our development checklist stipulates requirements for upholding human and labour rights within supply chains see page 56.
Monitoring our contractors Having implemented our development checklist our focus is on ensuring that contractors meet our requirements.
The monitoring of compliance has helped us to identify areas of improvement with regards to the environmental impact of our construction activities.
Benets for local communities Our developments typically involve local contractors and suppliers.
Once developments are complete and operational our tenants employ locallybased staff for their retail stores or distribution warehouses.
Our developments therefore generate signicant employment and economic benet to the local area.
We engage extensively with the local community in particular councils and local organisations to ensure that proper consideration is given to the local area its needs and opportunities for local jobs and apprenticeships.
By way of examples see page 55.
Future plans We will continue to focus on ensuring that our Responsible Development Requirements are effectively implemented and our developments continue to include environmental sustainability aspects.
We will also continue to support local job creation and the use of local suppliers to ensure that economic benets accrue to local communities.
Responsible development in action see page 33 Construction data 93% of waste diverted from landll
Reportable accidents or incidents 52 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Responsible asset management We work in partnership with occupiers to undertake mutually benecial asset management opportunities and mitigate any material risks.
In addition to progressing on achievements to date and continuing to engage with our tenants we will For the rst time undertake an investor survey to seek their views on our sustainability performance Further to our comprehensive independent tenant survey in 2015 undertake a follow on tenant survey For the full Responsible Business 2017 report see site We continue to actively maintain compliance and manage risks associated with key regulatory drivers EPCs As part of our Responsible Investing we carefully assess the environmental risks of assets prior to purchase.
This year we have again reported that for the purposes of MEES 100% of our assets are rated E or above.
Through our asset management we are improving the rating of our assets.
CRC We continue to meet our obligations under the CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme.
ESOS Audits were carried out across our portfolio in 201516 in accordance with the Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme and we continue to satisfy our obligations under this scheme.
Our activities continue to drive energy use reductions cost savings and greener energy sourcing Lighting External car park lighting accounts for a meaningful part of our energy usage and carbon footprint.
To date we have completed an LED lighting upgrade across four retail parks.
The average expected reduction in energy requirements is 65%.
Green Tariff At our office in Marlow we have agreed to enter into a low carbon electricity supply with our incumbent supplier.
Marlow accounts for 30% of our energy consumption and this contract will deliver not only 100% renewably sourced energy but also a 3% reduction in the tariff.
Recharge pods We are trialling the installation of electric car recharge pods on two retail parks.
Solar PVs As a result of ongoing engagement with our tenants and a number of feasibility studies we have installed 700 KWs of solar PV capacity across our assets over the last two nancial years.
Following signicant engagement with Dixons Carphone a further 1000 KW has been installed recently at our distribution centre in Newark.
We continue to look at further solar installations particularly on our current and recently completed developments.
Tenant data We have increased the scope of our environmental data collection from tenants and now collect data on 32% of our portfolio.
Energy audits We have started to undertake full energy audits at several of our distribution centres and are progressing discussions with one tenant on an internal lighting replacement programme.
Regulatory compliance Energy and cost savings Tenant engagement External car park lighting replacement programme at North Shields completed in August 2016.
Future plans 1000 KW solar PV installation at our distribution centre in Newark let to Dixons Carphone.
53 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 As part of our asset management activities we focus on Ensuring that we remain compliant with key environmental regulation Monitoring and targeting improvements in the environmental performance of our assets Active engagement with our tenants including on matters relating to sustainability Our communities and charitable commitments We recognise the importance of supporting our local communities.
Our activities bring signicant benets to local areas and we see engagement with all stakeholders as crucial to maximising these benets.
Our responsibilities also extend to supporting local causes and encouraging our employees to be community minded.
Beneting local communities through our activities We work in close partnership with our occupiers to deliver real estate that helps to full modern shopping requirements.
These activities benet local communities in a number of ways primarily through Investment and construction jobs in the local area through our asset management and development activities the t out work of our retailers also brings local job creation Creation of desirable shopping destinations which provide amenities diverse retail offerings and convenient shopping locations that will remain vibrant for the long term Long term commitment of our retailers and occupiers who typically sign 1015 year leases bringing long term employment to the local area At our newly developed distribution warehouse in Warrington for example Amazon are expected to employ 1200 people once fully operational.
Engaging with local communities In undertaking our activities we understand the importance of engaging with local stakeholders including planning authorities local councils and highways local residence and business employment organisation and charities.
On each of our assets through our procurement and development policies we require that our suppliers and contractors source locally and have proper regard for local communities.
We encourage our occupiers to also employ locally.
During the year we continued our support of community causes local to our assets including Sponsorship of Coventrys participation at the International Childrens Games Contributing towards improving sports facilities in Islip Northamptonshire Committing to ongoing support of the community events in Kirkstall Leeds Community and charity minded company Following the formation of a Charity and Communities Working Group in 2016 this year we published a Community Policy which is available on our website.
Future plans As well as continuing our local community engagement we will continue to Target giving to community causes local to our assets Support LandAid events and employeeled charity events Match employee charity giving Encourage pro bono work and employee volunteering 23 new leases signed with our occupiers that will bring long term local employment across 12 locations 35695 total charitable contributions in the year Community Policy published 54 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Community consultation at Launceston We fully prelet a former BandQ store redevelopment where we had previously accepted an early surrender.
As part of our Responsible Business strategy we undertook a public consultation and our plans received strong support from the community.
Apprenticeship training at Stoke As part of our 277 000 sq ft distribution development demolition works were undertaken including asbestos removal by AR Demolition.
Given the extent of the project AR Demolition carried out invaluable apprenticeship training at the site.
Mudathon Event The LondonMetric team participated in a Paragon Mudathon event to raise money for Landaid.
LondonMetric Cycle Ride LondonMetric organised a 100 km charity cycle event with participants including many of its occupiers.
The event after matching by the Company raised 3560.
All proceeds went to Prostate Cancer UK.
Ongoing community communication at Stoke Through our contractor Winvic monthly newsletters are distributed locally to inform the local community of progress and update on planned works.
All our contractors adhere to the Considerate Constructors Scheme.
Travel Plan at our 120000 sq ft Retail Park in Leeds At our recent retail development we published a travel plan to encourage the use of noncar journeys.
In conjunction with the council the plan was widely distributed locally and we are monitoring its impact.
Community and charity  in action 55 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our people human rights and governance We support our employees internally by providing a healthy and productive workplace and uphold high standards of corporate governance.
Our people LondonMetric has 38 employees including Directors.
Over the four years since merger our voluntary staff turnover rate has been low at 6%.
Staff development and wellbeing is highly important to us we aim to attract retain and motivate high performing individuals.
We
Actively encourage training with over 480 hours of training recorded by employees in the year Conduct annual reviews where performance is evaluated objectives and training requirements are set and employee feedback is discussed Promote healthy living encourage volunteering and supporting of charitable causes.
We continue to promote diversity across a range of criteria including skills knowledge experience gender age and ethnicity.
58% of employees are male and 42% are female.
Governance
As further set out in this Report the Board is committed to upholding the high standards of corporate governance that underpin the successful management of the business and its success.
Recently we have formalised three additional Responsible Business policies Health and safety The policy aims to provide and maintain safe and healthy working conditions for all employees providing appropriate equipment operational processes and safe systems of work to cover all of our activities.
For more details see the full Responsible Business 2017 Report Compliance and anti corruption Details how LondonMetric manages investigates and reports risks associated with compliance antimoney laundering nancial crime and conicts of interest Responsible procurement Establishes LondonMetrics requirements in relation to labour standards human rights health and safety resource use and pollution risk in relation to its procurement and development activities and species considerations for managing agents and development contractors on environmental community and labour aspects UK Modern Slavery Act As a company located and operating solely in the UK LondonMetrics exposure to human rights risks including modern forms of slavery  is very limited.
LondonMetric has published its Remuneration Policy which demonstrates its commitment to transparent and fair remuneration for its own employees.
However to reduce exposure to slavery and human trafficking within its supply chain LondonMetric specically addresses these important areas in its Responsible Procurement Policy and Responsible Development Requirements Checklist.
LondonMetric requires its contractors to meet a number of standards including paying a fair wage to their workers respecting Human Rights and Labour Rights Legislation and investigating their own supply chains for slavery and human trafficking.
For each development contractors are expected to provide on request evidence that they meet these requirements.
No human rights concerns have arisen within our direct operations or our supply chain during 2017 .
Our Modern Slavery Act Statement is available on the Companys website home page.
Employee gender diversity
The number of persons of each sex who were Directors of the Company Senior managers The number of persons of each sex who were senior managers of the Company other than identied as Directors
The number of persons of each sex who were employees of the Company LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Inside this section Introduction from the Chairman 58 Governance at work 59 Board of Directors 60 Leadership 62 Relations with shareholders 68 Effectiveness 70 Nomination Committee report 70 Accountability 75 Audit Committee report 75 Remuneration 82 Remuneration Committee report 82 Report of the Directors 108 Directors responsibility statement 111 57 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Governance Introduction from the Chairman
Good governance is embedded into the way we manage our business to create a culture of appropriate decision making risk assessment and transparency at all levels in the organisation.
Patrick Vaughan
This year much thought has been given to our risk appetite and emerging risks in the aftermath of the EU Referendum and Brexit vote.
The risk dashboard is a standing agenda item at each quarterly meeting highlighting changes in the Groups exposure to risks and prompting further debate.
Succession planning and talent development has continued to be a key area of focus to support the Companys long term plans.
Last year we appointed The Zygos Partnership to assist with a phased refreshment of the Non Executive Board in light of their individual tenure and the best practice recommendations of the Code.
As a result we welcomed Andrew Livingston to the Board and Audit Committee this year and said farewell to Charles Cayzer who had served as a valuable Board member and Senior Independent Director for six years.
Having further considered the size skill set and tenure of the Non Executive Directors this year Andrew Varley has decided to retire from the Board and Committees in September.
I would like to thank him for his contribution and dedication over the last four years at LondonMetric and previously as a Non Executive Director of Metric.
The Audit Committee has considered the updates to the UK Corporate Governance Code and Guidance on Audit Committees which are mandatory for the Company next year.
The Board has considered the composition of the Audit Committee and its experience in the property sectors in which we operate in order to satisfy the new requirement that the Committee as a whole has competence in the relevant operating sectors.
It has also reviewed the Companys policy on non audit services provided by the external auditors.
The Audit Committee has once again challenged the going concern principal underlying the preparation of these accounts and considered the Companys longer term viability.
It has reviewed the processes in place and followed by management to ensure that the nancial statements are fair balanced and understandable and has scrutinised and challenged the accounting treatment of signicant transactions and areas of judgement which could have a material impact on the results including those concerning the valuation of property.
This year the Committee has paid particular attention to the alternative performance measures reported in these accounts and the balance of statutory and non statutory measures.
Regular communication with investors continues to be a key priority for the Executive Directors.
Understanding the views of shareholders is fundamental to the Companys strategic direction and ultimate success.
This year the Executive Directors met with 280 shareholders fund managers private wealth investors and other interested parties to discuss the Companys performance and plans.
The Nomination Committee led our annual internal Board evaluation which involved all Directors completing a questionnaire which focused on the key components of good governance and effective performance.
Overall the ndings were extremely positive and concluded that the individual Directors the Board and its Committees continue to work well together with the right balance of skills and expertise and within a climate of trust and transparency.
The Committee will lead an externally facilitated review next year.
The Remuneration Committee has undertaken a full review of the Companys Remuneration Policy for the forthcoming three year period in advance of the mandatory vote at the AGM.
The overriding principle is to maintain a fair reward structure that adequately incentivises and retains the executive team to deliver long term growth and success.
The Committee was advised by PwC who were appointed new remuneration advisors in the year.
The Chairman of the Committee consulted extensively with shareholders who provided constructive feedback and following suggested revisions were supportive of the nal proposals.
Patrick Vaughan
31 May 2017 Good governance underpins the scope of transactions and our ability to operate in a way that is both legally compliant and also responsible.
This approach to business builds and maintains the trust of our key stakeholders including investors business partners customers suppliers and employees.
Furthermore we are committed to enhancing the business environments in which we operate as discussed in detail in the Responsible Business section of the Strategic report.
The Directors and senior managers have formed strong relationships over several years of working together in an open environment that welcomes challenge and constructive debate.
Through the close involvement of the Executive Directors this culture permeates through the wider organisation promoting good governance practices beyond the Boardroom and supporting the successful delivery of strategy.
The Corporate Governance report which follows provides insight into our governance processes and activities in the year and demonstrates our commitment to upholding the principles and provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
58 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The Board seeks to promote and embed a culture of good governance and ethical values into its daily activities and continues to uphold the high standards of corporate governance that underpin the successful management of the business and its long term success.
Governance at work The Board provides leadership either directly or through the operation of its Committees.
In doing so Directors have regard to the interests of the Companys shareholders and employees the impact on the communities within which it operates and the environment.
Role of the Board and its Committees Division of responsibility Independence of Non Executive Directors Setting the tone and culture from the top Communication and an open dialogue with investors is a top priority of the Chief Executive and Executive Directors the Companys principal representatives.
The Executive Directors have met with and presented to 280 investors and analysts throughout the year Portfolio tours arranged for leading investors and new corporate lenders Consultation with shareholders setting out key components of proposed Remuneration Policy AGM is attended by the whole Board The Board sets the key processes to ensure the Board and its Committees operate effectively.
Composition of the Board skills independence diversity and time commitment Succession planning Board appointments induction and training Internal Board evaluation Nomination Committee report The role of the Remuneration Committee is to determine and maintain a fair reward structure that incentivises Executive Directors to deliver the Groups strategic objectives whilst maintaining stability in the management of its long term business.
Proposed new Remuneration Policy Annual bonus and LTIP achievement against targets Appointment of new remuneration advisor
Remuneration Committee report
The Board is responsible for establishing and maintaining the Groups system of risk management and internal controls and the integrity of nancial reporting.
Assessment of principle and emerging risks Risk management and internal control Viability and going concern Financial reporting and a fair balanced and understandable Annual Report Audit Committee report
Relations with shareholders
Remuneration
Accountability
See pages 62 to 67 See pages 68 and 69 See pages 70 to 74 See pages 82 to 107 See pages 75 to 81 The Board has considered the Companys compliance with the main principles and provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code published by the Financial Reporting Council in September 2014 publicly available at www. rc. review and to the date of this report.
Statement of Compliance 59 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board of Directors Valentine Beresford Investment Director
3 June 2014 Skills and experience Valentine was cofounder and Investment Director of Metric from its inception in March 2010 until its merger with London and Stamford in January 2013.
He joined the Board of LondonMetric on 3 June 2014 as Investment
Prior to setting up Metric Valentine was on the Executive Committee of British Land and was responsible for all their European retail developments and investments.
Valentine joined British Land in July 2005 following the acquisition of Pillar where he also served on the Board as Investment Director.
Other appointments
Board Committees Executive Committee Mark Stirling Asset Director
3 June 2014 Skills and experience Mark was cofounder and Asset Management Director of Metric from its inception in March 2010 until its merger with London and Stamford in January 2013.
He joined the Board of LondonMetric on 3 June 2014 as Asset Management
Prior to the setting up of Metric Mark was on the Executive Committee of British Land and as Asset Management Director was responsible for the planning development and asset management of the retail portfolio.
Mark joined British Land in July 2005 following the acquisition of Pillar where he was Managing Director of Pillar Retail Parks Limited from 2002 until 2005.
Other appointments
Board Committees Executive Committee Patrick Vaughan
Appointed
13 January 2010 Skills and experience Patrick has been involved in the UK property market since 1970.
He was a cofounder and CEO of Arlington of Pillar and of London and Stamford leading all three of the companies to successful listings on the FTSE main market.
Upon completion of London and Stamfords merger with Metric in January 2013 he was appointed Chairman becoming Non Executive Chairman on 1 October 2014.
Patrick also served as an Executive Director of British Land 2005 to 2006 following its acquisition of Pillar.
Other appointments
Board Committees Nomination Committee Andrew Jones Chief Executive
25 January 2013 Skills and experience Andrew was a cofounder and CEO of Metric from its inception in March 2010 until its merger with London and Stamford in January 2013.
On completion of the merger Andrew became Chief Executive of LondonMetric.
Andrew was previously Executive Director and Head of Retail at British Land.
Andrew joined British Land in 2005 following the acquisition of Pillar where he served on the main Board.
Other appointments Non Executive Director of The Unite Group Plc Board Committees Executive Committee Martin McGann Finance Director
13 January 2010 Skills and experience Martin joined London and Stamford as Finance Director in September 2008 until its merger with Metric in January 2013 when he became Finance Director of LondonMetric.
Between 2005 and 2008 Martin was a Director of Kandahar Real Estate.
From 2002 to 2005 Martin worked for Pillar latterly as Finance Director.
Prior to joining Pillar Martin was Finance Director of the Strategic Rail
Martin is a qualied Chartered Accountant having trained and qualied with Deloitte.
Other appointments
Board Committees Executive Committee 60 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Alec Pelmore Independent Director
25 January 2013 Skills and experience Alec joined the Board of Metric at the Companys inception in March 2010.
He has been a member of the Supervisory Board of UnibailRodamco SE Europes largest property company since 2008 and is currently a member of its Audit
Alec held positions as an equity investment analyst specialising in property companies from 1981 to 2007 .
The majority of his career as an investment analyst was spent at Dresdner Kleinwort Benson and Merrill Lynch where his teams were voted number one for property in Europe by the Institutional Investor European Property Research Survey for 12 out of 13 years from 1995 to 2007 .
Other appointments Member of the Supervisory Board of UnibailRodamco SE Board Committees Nomination Committee and Audit Committee Rosalyn Wilton Independent Director
25 March 2014 Skills and experience Rosalyn was appointed to the Board of LondonMetric in March 2014 becoming Chairman of the Audit Committee in March 2015.
She has held a number of Non Executive Directorship positions most recently with AXA UK Limited until September 2015 where she acted as Chair of the Risk Committee and Optos Plc where she was Chair of
She has previously served as Senior Advisor to 3i Investments and Providence Equity Partners Chairman of Ipreo Holdings LLC the USbased nancial data and solutions group and has worked for Reuters Group where she was a member of the Executive Committee.
Other appointments Trustee of the University of London Vice Chair of the Harris Federation and Chair of Governors of Harris Girls Academy Board Committees Audit Committee Chairman Remuneration Committee Philip Watson Senior Independent Director
25 January 2013 Skills and experience Philip joined the Board of Metric at the Companys inception in March 2010.
He is a Non Executive Director of Mirabaud Asset Management
Philip joined Hill Samuel in 1971 and then Robert Fleming in 1972 on the UK desk where he worked as an investment analyst and fund manager.
Philip left Robert Fleming in 1982 to found TWH Asset Management Limited now Mirabaud Asset Management Limited in which he and his partners sold a controlling interest to Mirabaud Pereire Holdings Limited in 1991.
Other appointments A Non Executive Director of Mirabaud Asset Management Limited Board Committees Nomination Committee and Remuneration Committee Andrew Varley Independent Director
25 January 2013 Skills and experience Andrew joined the Board of Metric at the Companys inception in March 2010.
He was Group Property Director and an Executive Director of Next from 1990 until his retirement in May 2014 with the responsibility for property franchise corporate responsibility and code of practice related issues.
His previous experience includes 12 years in retail and commercial property.
From 1999 to 2007 Andrew was a Non Executive member of the British Heart Foundations Shops Committee.
Other appointments
Board Committees Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee James Dean Independent Director
29 July 2010 Skills and experience James is a Chartered Surveyor and has worked with Savills plc since 1973 serving as a Director from 1988 to 1999.
Other appointments James is a Non Executive Director of Branston Holdings and Chairman of London and Lincoln Properties Ltd and Patrick Dean Ltd Board Committees
Committee Chairman Nomination Committee Andrew Livingston Independent Director
31 May 2016 Skills and experience Andrew was appointed to the Board on 31 May 2016.
He has been the Chief Executive of Screwx since 2013 where he was previously the Commercial and Ecommerce Director from 2009 to 2013.
Before joining Screwx Andrew was Commercial Director at Wyevale Garden Centres between 2006 and 2008 and then Chief Operating Officer between 2008 and 2009.
Andrew has worked previously at Marks and Spencer CSC Index and BandQ where he was Showroom Commercial Director from 2000 to 2005.
Other appointments Chief Executive of Screwx Direct Limited and Director of Vedoneire Limited Board Committees Audit Committee 61 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Leadership Leadership Structure Chairman Patrick Vaughan Comprises 4 Executive and 7 Non Executive Directors Role Responsible to the shareholders for the long term strategy control and leadership of the Group Chairman Rosalyn Wilton
4 Non Executive Directors Role Oversees nancial reporting Monitors risk management and internal control Evaluates the external audit process Chairman Valentine Beresford Comprises 4 Executive Directors and senior management Role Reviews investment and divestment opportunities and allocation of capital Chairman Mark Stirling Comprises 4 Executive Directors and senior management Role Reviews value enhancing operational activities and development opportunities Chairman Martin McGann Comprises 4 Executive Directors and senior management Role Reviews budgets and forecasts achievement of targets funding requirements and liquidity
Patrick Vaughan
4 Non Executive Directors Role Recommends Board appointments Succession planning and Board composition Skills and diversity of Board members Performance evaluation Chairman James Dean
4 Non Executive Directors Role Determines remuneration policy Sets Executive Directors remuneration packages and incentives Approves bonus and LTIP targets and outcomes Chairman Andrew Jones
4 Executive Directors 1 Senior Executive Role Implementation of strategy Day to day management of the business Succession planning below Board and people development Manages allocation of capital The Board Board Committees Management Committees
Committee
Investment
Committee
Asset Management
Finance
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Executive
Committee
Remuneration
Committee report see page 82
Committee report see page 75
Committee report see page 70 The framework reects the composition of the Board as at 31 March 2017 62 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The role of the Board The Board is collectively responsible to the shareholders of the Company for the long term success of the business.
It sets and implements strategy and provides leadership and direction within a sound framework of risk management and internal controls.
Details of the Directors including the skills and experience they bring to the Board are reected on pages 60 and 61.
There is a division of responsibility between the Chairman and Chief Executive which has been approved by the Board.
The Chairman is responsible for leading the Board and monitoring its effectiveness and the Chief Executive supported by the Executive Directors is responsible for the day to day management of the Group and the implementation and delivery of the Boards agreed strategic objectives.
The Chairman is responsible for ensuring a constructive relationship between Executive and Non Executive Directors and for encouraging and fostering a culture of Boardroom challenge and debate.
He maintains regular contact with the Executive Directors and senior management outside of formal Board meetings which ensures he is kept abreast of individual Directors views and issues as they arise.
During the year the Board recommended the extension of the Chairmans appointment for a further year to 31 March 2018.
As reported in the table on page 65 each of the Non Executive Directors other than the Chairman is considered by the Board to be independent from management and has no commercial or other connection with the Company.
In considering independence the Board concluded that tenure should be measured from the date of election to the LondonMetric Board.
Committees comprise entirely of independent Non Executive Directors other than the Nomination Committee as permitted by the Code.
The Boards composition throughout the year met the Codes requirement that at least half of its members excluding the Chairman are independent Non Executive Directors.
The Board has a schedule of matters reserved for its attention which includes approval of budgets nancial reports signicant acquisitions and disposals major capital expenditure funding and dividend policy.
Board culture Individual Directors and senior managers have formed strong relationships over several years of working together.
The Chairman sets the culture of the Board and wider organisation which is dened as a balanced approach to business and a willingness to take considered risks to achieve strategic goals within an open environment which encourages constructive challenge and debate.
This culture and thinking permeates through the organisation through the close interaction of Directors and staff in day to day activities.
Board processes are well understood and adhered to after many years of consistent application.
Board Committees The Board has three Committees of Non Executive Directors to which it has delegated a number of its responsibilities the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
The Committees ensure a strong governance framework for decision making and each operates within dened terms of reference which are reviewed annually by each Committee and the Board and which are available on written request and on the Companys website at site The Audit and Remuneration Committees are composed entirely of independent Non Executive Directors.
The Nomination Committee includes the Chairman who is not considered to be independent but his attendance is permitted by the Code.
The Chairman of each Committee provides a verbal update on the matters discussed at each meeting to the Board.
The Executive Committee meets monthly to discuss nancial and operating targets and performance property transactions and the management of the business and its staff.
There are informal meetings between the Executive Directors at other times and due to the size of the organisation they are involved in all signicant business discussions and decisions.
The Executive Committee is supported by three sub Committees each focusing on different areas of the business the Investment Asset Management and Finance
These Committees comprise Executive Directors and members of the senior management team and meet at least monthly.
63 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Leadership continued The following table sets out the key responsibilities of Board members Role Responsibilities
Patrick Vaughan Leads the Board and ensures it operates effectively Sets Board agenda culture and tone of discussions to promote Boardroom debate and openness Builds relationships between Executive and Non Executive Directors Monitors progress against strategy and performance of the Chief Executive Chief Executive Andrew Jones Manages dialogue and communication with shareholders and relays investors views to the Board Develops and recommends strategy to the Board and is responsible for its implementation Day to day management of the business operations and personnel assisted by the Executive team Non Executive
James Dean Andrew Livingston Alec Pelmore Andrew Varley Philip Watson Rosalyn Wilton Support and constructively challenge the Executive Directors in determining and implementing strategy Bring independent judgement and scrutiny to decisions taken by the Executive Board Contribute a broad range of skills and experience Monitor delivery of agreed strategy within the risk and control framework set by the Board Review the integrity of nancial information and risk management systems Senior Independent
Philip Watson Acts as a sounding board for the Chairman and trusted intermediary for the other Directors Available as a communication channel for shareholders if other means are not appropriate Leads performance evaluation of Chairman Executive Directors Andrew Jones Valentine Beresford Martin McGann Mark Stirling Manage business operations within area of expertise Assist Chief Executive in the implementation of strategy Manage appraise and develop staff below Board level
Secretary
Jadzia Duzniak Advises the Board and is responsible to the Chairman on corporate governance matters Ensures good ow of information to the Board its Committees and senior management Promotes compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements and Board procedures Provides guidance and support to Directors individually and collectively Tenure has been reected from the date of appointment to the LondonMetric Board All charts reect the composition of the Board as at 31 March 2017 Some Directors are represented in more than one category in terms of their expertise Responsibilities of the Board A balanced board
55% Non Executive 36%
9% Non Executive
Gender diversity 91 %
9%
Board tenure 36% 36 years 36% 13 years 28% 69 years
9% 18% 36% 64%
Retail Finance Property 64 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Non Executive Directors The Non Executive Directors are a diverse group with a wide range of experience encompassing property nance fund management risk management and retailing.
They provide a valued role by challenging aspects of executive decisions and monitoring the delivery of the agreed strategy adding insight from their varied commercial backgrounds.
They bring independent and objective scrutiny and judgement to all matters raised ensuring that no one individual has unfettered decision making powers.
The Senior Independent Director acts as an intermediary to the Executive Directors for the Non Executive Directors and shareholders as required.
He is available to meet with shareholders at their request to address concerns or if other communication channels fail to resolve queries raised.
No such requests were received from shareholders in the year.
The Non Executive Directors meet regularly with rare occasion that a Director is unable to attend a meeting papers will still be provided in advance and their comments are provided to the Board prior to the meeting.
Non Executive Directors are encouraged to communicate directly and openly with the Executive Directors and senior management between scheduled Board meetings to explore and challenge large and complex transactions and as part of each Directors contribution to the delivery of strategy.
This ad hoc communication is often supplemented by site visits and provides further opportunity to mix with senior management.
The Executive Directors have regular off site meetings to discuss business strategy and performance in a less formal environment.
External advisors and senior managers are invited to present and the focus is reviewing the appropriateness of and progress against agreed strategy in light of Company performance and the wider macroeconomic environment.
The number of Board and Committee members and their attendance during the year was as follows Title Date appointed
Independent Board Audit
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Chairman
Patrick Vaughan 1312010 7 NA Executive Directors Andrew Jones 2512013 4 No 6 6 Martin McGann 1312010 7 No 6 6 Valentine Beresford 362014 3 No 6 6 Mark Stirling 362014 3 No 6 6 Non Executive Directors Charles Cayzer 2972010 na Yes 2 3 2 2 1 2 1 1 James Dean 2972010 7 Yes 6 6 4 4 1 1 Andrew Livingston 3152016 1 Yes 5 6 5 5 Alec Pelmore 2512013 4 Yes 6 6 5 5 2 2 Andrew Varley 2512013 4 Yes 6 6 5 5 4 4 Philip Watson 2512013 4 Yes 6 6 4 4 2 2 Rosalyn Wilton 2532014 2 Yes 6 6 5 5 3 3 Percentage independent 60% Provision B.1.1 of the Code regarding independence is not appropriate in relation to the Chairman.
Calculation is based on Board members as at 31 March 2017 Bracketed numbers indicate the number of meetings the member was eligible to attend Resigned with effect from 30 September 2016 Tenure is measured from the date of appointment to the LondonMetric Board and as at 31 March 2017  rounded to the nearest whole year Membership and attendance the Chairman without the Executive Directors present to discuss business matters and their contribution.
On appointment Non Executive Directors are advised of the likely time commitment to full the role.
The ability of individual Directors to allocate sufficient time to discharge their responsibilities is considered as part of the annual evaluation process undertaken by the Nomination
The Board is satised that each of the Non Executive Directors is able to devote sufficient time to the Companys business.
The Board has a regular schedule of meetings timed around the nancial calendar together with further ad hoc meetings as required to deal with transactional matters.
All Directors are expected to attend all meetings of the Board and of the Committees on which they serve and to devote sufficient time to the Companys affairs to enable them to full their duties as Directors.
On the 65 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent advice All Directors and Committees have access at all times to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring that Board procedures are followed and that governance regulations are complied with.
The Directors may in the furtherance of their duties take independent professional advice at the expense of the Company.
None of the Directors sought such advice in the year.
Conicts of interest Directors are required and have a duty to notify the Company of any potential conicts of interest they may have.
Any conicts are recorded and reviewed at each Board meeting.
There have been no conicts of interest noted this year.
Implementation of business objectives in line with strategy to promote the long term success of the Company Continue to embed risk culture into all daily business activities and promote the early identication of risks Succession planning and ongoing Board refreshment External performance evaluation exercise Set a base EPS target for the 2017 LTIP awards and annual bonus for the year to 31 March 2018 Consider regulatory and technical developments on the horizon including the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code Guidance on Audit Committees the Green Paper on governance reform EU Non Financial Reporting Directive and reporting on Payment Practices and Performance Board considerations in 2018 Leadership continued Board changes As reported last year an executive search company was commissioned to source possible candidates for new Non Executive Directors of the
As a result of this search Andrew Livingston was appointed as a Non Executive Director and member of the Audit Committee on 31 May 2016 replacing Charles Cayzer who retired from the Board in September 2016.
Philip Watson replaced Charles Cayzer as Senior Independent Director and Rosalyn Wilton and James Dean were appointed to the Remuneration and Nomination Committees respectively.
Patrick Vaughan was appointed as Chairman of the Nomination Committee in July 2016.
Andrew Varley has expressed his intention to retire from the Board and its Committees in September.
Professional development Newly appointed Directors participate in a tailored induction programme and receive a comprehensive pack of information on the Group its business and the governance structure.
The induction also involves meeting with the senior management team to discuss property transactions nancial matters share dealing and governance.
This induction process was carried out for Andrew Livingston who joined as a new Non Executive Director in the year.
For an insight into the Group Andrew had onetoone meetings with senior managers in property and nance and the Companys external auditors.
Ongoing training and information updates in relation to the Groups business regulatory framework and accounting requirements are provided to the Directors through Board brieng papers reports and presentations by external advisors senior executives and property visits.
During the year training was provided through presentations at Board meetings by senior managers and advisors on real estate and capital markets.
Specic brieng papers were provided on the Private Placement debt facility scrip dividend alternative Market Abuse Regulations institutional feedback and Responsible Business.
Each Director is expected to take responsibility for identifying their individual training needs and ensuring they are adequately informed about the Groups strategy business and responsibilities.
Directors are encouraged to attend relevant seminars and conferences and receive technical update material from advisors.
Non Executive Directors are encouraged to familiarise themselves with the Groups business through regular communications with the Executive Directors and senior management between formal meetings.
Informal communication between Non Executive Directors and the Executive Board is encouraged and occurs on a regular basis and supports the Companys culture of openness.
Information ow The Chairman supported by the Company Secretary ensures that the Directors receive clear information on all relevant matters on a timely basis.
Comprehensive reports and brieng papers are circulated one week prior to Board and Committee meetings to give the Directors sufficient time to consider their content prior to the meeting and to promote an informed Boardroom debate.
The Board papers contain market property nancial and risk updates as well as other specic papers relating to agenda items.
The Board receives other ad hoc papers of a transactional nature at other times circulated by email for their review and approval which are ratied at the next Board meeting.
In addition the Chairmen of the Audit and Remuneration Committees communicate regularly and independently with relevant staff and external advisors including the Companys external auditors and remuneration advisors.
66 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The key areas of Board activity during the year were as follows Board activities in 2017 Focus on distribution and convenience retail sectors Continued divestment of retail parks and non core assets Property and retail market outlook and demand expectations general economic and political climate and competitor activity Implications of Brexit vote and US Election outcome including presentation by CBRE post EU referendum Signicant property acquisitions and disposals in excess of 10 million including retail park sales in Newry Kings Lynn Christchurch and Bedford and a portfolio acquisition of six distribution warehouses Major capital expenditure and development projects including at Omega South Warrington Shareholder relations liaison and feedback from roadshows including engagement on proposed new Remuneration Policy Risk appetite and culture Risk register and quarterly dashboard update including debate of signicant and emerging risks including political and cyber security Effectiveness of the internal control framework to manage risks Developments in corporate governance and regulatory including consideration of Market Abusive Regulations the Modern Slavery Act and the 2016 Corporate Governance Code Internal Board and Committee performance evaluation Viability statement and going concern Considered policy on Non Audit Services provided by external auditors Considered relevant sector competence of Audit Committee Interim and annual nancial statements and results presentations Three year nancial forecasts Interim and annual property valuations Financing arrangements available debt facilities LTV and nancial covenants including Private Placement debt facility Capital structure and equity placing Move to quarterly dividend payments and scrip alternative Tax strategy and structure Hedging and approved buy down 66 million of legacy swaps Presentations to staff from advisors on impact of new leasing standard and Anti money laundering Appointed new Non Executive Director Andrew Livingston Reviewed size of Board and retirement of Andrew Varley as a Non Executive Director Reviewed proposed new remuneration policy executive remuneration and performance against targets Appointed new remuneration advisor Succession planning and tenure Staff resources and requirement Health and Safety policy and presentation to all staff Responsible Business report Cyber risk and IT security
Governance
Financial
People
Governance
People
Financial
Strategy
The Board 67 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Relations with shareholders Communication with investors remains a top priority of the Board who believes that understanding the views of shareholders is key to the Companys strategic direction and success.
The Company places considerable emphasis on maintaining an open dialogue with investors in particular institutions and private wealth managers and brokers through a comprehensive investor relations programme.
The Chief Executive and Finance Director are the Companys principal representatives and along with the other Executive Directors and the Head of Investor Relations hold meetings throughout the year to communicate the Companys strategy and performance.
These include results presentations one to one meetings group meetings panel discussions conferences and site visits.
Investor meetings The framework of investor relations is set around the nancial reporting calendar specically announcement of half and full year results.
In addition signicant shareholder engagement occurs outside these periods and primarily consists of UK regional and overseas roadshows.
These meetings and roadshows seek to keep investors informed of the Companys performance and plans answer questions they may have and understand their views.
Topics discussed include the development and implementation of strategy performance property transactions quality of underlying tenants strength of the Companys income debt structure and the real estate market in general.
Investor activity During the nancial year the Company met with over 280 shareholders analysts and potential investors.
A breakdown by type of investor seen and location of meeting are shown in the charts opposite.
Meetings were held predominantly in the UK with 54% of investors seen in London.
As the importance of retailprivate wealth shareholders continues to grow the Company maintained its high level of roadshow activity in UK regions.
Regional roadshows included visits to Glasgow Edinburgh Dublin Bristol Liverpool and Manchester.
In total private wealth meetings accounted for 36% of investors seen and the Company continues to place great importance on engaging with its private wealth shareholders.
Approximately 17% of investor meetings were held overseas in Ireland Holland South Africa and the United States.
The Company will continue to engage with overseas investors to broaden further its investor base.
Investor site visits Three investor site visits were arranged in the year at several of the Companys distribution warehouses in Newark occupied by Dixons Carphone Reading let to DHL Warrington which was under construction at the time but was subsequently let to Amazon The visits were attended by approximately 60 investors several Directors and senior managers.
In addition in September 2016 the Company arranged a site visit to two of its key distribution warehouses in Thrapston occupied by Primark for its new Private Placement debt providers.
Equity placing During the year the Company undertook a successful equity placing to raise 95 million.
The Company pre marketed the placing largely to its top shareholders ahead of announcing.
The placing was priced at a tight discount of 1.9% to the previous days share price and a 6.3% premium to the last reported EPRA NAV.
The fundraising structure of a placing allowed the Company to raise the money within less than a week thereby reducing equity market risk and giving high certainty of success.
The placing was oversubscribed with strong support from existing shareholders and several new investors.
Investor meetings By location 7% Site visit 54%
17%
22% UK regional By type of investor 36% Private wealth 5%
28%
31 %
68 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Full year 2016 results presentation Investor full year roadshow held post results Site visit to Newark Regional investor meetings in Edinburgh Glasgow and Bristol
Annual General Meeting of Shareholders US investor roadshow Investor meetings in Dublin Site visit to Thrapston
Half year results presentation Half year investor roadshow post results Investor roadshow in London Liverpool and Amsterdam Site visits to Warrington and Reading
Investor meetings in Birmingham Bristol Manchester Dublin Cape Town and Johannesburg Letter sent to major shareholders outlining new Remuneration
Equity placing Investor feedback Investor feedback is presented to the Board at scheduled meetings together with published analyst comments.
Feedback received is very supportive of the Companys strategy performance management and future direction.
The Chairman of the Remuneration Committee wrote to shareholders in January 2017 outlining proposed changes to the Remuneration Policy that will be subject to a binding vote at this years Annual General Meeting.
Following feedback from the shareholder consultation the proposed new policy was amended to exclude an additional one year LTIP target.
The majority of the shareholders consulted were supportive of the revised proposal.
As part of its ongoing shareholder engagement the Company is planning to conduct its biannual investor sustainability engagement survey this year.
Public communication Shareholders are kept informed of the Companys progress through results statements and other announcements released through the London Stock
Company announcements are made available on the website affording all shareholders full access to material information.
The website is an important source of information for shareholders and includes a comprehensive investor relations section containing all RNS announcements share price information investor presentations and Annual Reports available for downloading.
A live and on demand webcast of results and a CEO interview is posted twice a year.
Individual shareholders can raise questions directly with the Company at any time through a facility on the website.
Key shareholder events throughout the year Annual General Meeting Shareholders are encouraged to participate in the Annual General Meeting of the Company which provides a forum for communication with both private and institutional shareholders alike.
The whole Board attends and is available to answer shareholder questions.
The Senior Independent Director is available for shareholders to contact if other channels of communication with the Company are not available or appropriate.
The Annual Report is sent to all shareholders at least 20 working days before the AGM and details of the resolutions to be proposed can be found in the Notice of Meeting on pages 149 to 153.
Shareholders are able to lodge their votes through the CREST system or by returning the Proxy Card sent with the Annual Report.
Details of the number of proxy votes for against and withheld for each resolution will be disclosed at the meeting and in the AGM RNS announcement.
69 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nomination Committee report
Patrick Vaughan
Nomination Committee The Committees key role is to ensure the Board and its Committees continue to have the right balance of skills experience and knowledge to independently carry out their duties and provide strong and effective leadership to enable the Company to deliver its strategy.
Members of the Committee
Date appointed
Meetings attended Patrick Vaughan 1112012 4 2 2 Alec Pelmore 2512013 4 2 2 Philip Watson 2512013 4 2 2 James Dean 1472016 1 1 1 Charles Cayzer retired 30 September 2016 2512013 na 1 1 Bracketed numbers indicate the number of meetings the member was eligible to attend.
Tenure is measured from date of appointment to the Committee and as at 31 March 2017 rounded to the nearest whole year.
Areas of focus this year Approved the appointment of Andrew Livingston as a new Non Executive Director and Audit Committee member to replace Charles Cayzer who retired on 30 September 2016 Approved the appointments of Rosalyn Wilton to the Remuneration Committee James Dean to the Nomination Committee Philip Watson as Senior Independent Director following the AGM in July 2016 Led internal Board and Committee performance evaluation in January 201 7 Recommended the reelection of Directors to the Board at the AGM Recommended the appointment of Andrew Livingston to the Remuneration Committee following the AGM to replace Andrew Varley who will retire as a Non Executive Director and member of both the Audit and Remuneration Committees in September 201 7 This year the Committee continued to focus on the size and composition of the Board and its Committees having welcomed Andrew Livingston to the Board in May 2016 and after Charles Cayzer stepped down in September 2016.
This led to the consideration of Andrew Varleys retirement from the Non Executive Board and reduction in its overall size.
The resulting Board composition continues to meet the requirements of the Code and has the correct balance of skills and knowledge to lead the Company going forward.
The Committee also led an internal evaluation of Board and Committee performance in the year and concluded that the Board was well led and administered by a dynamic and respected Chairman who promoted an open culture of discussion and constructive debate.
The Directors unanimously considered the Board to have the appropriate complement of skills required to monitor performance challenge management promote debate and develop strategy.
Role of the Committee The role of the Committee is to evaluate the size structure and composition of the Board to ensure that it has the appropriate balance of skills knowledge experience and independence having due regard to the benets of diversity.
The Boards collective experience covers a range of relevant sectors as reected in the chart on page 64 including property nance and retail.
The Committee drives succession planning for Directors and other senior executive positions and ensures that the refreshment process is properly planned and managed to maintain stability and mitigate business disruption.
It is responsible for identifying and recommending candidates to ll Board vacancies and leads the selection process ensuring it is formal rigorous and transparent.
On appointment the Company arranges a tailored induction programme for all new Directors to help them develop an understanding of the business including its strategy processes people assets nances 70 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
42%
58%
Senior management 75%
25%
Directors
9%
91 %
All charts reect the composition of the Company and Board as at 31 March 2017 Gender diversity risks and controls.
The induction includes the provision of a detailed Company information pack site visits and introductions to and meetings with senior management and advisors.
A comprehensive induction programme was arranged for Andrew Livingston who joined as a new Non Executive Director in the year including One to one meetings with Executive Directors and senior managers from property and nance Provision of past Board and Committee papers minutes and nance reports Board and Committee timetables One to one meeting with the Companys audit partner Responsibilities of the Committee The principal responsibilities of the Committee are to Review and evaluate the size structure and composition of the Board Make recommendations to the Board regarding Board and Committee membership changes Consider succession planning for Directors and other senior executives Identify candidates to ll Board vacancies as they arise Lead the Board and Committee performance evaluation exercise Assess the time commitment required from Non Executive Directors Consider the annual reelection of Directors to the Board Composition of the Committee The Committee is comprised entirely of Non Executive Directors and membership details are set out in the table on page 70.
The Committee was chaired by Charles Cayzer until the AGM in July 2016 when he announced his retirement from the Board and Committee and Patrick Vaughan replaced him as Chairman.
James Dean was appointed as a member of the Committee following the AGM and Charles Cayzer retired as a member of the Committee on 30 September 2016.
Meetings and activities The Committee met twice during the year to consider and make recommendations to the Board in respect of The appointment reappointment and resignation of Non Executive Directors to the Board and its Committees The internally led performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees The reelection of Directors at the forthcoming AGM Its own terms of reference
The Board continues to be committed to a culture that attracts and retains talented individuals to deliver outstanding results.
It strives to operate in a working environment of equal opportunity and recognises the benets diversity brings to the organisation.
It continues to promote diversity at every level of recruitment and across a range of criteria including skills knowledge experience gender age and ethnicity.
All appointments to the Board and senior management team are made on merit alone.
The Board believes that an appointment on any other basis would not be in the best long term interests of the Company.
It supports and promotes greater female representation on listed company boards but it does not consider given the size of the Company that diversity quotas are appropriate in determining its composition and has not set targets.
It does not wish to increase its size solely to enable further women to be appointed.
However there is an ongoing commitment to strengthen female representation at Board level the pace of which will be dependent upon the availability of suitable candidates and Board vacancies.
Gender and wider diversity will continue to be taken into account when evaluating Board composition and appointments and will be considered as part of the ongoing Board refreshment programme.
The Company as a whole is supportive of gender diversity with 25% of senior management positions being lled by women and 42% of all staff being female.
The Company supports exible working practices for employees on a case by case basis as utilised by four of the total 31 employees at the year end excluding Non Executive Directors.
Further information on the Companys commitment to developing people is contained in the report on Responsible Business on page 56.
71 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Effectiveness continued Succession planning A key priority of the Committee is the consideration of succession planning and talent development to support the Companys long term plans.
In reviewing succession planning for both Executive and Non Executive Directors the Committee considers the leadership needs of the Company and balance of the Board.
Last year the Committee considered the tenure of the Non Executive Directors and the need for a progressive refreshing of the Board as required by the Code.
It appointed an external executive search agency The Zygos Partnership to assist with a phased refreshment of the Non Executive Board.
Potential candidates were shortlisted for consideration and the Committee recommended the appointment of Andrew Livingston replacing Charles Cayzer who retired in September 2016.
Further details of Andrews appointment process was given in last years Annual Report.
Once again this year the Nomination Committee considered the size and skill set of the Non Executive Board and has agreed that Andrew Varley will retire from the Board and Committees in September 2017 .
The remaining balance of independent Non Executive Directors continues to meet the requirements of the Code and further Board refreshment will be considered next year in light of strategic focus and regulatory changes.
The Executive Directors consider succession planning below Board level and is committed to nurturing developing and retaining high performing individuals to ensure a clear talent pipeline exists for future Board and senior management positions.
Staff are encouraged to develop and broaden their experience and Directors are mindful of cover for senior management positions should a need arise.
Low staff turnover at senior levels signies a loyal content and motivated workforce.
Reelection of Directors Following the Board evaluation and appraisal process the Committee concluded that each of the Directors seeking reelection continues to make an effective contribution to the Board and has the necessary skills knowledge and experience to enable them to discharge their duties properly in the coming year.
The Committee considers the time commitment required of the Directors and other external appointments they have.
Before taking on any additional external commitments Directors must seek the prior agreement of the Board to ensure possible conicts of interest are identied and to conrm they will continue to have sufficient time available to devote to the business of the Company.
The Board following the advice of the Committee recommends the reelection of all Directors at the forthcoming AGM.
Progress against the recommendations from last years internally facilitated review is set out below.
Recommendation Progress Continued focus on succession planning and Board refreshment Board refreshment commenced with the appointment of Andrew Livingston and retirement of Charles Cayzer in the year Andrew Varley to retire in September 201 7 Consideration of skills required for new appointments given strategy and regulations The appointment of Andrew Livingston brought further and current retail and ecommerce experience to the Board Continue to promote diversity at all levels 25% of senior management positions are lled by women All staff appointments are considered on the basis of merit Succession planning for the Chairman The Chairmans letter of appointment has been extended for a further 12 months to 31 March 2018 Promote a risk culture which underpins business decisions The risk dashboard has been a standing item on the Board meeting agenda for over a year.
Emerging risks are tabled at meetings of the Executive
Progress against 2016 targets Board performance and evaluation The Board is committed to undertaking an annual internal review of its performance and of its Committees and an externally facilitated review every three years.
An externally facilitated performance review will be undertaken next year.
The Board has delegated responsibility for carrying out the performance evaluation to the Nomination Committee.
This years performance evaluation was led by the Chairman of the Nomination Committee and involved the Directors completing a detailed questionnaire which focused on the key aspects of good governance.
The ndings were collated by the Finance Director and were tabled for discussion at the Nomination Committee who reported their ndings to the Board in January 2017 .
The key areas of focus and ndings are set out in the table on page 73.
72 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Focus areas Findings Board objectives and strategy Development of strategy review of performance against strategic objectives There is a clear strategy and set of objectives that have been agreed with management and are fully supported by Directors Strategy is continually reviewed in relation to individual asset performance and the impact of external factors such as bond yields changes in shopping patterns the direction of the real estate market and investor preferences Any downside risks associated with changes to strategy are clearly highlighted Strategy is aligned to the Companys capabilities in terms of people and nancial resources Six month strategy update and presentation by senior executives to the Board was recommended to increase exposure of the Non Executive Directors to other key members of staff
Reporting of performance against strategy communication of expected performance and variances Reporting to the Board is regular and timely Board papers analyse the effect of changes in strategy and the portfolio and the impact on earnings dividend cover net assets and liquidity Board receives early warning signals of problems that may adversely affect the business Board composition and its Committees Committees balance of skills diversity size appointment process contribution of Directors succession tenure Adequate time is devoted to the consideration of pertinent matters Appropriate balance of skills experience independence and knowledge Consideration to be given to reducing the complement of Non Executive Directors by one Enhanced support for the Remuneration Committee following the appointment of PwC as advisor Board is cohesive and combines management support together with appropriate challenge Culture viewed positively and seen as a key consideration when undertaking further Board recruitment Relationships with shareholders Shareholder engagement and perception Shareholder engagement is comprehensive with an extensive programme of investor meetings led by the Chief Executive High proportion of shares held through private client fund managers illustrates strong relationship with shareholders The Company has a good reputation in the investor community and is well regarded
Risk management
Process of identifying reporting and evaluating principal risks A risk dashboard is prepared and circulated ahead of each Board meeting providing commentary on changes to and emerging risks in the period under review Assurances on risk management processes has been delegated to the Audit Committee Management are responsible for designing implementing and maintaining the necessary systems of internal control 2017 performance evaluation 73 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Effectiveness continued The Board continues to look for areas of improvement and has highlighted the following to consider next year Externally facilitated performance evaluation Continued Board refreshment and diversity to complement existing Board culture Succession planning for the Chairman More time to be devoted to strategy debate including a six monthly strategy update and presentation to the Board by senior executives Consideration of Board size skills and experience in light of changes to the UK Corporate Governance Code Areas of focus for 2018 Overall the results were extremely positive and concluded that the Board its Committees and individual Directors continued to operate effectively and worked well together with the right balance of skills and expertise and within a climate of trust and transparency.
No signicant issues were raised and the Board acknowledged that good progress had been made against targets established last year.
The review of the Chairmans performance was led by the Senior Independent Director who praised the Chairman for continued good leadership both in and out of meetings and for promoting Boardroom discussion and facilitating debate in an open yet respectfully constructive environment.
The Directors unanimously agreed that the Board was well led and administered with the timely delivery of information and the appropriate complement of skills required to monitor performance challenge management promote debate and develop strategy.
The Directors agreed that the Chairman and Chief Executive had a very good working relationship and provided clear and effective leadership and focus.
Patrick Vaughan Chairman of the Nomination Committee 31 May 2017 74 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Audit Committee report Rosalyn Wilton
Audit Committee The Audit Committee continues to play a key oversight and assurance role assisting the Board and ensuring shareholder interests are protected by monitoring the processes that support nancial reporting and the activities of management and external auditors.
Members of the Committee
Date appointed
Meetings attended Rosalyn Wilton 2532014 3 5 5 Andrew Livingston 3152016 1 5 5 Andrew Varley 2512013 4 5 5 Alec Pelmore 2512013 4 5 5 Charles Cayzer retired 30 September 2016 1102010 na 2 2 Bracketed numbers indicate the number of meetings the member was eligible to attend.
Tenure is measured from date of appointment to the Committee and as at 31 March 2017 rounded to the nearest whole year.
Areas of focus this year Ongoing review of risk management and internal control going concern and viability Fair balanced and understandable statement and presentation of alternative performance measures Gaining assurance around the valuation process Legislative changes on sector competence of Audit Committee Reviewed and refreshed policy for non audit services Rotation of audit partner Chairmans introduction The role of the Audit Committee is to review and report to the Board on nancial reporting internal control and risk management and the performance independence and effectiveness of the external auditors and audit process.
The Committee monitors the integrity of the nancial reporting process and scrutinises the full and half year nancial statements before proposing them to the Board for approval.
This year the Committee has continued to focus on risk management and has undertaken a comprehensive review of principal risks and the internal control framework.
It has challenged the signicant accounting judgements made by management including those concerning the valuation of investment property in light of the economic and political uncertainties arising from the EU Referendum and triggering of Article 50 and the forthcoming UK election.
The Committee has also scrutinised the processes in place to ensure that the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable.
The disclosure and explanation of alternative performance measures has been considered in accordance with FRC and ESMA Guidelines published in the year along with the 2016 amendments to the UK Corporate Governance Code regarding the relevant sector competence of the Audit Committee.
It has also considered the independence and effectiveness of the external audit process and has recommended that Deloitte be reappointed at the AGM in July.
As part of this process it considered the rotation next year of the lead audit partner and has reviewed the policy governing the provision of non audit services establishing and clarifying guidelines for any such appointments.
The Committee has considered the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code concerning going concern and viability and has advised the Board on the statement made in the Risk management section of this report on page 41.
It has also conrmed to the Board that there are adequate processes and internal controls in place to ensure the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and to make its statement on page 1 1 1.
75 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accountability continued
The Committee continues to comprise four Non Executive Directors chaired by Rosalyn Wilton.
Andrew Livingston was appointed to the Committee and Board as a Non Executive Director on 31 May 2016.
Charles Cayzer retired from the Committee and Board on 30 September 2016 having served as a Non Executive Director of the Company for over six years.
Members have no day to day involvement with the Company or links with the external auditor.
The Board is satised that Rosalyn Wilton brings recent and relevant nancial experience as required by the UK Corporate Governance Code as a former Chairman of the Risk Committee at AXA UK Limited.
Additionally in accordance with the 2016 Corporate Governance Code which becomes mandatory for the Company next year the Board considers that all Committee members have the expertise and relevant competency required in the sectors in which the Company operates to discharge their duties as they all hold or have previously held senior positions in related and relevant businesses.
Andrew Livingston adds to the existing skill set of members bringing current retail and ecommerce experience as Chief Executive of Screwx a leading online retailer.
Biographies of the Committee members which set out the relevant knowledge and sector relevant experience they bring can be found on pages 60 and 61.
Meetings
The Committee follows an annual programme to ensure it gives full consideration to matters of particular importance and its terms of reference.
The Committee met ve times last year with meetings aligned to the Companys nancial reporting timetable.
Meetings are attended by the Committee members and by invitation the Groups external auditor independent property valuers CBRE Ltd and Savills Advisory Services Limited the Finance Director and senior management.
Time is allocated for the Committee to meet the external auditor and property valuers independently of management.
In addition to formal Committee meetings the Chairman has regular contact and meetings with the audit partner.
The May and November meetings are scheduled to precede the approval and issue of the full and half year nancial reports.
Separate meetings are held with the Companys property valuers to challenge the valuation process and review their independence.
At the March meeting the Committee reviewed risk management and internal control processes and considered the year end audit plan.
It also considered a paper from the Finance Director on IT and cyber risk and the risk management processes in place.
The Chairman of the Committee reports to the Board on the matters considered and conclusions reached after each Committee meeting.
The Committee is satised that it receives sufficient reliable and timely information and support from management and the Companys external auditor to allow it to full its obligations.
Financial reporting Interim and year end results announcement and Annual
Accounting treatment of signicant transactions and areas of judgement which could have a material impact on the nancial statements Processes undertaken to ensure that the nancial statements are fair balanced and understandable Use of alternative performance measures and disclosure in the Annual Report Audit Committee report Group tax strategy
Risk management
Annual assessment of the Groups principal and emerging risks appetite risk register and dashboard IT and cyber risk review The adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems The appropriateness of the going concern assumption and the level of stress testing undertaken The Viability statement External audit Scope of the external audit plan The independence objectivity and tenure of Deloitte LLP Performance of the external auditor and effectiveness of the audit process Evaluation of key audit ndings Auditors fee proposal Reappointment of external auditor Rotation of audit partner Policy on provision of non audit services Property valuation The property valuation process and the appropriateness of the interim and year end individual valuations The independence and competence of the external valuers
Committees relevant sector competence Committees own terms of reference constitution and performance The need for an internal audit function The Groups whistle blowing arrangements Activities during 2017 During the year the work undertaken by the Committee has included the consideration review and approval of the following 76 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Financial reporting and signicant judgements The Committee monitors the integrity of the nancial information published in the interim and annual statements and considers the extent to which suitable accounting policies have been adopted consistently applied and disclosed.
It pays particular attention to matters it considers to be important by virtue of their size complexity level of judgement and potential impact on the nancial statements and remuneration.
The signicant matters considered by the Committee discussed with the external auditor and addressed during the year are set out in the table below.
Further details can be found in note 1 to the nancial statements.
The Committee has considered a number of other judgements made by management none of which were material in the context of the Groups results or net assets.
These included judgements concerning the recoverability of nancial assets and the valuation of derivative instruments.
Management conrmed that they were not aware of any material misstatements and the auditor conrmed they had not found any material misstatements in the course of their work.
After reviewing reports from management and following its discussions with the auditor and valuers the Committee is satised that the key nancial judgements and estimates have been appropriately and adequately addressed by the Executive Directors reviewed by the external auditor and reported in these nancial statements.
The Committee is also satised that the processes used to determine the value of the assets and liabilities have been appropriately reviewed challenged and are sufficiently robust.
Signicant matter considered Committees approach Property valuations The property valuation is a critical and signicant part of the Groups reported performance being the largest item on the balance sheet.
It is a key determinant of the Groups protability net asset value and total property return and is therefore a key area of focus.
Property valuations are inherently subjective as they are based on assumptions made by the external valuers which are underpinned by recent market transactions and may not prove to be accurate.
For further details on property valuations refer to notes 1 and 9 of the nancial statements.
All of the Groups investment properties and those held in joint ventures are externally valued by two independent property valuers CBRE and Savills.
The Committee met twice during the year with the property valuers as part of the interim and year end reporting process to challenge and assess the integrity of the valuation process methodologies and outcomes.
The key judgements applied to each property valuation and any issues raised or disagreements with management were considered and discussed to ensure that undue inuence had not been placed on the valuation process and the valuers remained independent and objective.
This year the Committee was mindful of the political and economic uncertainty associated with the EU Referendum and the UK election.
It considered the impact on the investment and occupier markets and the lower volumes of transactional evidence available to support and substantiate certain property valuations.
Future rental growth and yield assumptions were challenged and supporting market evidence was provided to enable the Committee to benchmark assets and conclude that the assumptions applied were appropriate.
Any valuation which required a greater level of judgement for example development assets and any valuation movements that were not broadly in line with the IPD benchmark were scrutinised.
The Committee discussed with the valuers the impact on values of committed expenditure on developments letting assumptions vacant space rent free periods and lease incentives.
As part of their audit work Deloitte use valuation specialists to assess and challenge the valuation approach assumptions and judgements.
They meet independently with the valuers and report their ndings and conclusions to the Committee.
Revenue recognition Certain transactions include unusual or complex adjustments to revenue and require management to make judgements as to whether and to what extent revenue should be recognised in the year.
There is a risk of overstatement or deferral of income in order to meet performance and remuneration targets.
The Committee considered the timing of recognising rental income arising on prelet developments at Leicester Liverpool Wakeeld and Warrington that completed in the year and concluded that it was appropriately recognised from the commencement of the lease.
It also considered the accounting for rent free periods and lease inducements including those to Amazon and Eddie Stobart.
The Committee received and assessed reports from the external auditor on the timing of revenue recognition for property and lease transactions completing in the year lease incentives and surrender payments and considered consistency of accounting treatment with previous years.
The Committee considered the options available challenged the judgements made and were satised that revenue had been appropriately recognised in the nancial statements.
77 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accountability continued Signicant matter considered Committees approach Signicant transactions During the year the Group transacted on 318 million of property.
Some transactions were large and complex and required management to make judgements in determining whether a transaction represented a business combination under IFRS 3 when a transaction should be recognised and the fair value of consideration.
Signicant property acquisitions and disposals were reviewed by the Committee to the extent that there were unusual terms and conditions of judgement in relation to timing.
The Committee in conjunction with the external auditor received and challenged managements accounting proposals in relation to The corporate disposal of the Groups retail park in Newry and distribution warehouse in Warrington both of which were considered in substance to be property disposals The timing of recognition of acquisitions and disposals on unconditional exchange of contracts rather than completion including the disposal of Alban Retail Park in Bedford which was accounted for as a disposal in the year with completion deferred until post year end The timing of the disposal of the distribution unit in Warrington where the occupier exercised its option to purchase The Committee concurred with the approach adopted by management in each case.
Presentation of information The Group operates through a number of joint ventures which are monitored by management on a proportionately consolidated basis but are required under accounting standards to be equity accounted.
EPRA performances measures are presented as KPIs and elsewhere within this report in line with other public real estate companies to highlight the recurring performance of the Group The Group equity accounts for its three joint venture operations as required by accounting standards.
Its share of prot after tax and net assets is reected in the nancial statements as one line in each of the income statement and balance sheet.
However management monitors the business on a proportionately consolidated basis and uses EPRA performance measures which reect the recurring performance of the Groups property rental business.
The gures and commentary presented in the Finance review section of the Strategic report on pages 34 to 39 are consistent with this approach.
Reconciliations between the management and statutory bases are provided in note 8 to the nancial statements and in the Supplementary Information section.
The Committee has reviewed the prominence given to statutory and alternative performance measures and has concluded that sufficient disclosure explanation and reconciliations are provided.
It believes the approach adopted provides the most useful analysis of the years results.
REIT status The Group must comply with the UK REIT regulations to benet from the favourable tax regime.
Failure to comply would result in tax charges and penalties that would have a signicant impact on the Groups results.
The Committee reviews compliance with the REIT tests which are reported on as part of the quarterly report presented by the Finance Director to the Board and concluded that there was full compliance and signicant headroom for the current year.
Going concern and viability The Companys ongoing solvency and liquidity is a critical risk to its future viability and the appropriateness of preparation of the Group nancial statements.
The Boards assessment of going concern is on page 1 10 and its Viability statement is on page 41.
The Committee reviewed the appropriateness of the going concern assumption in the preparation of these nancial statements and whether the business was viable in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
It considered the quarterly reports presented by the Finance Director to the Board which included the Groups three year prot and cash ow forecasts committed and undrawn debt facilities and expected headroom under the nancial covenants in those facilities.
The Committee reviewed managements assumptions about the principle risks facing the Group future trading performance rental income growth valuation projections capital expenditure funding requirements and gearing levels.
It considered the amount of stress testing undertaken and the appropriateness of the three year assessment period.
In light of this review the Committee conrmed to the Board that it was appropriate for the nancial statements to be prepared on a going concern basis and that there was a reasonable expectation that the Company would be able to continue in operation over the three year viability period.
78 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements External audit Deloitte LLP was appointed as external auditor following a formal tender process in 2013.
Current UK regulations require rotation of the lead audit partner every ve years a formal tender of the auditor every ten years and a change of auditor every 20 years.
The lead partner Claire Faulkner who has held office for the past four years will be stepping down following the conclusion of this years audit and Georgina Robb has been appointed as her successor.
Georgina has shadowed the audit partner and team this year.
The Committee has assessed the performance independence objectivity and fees of the external auditor through discussions with the Finance Director and senior management team and through a review of the audit deliverables.
In addition the Committee Chairman meets independently with the Audit Partner on a regular basis throughout the year.
In making its assessment the Committee considers the qualications expertise and resources of the audit partner and team as well as the quality and timeliness of the audit deliverables.
It reviewed the extent to which the audit plan was met the level of independent challenge and scrutiny applied to the audit and the depth of understanding of key accounting judgements.
It considered the interaction with and feedback from senior management in the audit process focusing on the early identication and resolution of issues and judgements and the quality and timely provision of draft accounts for review.
The results of the audit debrief meeting held between senior management and the audit team are relayed to the Audit Committee along with any areas identied for improvement.
The Committee recognises the importance of auditor objectivity and independence and understands that this could be compromised by the provision of non audit services.
This year it has reviewed and refreshed the Companys policy governing the provision of non audit services in light of legislative changes including the 2016 update to the UK Corporate Governance Code Guidance on Audit Committees and the FRCs Ethical Standard for Auditors.
It took into account the fact that all taxation services and remuneration advice is provided separately by PwC and corporate due diligence and liquidation work is undertaken by BDO LLP .
However the Companys policy recognises that there may be certain circumstances where due to Deloittes expertise and knowledge of the Company or real estate sector it is appropriate for them to undertake non audit work.
A thorough assessment of each case is undertaken by the Executive Directors who observe the following guidelines Pre approval of fees by the Executive Directors up to a limit of 100000 or referral to the Audit Committee for review and approval Proposed arrangements to maintain auditor independence Conrmation from the auditors that they are acting independently Certain services are prohibited from being undertaken by the external auditors including bookkeeping preparing nancial statements design and implementation of nancial information systems valuation remuneration and legal services Year to 31 March 2017 Audit fees including related assurance services Non audit fees  2 Ratio of non audit fees to audit fees na na 1% Audit fees paid to the external auditor in respect of joint ventures totalled 17 000 at share 2016 17 000 at share.
Audit and non audit fees to Deloitte The table below sets out the ratio of non audit to audit fees for each of the past three years.
The three year average ratio of non audit fees to audit fees is less than 1% supporting the Committees conclusion that Deloitte remains independent and that the level on non audit fees is not material.
Deloitte has conrmed to the Audit Committee that they remain independent and have maintained internal safeguards to ensure the objectivity of the engagement partner and audit staff is not impaired.
They have also conrmed that they have internal procedures in place to identify any aspects of non audit work which could compromise their role as auditors and to ensure the objectivity of their audit report.
Having undertaken its review in the opinion of the Audit Committee the 2017 audit was appropriately planned executed and of a high quality there continues to be a good working relationship between management and Deloitte who remain independent and objective.
It has recommended to the Board that a resolution is proposed at the forthcoming AGM to reappoint Deloitte LLP as the Companys and Groups auditor.
The Company has complied with the provisions of the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 during the year.
79 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accountability continued
Risk management
The Board is ultimately responsible for establishing and maintaining the Groups framework of risk management and internal control and for determining the nature and extent of the principal risks it is willing to take to achieve its strategic objectives.
It recognises that risk is inherent in running the business and understands that effective risk management is critical to the decision making process and ultimate success of the Group.
The risk framework and processes in place to identify evaluate and manage the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group are described in the Risk management section on pages 40 to 47 .
The system is designed to give the Board condence that the risks are managed or mitigated as far as possible.
However it should be noted that no system can eliminate the risk of failure to achieve the Groups objectives entirely and can only provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board undertakes a robust assessment of the principal and emerging risks facing the business at each meeting and has adopted a risk dashboard as a standing agenda item which highlights changes in the Groups exposure to current and emerging risks and the mitigation thereof.
The Board has delegated responsibility for reviewing the effectiveness of the risk management framework and internal control environment and compliance with the Code to the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee carries out an annual review of the risk register and reports its ndings to the Board.
The risk register was last updated in February 2017 and presented to the Audit Committee at their planning meeting in March.
The risk register identies the following for each key strategic economic transactional and nancial risk facing the business Signicance and probability of each risk Controls and safeguards in place to manage and minimise each risk Movements in the Groups exposure to the risk since the last review Allocated owner of the risk and management of safeguards A key part of the risk management process is the identication and assessment of risks which is the responsibility of the Executive Committee assisted by senior management.
Short reporting lines and operating from one office ensures the Executive Directors have close involvement in day to day matters allowing early identication of risks and development of mitigation strategies.
The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls.
It receives an annual internal control evaluation questionnaire which is completed by senior management and other reports provided by the external auditor.
The key elements of the Groups internal control framework are as follows A dened schedule of matters reserved for the Boards attention A documented appraisal and approval process for all signicant capital expenditure A comprehensive and robust system of nancial budgeting forecasting and reporting Short term cash ow forecasting that is considered weekly by the Executive Committee An integrated nancial and property management system An organisational structure with clearly dened roles responsibilities and limits of authority that facilitates effective and efficient decision making Close involvement of the Executive Directors in day to day operations including regular meetings with senior management on all operational aspects of the business Disciplined monthly meetings of the Executive Investment Asset Management and Finance Committees The maintenance of a risk register and quarterly risk dashboard highlighting movements in principal and emerging risks and mitigation strategies A formal whistle blowing policy The requirement for a dedicated internal audit function was reviewed by the Audit Committee during the year and was not felt to be necessary or appropriate given the size and structure of the Group the close day to day involvement of the Executive Directors and the internal control procedures in place.
This is kept under regular review.
Based on its review and assessment the Audit Committee is satised that there are no material weaknesses in the Groups internal control structure and an effective risk management system is in place and has reported these ndings to the Board.
It concluded that risks were properly categorised understood and acted upon if necessary.
80 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Fair balanced and understandable At the request of the Board the Audit Committee considered whether the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts was fair balanced and understandable and whether it provided the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
The Audit Committee is satised that the Annual Report and Accounts met this requirement.
In reaching this decision the Committee scrutinised the procedures in place and adopted by management in the preparation of the Annual Report which included the following The establishment of a team of senior managers drawn from nance investor relations and property with clear responsibilities for preparation and review of relevant sections of the report Regular team meetings were held during the drafting stages to ensure consistency of tone and message balanced content and appropriate linking of the various sections Regulatory and technical updates were provided by and discussed with the external auditor as part of a technical brieng workshop attended by relevant staff in February 2017 The Chief Executive provided early input to and agreed the overall message and tone of the report The Executive Directors were closely involved in the initial drafting process and reviewed their respective draft sections An extensive verication exercise was undertaken to ensure factual accuracy The nal draft report was reviewed by the Audit Committee and discussed with the Finance Director and senior management before being presented for Board approval In addition the Committee considered whether the Annual Report had been written in straightforward language without unnecessary repetition and the use of any alternative performance measures had been adequately explained and reconciled to the nancial statements.
The Directors statement on fair balanced and understandable is on page 1 1 1 and their ndings can be summarised as follows
Includes relevant transactions and balances Includes required regulatory disclosures
Consistent throughout Appropriate mix of statutory and alternative performance measures Alternative measures explained
Straight forward language Lack of repetition Use of diagrams and charts Clear cross references and links Clear contents pages to aid navigation Rosalyn Wilton Chairman of the Audit Committee 31 May 2017 81 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 James Dean
Remuneration Committee The primary role of the Remuneration Committee is to determine and recommend to the Board a fair reward structure that incentivises Executive Directors to promote and deliver the Groups strategic objectives whilst maintaining stability in the management of its long term business.
Members of the Committee
Date appointed
Meetings attended James Dean 1102010 7 4 4 Philip Watson 2512013 4 4 4 Andrew Varley 3052013 4 4 4 Rosalyn Wilton 1472016 1 3 3 Charles Cayzer retired 30 September 2016 1102010 na 1 2 Bracketed numbers indicate the number of meetings the member was eligible to attend.
Tenure is measured from date of appointment to the Committee and as at 31 March 2017 rounded to the nearest whole year.
2017 Policy renewal highlights An increase in the minimum shareholding requirement to 700% of salary from 400% and the introduction of one year postcessation shareholding requirement of 100% of salary Provision for individuals who have met their shareholding requirement to opt out of bonus deferral and increasing the level and period of bonus deferral for those individuals who have not met their requirement Improved alignment with emerging corporate governance best practice through the introduction of a two year holding period post vesting for long term awards Clarication on the malus and clawback provisions including time horizons in which they may operate No other material changes to the current policy Chairmans introduction The Groups Remuneration Policy Policy is designed to align Executive pay and incentives with the Companys goals and encourage and reward exceptional overall and individual performance.
The Policy we have operated for the past three nancial years was approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM and our new Policy which is presented on pages 88 to 99 is being put forward for a binding vote at the forthcoming AGM.
The Committee believes the proposed Policy is better suited to incentivise and motivate management to deliver the Companys strategy over the next three year period and this is explained in further detail in the Directors
Remuneration Policy report.
Our Annual Report on Remuneration contains details of our payouts during the nancial year being reported on and how we intend to implement our new Policy for the year ended 31 March 2018.
This part of the report is subject to an advisory vote at the AGM.
Performance during 201617 The KPIs which underpin the Companys incentive plans are EPRA earnings per share EPS total property return TPR total accounting return TAR and total shareholder return TSR.
The Groups decision to reposition the portfolio towards the logistics market away from the physical retail market to reect the change in consumer shopping patterns is proving to be protable.
The long term secure income ows from the logistics sector supported by our development strategy has delivered strong nancial performance which is reected in the sums paid to Executive Directors in the year.
The Group remains committed to a progressive dividend that is fully covered by EPRA earnings and has increased its payment this year by 3.4% to 7 .5p per share.
EPRA earnings per share has increased by 5.1% to 8.2p and EPRA net assets per share by 1.4% to 149.8p.
Group like for like net rental income increased by 4.6% and the Groups total property return of 7 .4% outperformed the IPD Quarterly Universe Index reweighted to the Groups core assets of 5.9% by 150bp.
Total accounting return for the year was 6.4%.
Remuneration
Remuneration Committee report
This report is structured as follows Chairmans introduction page 82 Directors Remuneration at a glance page 85 Directors Remuneration Policy page 88 Annual Report on Remuneration page 100 82 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Annual bonus The Executive Directors have delivered successfully against a large number of operational and strategic objectives including contracted income growth portfolio repositioning diversied funding delivery of developments and strengthened relationships with key stakeholders.
This strong nancial and non nancial performance has been taken into account when considering the variable elements of remuneration.
The Committee has calculated annual bonuses for the Executive Directors to be at 89% of their respective maximum levels.
Half of the bonus will be deferred into shares which vest in equal tranches over three years.
LTIP vesting Vesting of the LTIP awards granted to Executive Directors in 2014 is dependent on Company performance over the three year period to 31 March 2017 .
Performance is measured by reference to TSR versus the FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector and EPRA EPS growth.
The Committee assessed performance and based on actual EPRA EPS of 8.2p and TSR performance of 25.2% 100% of both components are expected to vest in June 2017  subject to continued service.
The Committee is satised that the level of payout under the variable incentive plans is appropriate given the performance outcomes over the respective performance period.
No discretion was exercised by the Committee in relation to these outcomes.
Salary increases The Committee approved salary increases of 2.0% for the Executive Directors effective from 1 June 2017 which are lower than the increases for employees generally of 3.1%.
Policy renewal Increased minimum shareholding and new post cessation requirements One of the core principles of the current Policy is to create alignment between shareholders and Executive Directors by encouraging high levels of Executive share ownership.
The Committee believes that the Policy has been successful in achieving this as demonstrated by the table on page 85 which shows how a shift in the Companys share price has a material nancial impact on each Executive Director thereby ensuring they share the same ownership experience as other shareholders.
Furthermore this core principle has shaped one of the enhancements to the new Policy where we are increasing the minimum shareholding requirement for the Executive Directors to 700% of salary from 400%.
This coupled with the introduction of a one year post cessation share holding period equal to an individuals salary will ensure that Executive Directors are incentivised to deliver sustainable results and will also ensure they have an incentive to manage an orderly succession on departure.
Optout of Bonus Deferral In conjunction with the increase to the minimum shareholding requirements we are proposing that Executive Directors can opt out of annual bonus deferral if they have met the increased requirement.
The key purpose of bonus deferral is to link the interests of the Executive Directors and shareholders in the long term.
This objective will have been achieved when Executive Directors have satised the heightened minimum shareholder requirements and therefore any incremental bonus deferral will have an immaterial impact given the size of their shareholdings.
PwC research conducted with the London School of Economics indicates that Executive Directors perceive a time and forfeiture risk discount of 1020% per annum to deferred share bonus awards therefore the increased liquidity provided by cash payments increases the economic value of the remuneration and therefore the competitiveness of the Company without increasing headline incentive opportunities.
In recognition of this change the Committee is reducing the maximum bonus potential under the Policy from 200% of salary to 175% of salary for newly appointed Executive Directors.
The maximum bonus potential for the current Executive Directors is being retained at 165% of salary for the Chief Executive and 140% of salary for the other Executive Directors for the next nancial year.
For Executive Directors who have not met the minimum shareholding requirement deferral of up to 100% of the annual bonus for three years may apply which is increased from 50% deferral under the current Policy.
In addition shares will only vest at the end of a three year deferral period subject to continued employment rather than in three equal tranches over three years under the current policy.
LTIP holding period The Committee proposes to alter the LTIP to ensure performance is sustainable and it is aligned with corporate governance best practice by introducing a two year postvesting holding period during which the Executive Directors cannot dispose of shares other than for tax purposes.
All other terms of the LTIP remain the same as under the current policy.
The schematic on page 84 shows the proposed operation of the LTIP for the Chief Executive under the new Policy.
83 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued Shareholder consultation The Committee consulted extensively with shareholders and the main shareholder representative bodies Institutional Shareholder Services the Investment Association and Glass Lewis on the proposed Policy.
One of the areas discussed with shareholders was whether to introduce an element to the LTIP where performance was measured over a period of one year.
The Committee felt that whilst the current nancial LTIP metrics measure the output of a successful implementation of strategy over a xed three year time period they do not reect the decisions which are likely to make them sustainable such as businessasset mix new markets and acquisitions.
For a heavily cyclical business such as LondonMetric it is equally important to incentivise strategic and operational objectives which have an impact on the long term sustainable performance of the business but may not be in either the current bonus or LTIP performance scorecard.
The nature of operationalstrategic targets is that they ex and change over time and therefore the Committee proposal was to set and assess targets annually.
Recognising that the performance risk is less with an element assessed annually compared to over three years the Committee proposed a reduction in the maximum LTIP award level from the current policy.
Following the shareholder consultation exercise and having considered the proposed one year targets of LTV EPRA cost ratio and portfolio weighting the Committee decided not to proceed with the one year LTIP performance measure for the following reasons The Committee on reection felt that these objectives could be used as part of the current annual bonus plan within the personal objectives category Their use within the bonus under the personal objectives category would allow the Committee to provide more qualitative and granular disclosure of the objectives and targets something requested by a number of shareholders during the consultation and The removal of the annual element of the LTIP simplied the incentive proposals in line with the Committees desires and in line with the feedback from some of the shareholders.
Following the Committees decision not to proceed with the annual element of the LTIP it determined that the LTIP would continue to operate with the same maximum and terms as under the current Policy but with the addition of a holding period.
The Company is grateful for the engagement and constructive suggestions made during this process at the end of which the majority of shareholders indicated that they were supportive of the proposed Policy.
James Dean Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 31 May 2017 3 years after grant 5 years after grant
200% of salary Subject to performance and continued employment over 3 years
Release of awards Vested awards subject to 2 year postvesting holding period 84 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Directors Remuneration at a glance What we awarded during the nancial year and why Total remuneration for Executive Directors
Benets
Pension
Bonus
LTIP
Total
Total
Illustrative change in value of shares owned and outstanding share awards Andrew Jones 000 2362 2792 522 Martin McGann  1341 1003 382 Valentine Beresford  1412 1635 379 Mark Stirling  1412 1630 328 Based on an illustrative swing in share price of 10p.
For reference the highest closing share price during the year was 1.668 and the lowest closing price was 1.349.
The number of shares and share awards was calculated based on the year end total Actual total remuneration compared to the 2017 potential The following charts show the actual remuneration earned by the Executive Directors against the minimum on target and maximum scenarios for the year.
The remuneration payable to each of the Executive Directors is based on salaries agreed for the year under three different performance scenarios i Minimum ii Target and iii
The elements of remuneration have been categorised into three components i Fixed ii Annual Bonus including Deferred Bonus and iii LTIP .
The target scenarios assume 50% payout of the maximum opportunity under the annual bonus and 25% being threshold vesting of the LTIP .
For the purposes of comparison we have included the single gure remuneration for the year ending 31 March 2017 .
A comparison of the actual remuneration earned compared to the Policy scenarios demonstrates the strong performance of the Company over the period with actual remuneration being between the on target and maximum Policy scenarios.
Actual remuneration On target Maximum Minimum
61tel1283 Annual Bonus LTIP Andrew Jones
On target Maximum Minimum
1412 495 Annual Bonus LTIP Valentine Beresford
On target Maximum Minimum
1341 470 Annual Bonus LTIP Martin McGann
On target Maximum Minimum
1412 495 Annual Bonus LTIP Mark Stirling 85 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual bonus plan  targets and outcomes Payout target Combining these outcomes with the personal objectives gives the following payouts 000 % of maximum
EPRA EPS 8.01p 8.09p 8.22p 8.16p 74% Martin McGann 418 89 TPR 5.94% 6.53% 7.13% 7.40% 100% Valentine Beresford 441 89 Mark Stirling 441 89 It should be noted that the very strong actual TPR performance compared to the targets set at the beginning of the year was due to the strong performance of distribution assets and completed developments.
2014 LTIPs vesting in the year  targets and outcomes Payout target The estimated number of shares vesting are as follows Number Performance measure 25% 100% Actual % awarded Andrew Jones 658138 TSR 12.27% 18.40% 25.23% 100% Martin McGann 337422 EPRA EPS 7.61p 7.96p 8.16p 100% Valentine Beresford 355320 Mark Stirling 355320 The level of LTIP vesting in 2017 demonstrates the long term successful performance of the Company over the performance period with strong absolute earnings growth and a resulting comparative return performance in excess of the Companys direct competitors.
Remuneration continued 0% 250% 500% 750% 1000% 1250% Shareholding of the Executive Directors % of salary 700% Proposed new minimum shareholding requirement
Jones
Martin
McGann
Valentine
Beresford
Mark
Stirling
Shareholding requirement Benecially owned shares Unvested interests over shares Shareholding requirement Benecially owned shares Unvested interests over shares Shareholding requirement Benecially owned shares Unvested interests over shares Shareholding requirement Benecially owned shares Unvested interests over shares Due to the large shareholdings of the Executive Directors a relatively small change in the share price would have a material impact on their wealth.
For example a 10p dip in share price would result in a loss in value for the Chief Executive equivalent to 102% of his annual salary.
It is the Committees view that it is important when considering the remuneration paid in the year under the single gure to take a holistic view of the Directors total wealth linked to the performance of the Company.
In the Committees opinion the impact on the total wealth of the Director is more important than the single gure in any one year this approach encourages Directors to take a long term view of the sustainable performance of the Company this is critical in a cyclical business.
The ability for the Directors to gain and lose dependent on the share price performance of the Company at a level which is material to their total remuneration is a key facet of the Companys future Remuneration Policy.
86 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements How we intend to operate the Policy next year The table below illustrates the implementation of our new Policy for the coming year.
Base salary The Committee decided to increase base salaries for the Executive Directors by 2.0%.
The average increase across the Group was 3.1% Executive Director Base salary from 1 June 2017 Base salary from 1 June 2016 Andrew Jones 522115 511877 Martin McGann 342638 335920 Valentine Beresford 360811 353736 Mark Stirling 360811 353736
The maximum contribution into the Executive Directors individual personal pension plan or a salary supplement in lieu of pension will be 15% of gross base salary.
Benets
Standard benets will be provided.
See Remuneration Policy for further details.
Annual bonus The maximum bonus opportunity will remain at 165% of salary for the Chief Executive and 140% of salary for the other Executive Directors.
The performance conditions and their weightings for the annual bonus are as follows
Growth in EPRA EPS 35% Growth in Companys EPRA EPS against a range of challenging targets Growth in total property return TPR 35% Growth in Companys TPR against IPD Quarterly Universe Index Full payout if growth is 120% of the Index 50% payout if growth is 1 10% of the Index 25% payout if growth matches the Index Straight line interpolation between limits No payout if TPR is negative
30% Vary between individuals and include portfolio management metrics nancial and people management investor relations and regulatory compliance The Committee believes that the EPRA EPS target and details of the personal objectives for the coming year are commercially sensitive and accordingly these are not disclosed.
These will be reported and disclosed retrospectively next year in order for shareholders to assess the basis for any payouts.
Under the proposed Policy bonus deferral will not apply for the Executive Directors if they have met the new shareholding guideline.
At the date of this report each of the Executive Directors shareholdings exceeds their minimum requirements.
LTIP
In line with the operation last year awards made under the LTIP in the year to 31 March 2018 will be 200% of salary for the Chief Executive and 165% for other Executive Directors.
Performance measures Weighting
25% vesting
100% vesting Total shareholder return TSR 37.5% Equal to index Equal to upper quartile ranked company Total accounting return TAR 37.5% Equal to index Equal to upper quartile ranked company EPRA EPS growth 25% RPI plus 3% over three years RPI plus 8% over three years Straight line interpolation between threshold and maximum TSR and TAR are relative measures measured against the FTSE 350 Real Estate Sector excluding agencies and operators the Index.
Under the TSR element there will be no payout if TSR is negative.
The Committee determined that the indices would not be weighted.
Non Executive Directors fees The current fees for the Non Executive Director roles are Chairman 250000 Base Non Executive Director fee 47754 Senior Independent Director additional fee 5000 Additional fee for AuditRemuneration Committee Chairmanship Additional fee for AuditRemuneration Committee membership Overview of Remuneration Policy for 201718 Key elements and time period Year ending Marchtel 2021 2022 Base salary
Benets
Annual bonus
Deferred shares
Non Executive Directors fees Key Performance period Vesting period Holding period 87 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Remuneration Policy The previous Remuneration Policy for the Group which was approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM on 17 July 2014 for a period of three years is near expiry.
This section outlines the new Remuneration Policy which subject to shareholder approval will take effect for three years from the 2017 AGM on 11 July 2017.
Overview of our new Policy The overriding objective is to operate a fair and transparent Remuneration Policy which motivates and retains individuals of the highest calibre and rewards the delivery of the Groups key strategic priorities long term growth and attractive shareholder returns.
As well as motivating remuneration plays a key role in retaining highly regarded individuals and needs to be competitive.
The principles which underpin the current Policy continue to be relevant to ensure that Executive Directors remuneration Is aligned to the business strategy and achievement of business goals Is aligned with the interests of shareholders by encouraging high levels of share ownership Attracts motivates and retains high calibre individuals Is competitive in relation to other comparable property companies Is set in the context of pay and employment conditions of other employees Rewards superior performance through the variable elements of remuneration that are linked to performance The table below outlines the key changes the Committee is proposing to ensure the Policy remains t for purpose and adheres to the principles outlined.
Remuneration continued Area Proposed change Rationale for change Minimum shareholding requirement Increase the minimum shareholding requirement from 400% of salary to 700% of salary for existing Executive Directors.
Current arrangement will apply for new Executive Directors.
Increasing the current shareholding requirement will ensure the lockin and sustained alignment between Executive Directors and shareholder interests.
Post leaving shareholding requirement Introduction of a postleaving shareholding requirement of 100% of salary lasting one year from the date of cessation.
Ensures a focus on successful succession planning providing an ongoing equity risk and is in line with emerging shareholder sentiment.
LTIP post vesting holding period Introduction of a two year holding period during which individuals cannot sell shares other than for tax purposes.
Five year time period for long term incentives is in line with corporate governance best practice.
Bonus deferral Executive Directors who have met their minimum shareholding requirement may opt out of bonus deferral and receive 100% of the annual bonus in cash.
For those who have not met the minimum requirement deferral may be up to 100% of the annual bonus minimum 50%.
Deferred share bonus payments where operated to vest in full after three years as opposed to in three equal instalments over the three year period.
The key purpose of bonus deferral is to link the interests of the Executive Directors and shareholders in the long term.
The extensive shareholding already built up by the Executive Directors has achieved this goal and therefore share price movements have a material impact on wealth.
Cash payments increase the economic value of the remuneration without increasing headline incentive opportunities.
Vesting schedule of deferred shares brought in line with market practice.
Maximum bonus opportunity Maximum bonus award in exceptional circumstances reduced from 200% to 175% of salary.
For current Executive Directors the maximum level of award is retained at 165%.
Reduced level of awards in exceptional circumstances will achieve a similar perceived value in light of the potential removal of bonus deferral.
Malus and clawback provisions The new Policy provides clarication on the malus and clawback circumstances and the time horizons within which they may be operated.
These changes provide further protection for the Company and shareholders and help to ensure sustainable performance.
88 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Executive Directors Remuneration Policy Table Base salary Purpose and link to strategy Provide a competitive level of xed pay to attract and retain Executive Directors of the required calibre to deliver the Groups strategy.
Level of pay reects individuals skills seniority and experience and complexity of the role.
Operation An Executive Directors basic salary is set on appointment and reviewed annually with changes taking effect from 1 June or when there is a change in position or responsibility.
When determining an appropriate level of salary the Committee considers Pay increases to other employees Remuneration practices within comparable property companies Any change in scope role and responsibilities The general performance of the Company and each individual The experience of the relevant Director The economic environment Individuals who are recruited or promoted to the Board may on occasion have their salaries set below the targeted policy level until they become established in their role.
In such cases subsequent increases in salary may be higher than the general rise for employees until the target positioning is achieved.
Maximum opportunity The Committee ensures that maximum salary levels are positioned in line with companies of a similar size to the Group and validated against other property companies so that they are competitive against the market.
The Committee intends to review the comparator group each year and will add or remove companies as it considers appropriate.
In general salary increases for Executive Directors will be in line with the increase for employees.
However larger increases may be offered if there is a material change in the scope and responsibilities of the role including signicant changes in Group size andor complexity or if it is necessary to remain competitive to retain a Director.
The Company will set out in the section of the Annual Report on Remuneration headed Statement of Implementation of Remuneration Policy in the following nancial year the salaries for that year for each of the Executive Directors.
Performance measures The Directors are subject to an annual performance assessment the outcome of which is taken account of in setting base salaries.
Pension
Purpose and link to strategy Provide a competitive postretirement benet to attract and retain individuals.
Operation The Company provides a pension contribution allowance in line with practice relative to its comparators to enable the Company to recruit and retain Executive Directors with the experience and expertise to deliver the Groups strategy.
This allowance will be a nonconsolidated allowance and will not impact any incentive calculations.
Maximum opportunity The maximum contribution is 15% of salary which is payable as a monthly contribution to the Executive Directors individual personal pension plan or taken as a cash equivalent.
Salary sacrice arrangements can apply.
No element other than base salary is pensionable.
Performance measures
89 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued Executive Directors Remuneration Policy Table continued
Purpose and link to strategy Provide a comprehensive and competitive benet package to aid recruitment and the retention of high quality Executive Directors.
Operation Each Executive Director receives the following Car allowance Private medical insurance Life insurance Permanent health insurance The Committee recognises the need to maintain suitable exibility in the benets provided to ensure it is able to support the objective of attracting and retaining personnel in order to deliver the Group strategy.
Additional benets which are available to other employees on broadly similar terms may therefore be offered.
Maximum opportunity Car allowance is 20000 per annum for each Executive Director.
Other benets are provided at the market rate and therefore the cost will vary from year to year based on the cost from third party providers.
Performance measures
Annual bonus Purpose and link to strategy Incentivise the achievement of annual nancial targets consistent with the Groups business plan for the relevant nancial year with particular focus on total property return TPR and EPRA earnings per share EPS as well as the delivery of agreed personal objectives.
Operation Annual performance targets are set by the Committee at the start of the nancial year linked to the Groups long term strategy of growth in EPRA EPS and TPR.
At least half of the bonus will be linked to the key property and nancial metrics.
Non nancial targets are set to measure individual strategic performance and contribution to the achievement of portfolio management initiatives and other operational management objectives.
Executive Directors who have met their minimum shareholding requirement have the option to receive the annual bonus paid in cash.
For those who are yet to meet the minimum shareholding requirement up to 100% of the annual bonus will be paid in deferred shares vesting after three years.
No further performance conditions will apply to these shares other than continued employment and dividend equivalents are paid out at the end of the vesting period.
The annual bonus contains malus and clawback provisions as noted on page 95.
Maximum opportunity The current maximum bonus for the Chief Executive is 165% of salary and 140% of salary for the other Executive Directors.
The payout for on target performance is 50% of the maximum and the payout for threshold performance is 25% of maximum.
In exceptional circumstances such as recruitment the Committee may award a bonus opportunity of up to 1 75% of salary.
However the maximum bonus limit for current Executive Directors will be capped at 165% i.
Directors.
Performance measures Performance is assessed against target nancial and non nancial measures which may vary each year depending on the annual priorities of the business.
At least half of the bonus payment is subject to nancial andor property performance targets.
The Committee will set challenging annual targets consistent with the Groups business strategy that are appropriately stretching but achievable.
The Committee is of the opinion that due to the commercial sensitivity of annual targets targets will be disclosed retrospectively.
Details of the targets set and measures applied for the current nancial year can be found in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 101 and 102.
The Committee retains discretion to make downward or upward adjustments to the amount of bonus payable resulting from the application of the performance measures if it believes that the outcomes are not a fair and accurate reection of business performance.
90 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Executive Directors Remuneration Policy Table continued Long term incentives Purpose and link to strategy Incentivise and reward the delivery of long term Group performance and sustained growth in line with business strategy thereby building a shareholding in the Group and aligning Executive Directors interests with shareholders interests.
Operation The LTIP rules were approved by the shareholders at the 2013 AGM.
Awards are granted annually to Executive Directors in the form of a conditional share award or nil cost option.
Details of the performance conditions for grants made in the year will be set out in the Annual
Report on Remuneration.
If the Committee decides that the selected strategic metrics are commercially sensitive for future grants details will be disclosed retrospectively in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Awards will normally vest at the end of a three year period subject to the Executive Directors continued employment at the date of vesting satisfaction of the performance conditions Vested awards will be subject to a further two year holding period during which Executive Directors cannot dispose of shares other than for tax purposes.
The Committee may award dividend equivalents on awards that vest.
The LTIP contains malus and clawback provisions as noted on page 95.
Maximum opportunity Annual awards with a maximum value of up to 200% of salary for the Chief Executive and 165% of salary for the other Executive Directors based on the market value at the date of grant set in accordance with the rules of the LTIP .
25% of the award will vest for threshold performance.
100% of the award will vest for maximum performance.
There is straight line vesting between these points.
Performance measures For the awards to be made in the year to 31 March 2018 the following three year performance measures will apply to the award Total Shareholder Return TSR exceeding the TSR of the FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector Index excluding agencies and operators relative Total Accounting Return TAR EPRA EPS growth versus a base target plus RPI The award to be made in the year to 31 March 2018 will be measured as follows 37 .5% on relative TSR 37 .5% on relative TAR 25% on EPRA EPS growth The Committee may change the balance of the measures or use different measures for subsequent awards as appropriate.
No material change will be made to the type of performance conditions without prior shareholder consultation.
In exceptional circumstances the Committee retains the discretion to vary substitute or waive the performance conditions applying to LTIP Awards if it considers it appropriate and the new performance conditions are deemed reasonable and are not materially less difficult to satisfy than the original conditions make downward or upward adjustments to the amount vesting under the LTIP award resulting from the application of the performance measures if it believes that the outcomes are not a fair and accurate reection of business performance 91 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued Non Executive Directors Remuneration Policy Table Fees and benets Purpose and link to strategy To attract and retain suitably qualied Non Executive Directors by ensuring fees are competitive.
Non Executive Directors are not eligible to receive benets other than travel hospitality related or other incidental benets linked to the performance of their duties as a Director.
Operation The Board is responsible for setting the remuneration of the Non Executive Directors.
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for setting the Chairmans fees.
Non Executive Directors are paid an annual fee and additional fees for chairmanship of Committees and for the Senior Independent Director.
The Company retains the exibility to pay fees for the membership of Committees.
The Chairman does not receive any additional fees for membership of Committees.
Fees are reviewed annually based on equivalent roles in the comparator group used to review salaries paid to the Executive Directors.
Non Executive Directors and the Chairman do not participate in any variable remuneration arrangements or other benets arrangements.
Maximum opportunity The fees for Non Executive Directors and the Chairman are broadly set at a competitive level against the comparator group.
In general the level of fee increase for the Non Executive Directors and the Chairman will be set taking account of any change in responsibility.
The aggregate fee for Non Executive Directors and the Chairman will not exceed 1 million.
The Company will pay reasonable expenses incurred by the Non Executive Directors and Chairman and may settle any tax incurred in relation to these.
Recruitment remuneration arrangements for Executive Directors
Salary Benets and Pension These will be set in line with the policy for existing Executive Directors.
Annual Bonus Maximum annual participation will be set in line with the Companys policy for existing Executive Directors and will not exceed 165% of salary 1 75% of salary in exceptional circumstances.
LTIP Maximum annual participation will be set in line with the Companys policy for existing Executive Directors and will not exceed 200% of salary.
Maximum Variable
The maximum variable remuneration which may be granted in normal circumstances is 365% of salary 375% of salary in exceptional circumstances.
This excludes in both cases the value of any buyouts.
Buyout of incentives forfeited on cessation of employment Where the Committee determines that the individual circumstances of recruitment justies the provision of a buyout the equivalent value of any incentives that will be forfeited on cessation of an Executive Directors previous employment the lapsed valued will be calculated taking into account the following the proportion of the performance period completed on the date of the Executive Directors cessation of employment the performance conditions attached to the vesting of these incentives and the likelihood of them being satised any other terms and conditions having a material effect on their value The Committee may then grant up to the same value as the lapsed value under the Companys incentive plans.
To the extent that it was not possible or practical to provide the buyout within the terms of the Companys existing incentive plans a bespoke arrangement would be used.
Relocation Policies In instances where the new Executive Director is required to relocate or spend signicant time away from their normal residence the Company may provide oneoff compensation to reect the cost of relocation for the Executive Director.
The level of the relocation package will be assessed on a case by case basis but will take into consideration any cost of living differences and schooling.
92 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Service contracts and payment for loss of office
General The Committee will honour Executive Directors contractual entitlements.
Service contracts do not contain liquidated damages clauses.
If a contract is to be terminated the Committee will determine such mitigation as it considers fair and reasonable in each case.
There are no contractual arrangements that would guarantee a pension with limited or no abatement on severance or early retirement.
There is no agreement between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
The Committee reserves the right to make additional payments where such payments are made in good faith to discharge an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement or compromise of any claim arising in connection with the termination of an Executive Directors office or employment.
Salary Benets and Pension These will be paid over the notice period.
The Company has discretion to make a lump sum payment in lieu.
Cash bonus Good leaver performance conditions will be measured at the bonus measurement date.
Bonus will normally be prorated for the period worked during the nancial year.
Other reason no bonus payable for year of cessation.
Discretion the Committee has the following elements of discretion to determine that an Executive Director is a good leaver.
It is the Committees intention to only use this discretion in circumstances where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders to determine whether to prorate the bonus to time.
The Committees normal policy is that it will prorate bonus for time.
It is the Committees intention to use discretion to not prorate in circumstances where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders Deferred share awards Good leaver all subsisting deferred share awards will vest.
Other reason lapse of any unvested deferred share awards.
Discretion the Committee has the following elements of discretion to determine that an Executive Director is a good leaver.
It is the Committees intention to only use this discretion in circumstances where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders to vest deferred shares at the end of the original deferral period or at the date of cessation.
The Committee will make this determination depending on the type of good leaver reason resulting in the cessation to determine whether to prorate the maximum number of shares to the time from the date of grant to the date of cessation.
The Committees normal policy is that it will not prorate awards for time.
The Committee will determine whether or not to prorate based on the circumstances of the Executive Directors departure LTIP Good leaver prorated to time and performance in respect of each subsisting LTIP award.
Other reason lapse of any unvested LTIP awards.
Discretion the Committee has the following elements of discretion to determine that an Executive Director is a good leaver.
It is the Committees intention to only use this discretion in circumstances where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders to measure performance over the original performance period or at the date of cessation.
The Committee will make this determination depending on the type of good leaver reason resulting in the cessation to determine whether to prorate the maximum number of shares to the time from the date of grant to the date of cessation.
The Committees normal policy is that it will prorate awards for time.
It is the Committees intention to use discretion to not prorate in circumstances where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders Other contractual obligations There are no other contractual provisions other than those set out above agreed prior to 27 June 2012.
93 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Change of control
Annual bonus cash Prorated to time and performance to the date of the change of control.
The Committee has discretion regarding whether to prorate the bonus to time.
The Committees normal policy is that it will prorate the bonus for time.
It is the Committees intention to use its discretion to not pro rate in circumstances only where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders.
Annual bonus deferred shares Subsisting deferred share awards will vest on a change of control.
The Committee has discretion regarding whether to prorate the award to time.
The Committees normal policy is that it will not prorate awards for time.
The Committee will make this determination depending on the circumstances of the change of control.
LTIP The number of shares subject to subsisting LTIP awards will vest on a change of control prorated to time and performance.
The Committee has discretion regarding whether to prorate the LTIP awards to time.
The Committees normal policy is that it will prorate the LTIP awards for time.
It is the Committees intention to use its discretion to not prorate in circumstances only where there is an appropriate business case which will be explained in full to shareholders.
Remuneration continued The Committees remuneration decisions are heavily steered by the Groups strategic direction and corporate objectives as reected by the selected performance metrics for the annual bonus and the LTIP .
The following table demonstrates how the Companys strategic KPIs are aligned to our incentive arrangements.
Further details of these KPIs can be found on pages 24 and 25 of this Annual Report.
Company ObjectiveKPI Annual Bonus cash Annual Bonus deferred shares LTIP Deliver long term shareholder returns Total shareholder return Maximise long term total accounting return Total accounting return Maximise property portfolio returns Total property return Deliver sustainable growth in EPRA earnings EPRA earnings per share Drive like for like income growth through management actions Like for like income growth Maintain strong occupier contentment EPRA vacancy Maintain a higher than market benchmark WAULT
Key remuneration objective Encourage the buildup and retention of shares In the Committees opinion it is key that the incentive arrangements operated by the Company are directly linked to the achievement of the Companys strategy and overall corporate objectives.
It is the Committees belief that the proposed incentive elements of the new Policy align with these objectives.
Strategy Link to Remuneration Policy The following table outlines the Policy for the treatment of incentives in the event of a change of control 94 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Recruitment remuneration arrangements The Companys principle is that the remuneration of any new recruit will be assessed in line with the same principles as for the Executive Directors as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
The Committee is mindful that it wishes to avoid paying more than it considers necessary to secure a preferred candidate with the appropriate calibre and experience needed for the role.
In setting the remuneration for new recruits the Committee will have regard to guidelines and shareholder sentiment regarding oneoff or enhanced short term or long term incentive payments as well as giving consideration for the appropriateness of any performance measures associated with an award.
Where an existing employee is promoted to the Board the policy would apply from the date of promotion but there would be no retrospective application of the policy in relation to subsisting incentive awards or remuneration arrangements.
Accordingly prevailing elements of the remuneration package for an existing employee would be honoured and form part of the ongoing remuneration of the person concerned.
These would be disclosed to shareholders in the Remuneration Committee report for the relevant nancial year.
New Non Executive Directors will be appointed through letters of appointment and fees set at a competitive market level and in line with the other existing Non Executive
Letters of appointment are normally for an initial term of three years and are subject to a notice period of three months by either party.
Service contracts and payment for loss of office The service contracts for the Executive Directors were reviewed and revised following the merger in 2013.
Service contracts are terminable by either party with notice of 12 months.
The Committee considers this appropriate for all existing and newly appointed Directors.
The Non Executive Directors do not have service contracts but are appointed under letters of appointment.
Each Non Executive is subject to an initial three year term followed by annual reelection at the Companys AGM.
The following denition of leavers will apply to both the annual bonus and the LTIP .
A good leaver reason is dened as cessation in the following circumstances
Illhealth
Injury or disability
Retirement
Employing company ceasing to be a Group company Transfer of employment to a company which is not a Group company At the discretion of the Committee Cessation of employment in circumstances other than those set out above is cessation for other reasons.
Malus and clawback The following denition of malus and clawback will apply to both the annual bonus including any deferred shares and the LTIP .
Malus is the adjustment of the annual bonus payments or unvested LTIP awards because of the occurrence of one or more circumstances listed below.
The adjustment may result in the value being reduced to nil.
Clawback is the recovery of payments made under the annual bonus or vested LTIP awards as a result of the occurrence of one or more circumstances listed below.
Clawback may apply to all or part of a participants payment under the annual bonus or LTIP award and may be effected among other means by requiring the transfer of shares payment of cash or reduction of awards or bonuses.
The circumstances in which malus and clawback could apply are as follows Discovery of a material misstatement resulting in an adjustment in the audited accounts of the Group or any Group company The assessment of any performance condition or condition in respect of an annual bonus payment or LTIP award was based on error or inaccurate or misleading information The discovery that any information used to determine the annual bonus payment or LTIP award was based on error or inaccurate or misleading information Action or conduct of a participant which amounts to fraud or gross misconduct Events or the behaviour of a participant have led to the censure of a Group company by a regulatory authority or have had a signicant detrimental impact on the reputation of any Group company provided that the Board is satised that the relevant participant was responsible for the censure or reputational damage and that the censure or reputational damage is attributable to the participant The following table outlines the time periods during which these recovery provisions may apply for each element of remuneration
Annual bonus cash Up to the date of the cash payment Two years post the date of any cash payment Annual bonus deferred shares To the end of the three year vesting period na LTIP To the end of the three year vesting period Two years post vesting 95 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Shareholding guidelines Minimum shareholding requirement In line with the Groups remuneration principles the Remuneration Policy places signicant importance on aligning the long term interests of shareholders with those of management by encouraging the Executive Directors to build up over a ve year period and then subsequently hold a shareholding equivalent to a percentage of base salary.
Adherence to these guidelines is a condition of continued participation in the equity incentive arrangements.
In addition Executive Directors will be required to retain at least 50% of the posttax amount of vested shares from the Company incentive plans until the minimum shareholding requirement is met and maintained.
The following table sets out the minimum shareholding requirements.
Role
Shareholding requirement % of salary Chief Executive 700% Other Executive Directors 700% Newly appointed Executive Directors 400% The Committee has set the requirement at 400% of salary for the Policy period for newly appointed Executive Directors to reect the practical maximum that could be achieved if all incentives were earned over the Policy period and paid in shares.
Post leaving shareholding requirement The Committee has introduced a post leaving shareholding requirement for the Executive Directors who must retain shares equivalent in value to one years salary for 12 months post cessation.
This requirement provides further long term alignment with shareholders and ensures a focus on successful succession planning.
Other directorships Executive Directors are permitted to accept external non executive appointments with the prior approval of the Board where such appointments are not considered to have an adverse impact on their role within the Group.
Fees earned may be retained by the Director.
There were no new appointments in the year.
Andrew Jones is a Non Executive Director of Unite Plc and earned fees of 45225 in the year to 31 March 2017 .
Employee considerations The Company applies the same principles to the remuneration of all employees as it applies to the Executive Directors namely that Any incentive compensation is aligned to the business strategy and achievement of business goals The remuneration encourages employees to become shareholders The remuneration attracts motivates and retains high calibre individuals The remuneration is competitive in relation to other comparable property companies The incentive elements reward superior performance through the variable elements of remuneration that are linked to performance The Committee is mindful of the internal pay relativities when setting pay for the Executive Directors.
Whilst the Committee did not consult directly with employees on the drawing up of the new Policy given the small size of the Company it believes that the Board as a whole has an accurate picture of employees views.
The diagram below illustrates the cascade of pay structures throughout the business for the Chief Executive other Executive Directors and senior management for the year to 31 March 2017 .
The Committee believes this demonstrates a fair and transparent progression of remuneration throughout the Company which is in line with one of its core pay principles that variable performance based pay increases with seniority.
Element of pay
Chief Executive
Executive
Directors
Senior
Management
LTIP 200% of salary 165% of salary 51% of salary Annual bonus 165% of salary 140% of salary 72% of salary Pension 15% of salary 15% of salary 11% of salary Salary 511877 335920 to 96900 to Amounts for LTIP  annual bonus and pension represent the weighted average percentage of salary Remuneration continued 96 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Statement of consideration of shareholder views Following a thorough review of the current Remuneration Policy the Committee carried out an extensive consultation with top shareholders and their representative bodies on the changes featured in the proposed Policy.
We recognise the heightened attention placed on executive pay this year from both a political and corporate governance perspective and have proposed a Policy which the majority of shareholders were supportive of during the consultation process.
The Committee remains committed to ongoing dialogue with the Companys shareholder base to ensure the views of all stakeholders are taken in to account in order to ensure the correct decisions are made for the Company.
Illustration of potential remuneration for Executive Directors under the new Policy The charts below set out the potential remuneration receivable by the Executive Directors for the year to 31 March 2018 reecting base salaries proposed for the year commencing 1 April 2017 as reected on page 87 and as increased from 1 June 2017 .
The minimum scenario reects xed remuneration of salary pension and benets only as the other elements are linked to future performance.
Base salary is that to be paid in the year to 31 March 2018.
Benets are as shown in the single gure remuneration table for the year for the year to 31 March 2017 on page 101.
The on target scenario reects xed remuneration as above plus 50% of the maximum annual bonus entitlement and the threshold level of vesting for the LTIP awards being 25% for each performance requirement.
The maximum scenario reects the xed remuneration plus the maximum payout of all other incentive arrangements.
On target Maximum Minimum
100% 47% 33% 20% 25% 34% 41% LTIP Annual bonus Andrew Jones On target Maximum Minimum
100% 52% 30% 18% 28% 33% 39% Annual bonus LTIP Valentine Beresford On target Maximum Minimum
100% 52% 30% 18% 28% 33% 39% LTIP Annual bonus Martin McGann On target Maximum Minimum Fixed LTIP Annual bonus Mark Stirling 100% 52% 30% 18% 28% 33% 39% 97 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Pay at risk The charts below set out the target remuneration for each Executive Director for the year to 31 March 2018 based on whether the elements remain at risk categorised as follows Payment is subject to continuing employment for a period Performance conditions have yet to be satised Elements are subject to clawback or malus for a period over which the Company can recover sums paid or withhold vesting The annual bonus is at risk for three years due to the malus and clawback provisions on any paid awards and are also at risk for one year prior to the payment of any awards due to the stretching annual performance conditions.
201718 201819 201920 202021 202122 Annual bonus
691802 At risk Subject to malus cash 520408 Salary Subject to clawback Performance period Holding period 102082 Pensions and benets Andrew Jones deferred shares 201718 201819 201920 202021 202122 Annual bonus
381185 At risk Subject to malus 341519 Salary Subject to clawback Performance period Holding period 76480 Pensions and benets Martin McGann Remuneration continued 98 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements 201718 201819 201920 202021 202122 Annual bonus
401402 At risk Subject to malus 359632 Salary Subject to clawback Performance period Holding period 78436 Pensions and benets Valentine Beresford 201718 201819 201920 202021 202122 Annual bonus
401402 At risk Subject to malus 359632 Salary Subject to clawback Performance period Holding period 78749 Pensions and benets Mark Stirling LTIP awards are at risk due to performance conditions and malus provisions applying for the rst three years of an award.
Awards are at risk for a further two years due to the holding period during which Executive Directors cannot sell shares other than to settle tax obligations relating to the award and awards are subject to clawback.
Figures have been calculated based on target performance xed elements plus 50% of maximum annual bonus and 25% of the maximum LTIP.
The charts have been based on the same assumptions as set out on page 97 for the illustrations of the potential remuneration for Executive Directors for the year to 31 March 2018.
99 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued
Annual Report on Remuneration
Set out below is the Annual Report on Remuneration for the year ending 31 March 2017 which provides details of how the remuneration policy was applied and how we intend to apply the proposed policy for the year to 31 March 2018.
It is subject to an advisory vote at the forthcoming AGM and complies with UK Corporate Governance Code Listing Rules and The Large and Medium Sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
The areas of the report which are subject to audit have been highlighted.
The role of the Remuneration Committee The Committee determines Directors remuneration in accordance with the approved policy and its terms of reference which are reviewed annually by the Board and are available on the Companys website at site The Committees responsibilities include the following Setting and reviewing the Groups overall remuneration policy and strategy Determining and reviewing individual remuneration packages Determining and reviewing the rules for the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP and the Annual and Deferred Bonus Plan arrangements Approving salaries bonuses and share awards for the Executive Directors The Board recognises that it is ultimately accountable for executive remuneration but has delegated this responsibility to the Committee.
All Committee members are Non Executive Directors of the Company which is an important prerequisite to ensure Executive Directors pay is set by Board members who have no personal nancial interest in the Company other than as potential shareholders.
The Committee meets regularly without the Executive Directors being present and is independently advised by PwC a signatory of the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct and which has no connection with the Group other than in the provision of advice on executive and employee remuneration matters and taxation advice.
PwC were appointed as advisors during the nancial year under review after a competitive tender process replacing New Bridge Street a trading name of Aon plc.
Total fees paid to New Bridge Street were 25674 2016 103195.
Total fees paid to PwC in respect of remuneration advice to the Committee were 77 500.
No Executive Director is involved in the determination of his own remuneration and fees for Non Executive Directors are determined by the Board as a whole.
The Company Secretary acts as secretary to the Committee and the Chief Executive and Finance Director attend meetings by invitation but are not present when their own pay is being discussed.
The Chairman of the Committee reports to the Board on proceedings and outcomes following each Committee meeting.
Meetings and activities The Committee met on four occasions during the year.
The main activities of the Committee during the year and to the date of this report were as follows Reviewed and designed the proposed Remuneration Policy to be put forward for shareholder approval at the AGM on 1 1 July 201 7 Set a base EPS target for the 2016 LTIP awards and annual bonus for the year to 31 March 201 7 Approved Executive Directors share awards under the LTIP following the announcement of the Companys results for the year ended 31 March 2016 Approved the Deferred Bonus Shares vesting in the year for Executive Directors Assessed the performance of Executive Directors against targets set and determined annual bonuses for the year Reviewed and approved annual salary increases effective from 1 June 201 7 and reviewed against pay increases within the wider workplace Reviewed and approved the Chairmans annual fee to be xed at 250000 per annum until 31 March 2018 Reviewed its own effectiveness Terms of Reference constitution and performance Reviewed and approved the Remuneration Committee
100 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Single total gure of remuneration for each Director audited Salary and fees Benets
Annual bonus
Total
Director
Executive
Andrew Jones 000 1610 2362 2792 Martin McGann  4tel282 1341 1003 Valentine Beresford tel540 871 1412 1635 Mark Stirling  5tel871 1412 1630 Non Executive Patrick Vaughan    329 328 Charles Cayzer 31 61         31 61 Andrew Livingston 43          43 James Dean 62 61         62 61 Alec Pelmore 52 51         52 51 Andrew Varley 57 56         57 56 Philip Watson 55 51         55 51 Rosalyn Wilton 65 61         65 61 Taxable benets include the provision of a car allowance for Executive Directors and private medical insurance Pension contribution is 15% of salary excluding any salary sacrice and may be taken partly or entirely in cash Annual bonus payable in respect of the nancial year ending 31 March 2017 paid 50% in cash and 50% in deferred shares 2014 LTIP awards expected to vest in June 2017 for the performance period to 31 March 2017 .
The value of the award has been calculated by multiplying the estimated number of shares that will vest including the dividend equivalent by the average share price for the three months to 31 March 2017 .
The estimated gures disclosed in the previous annual report for 2016 vesting has been restated to reect nal vesting gures and the share price on the date of vesting Annual bonus outcome for the year ended 31 March 2017 The annual bonus performance targets set for the year to 31 March 2017 and the assessment of actual performance achieved is set out in the tables below.
Bonus awards are based 70% on the Companys nancial performance and 30% on the individuals contribution in the year.
The nancial performance element measures growth in EPRA EPS and Total Property Return relative to the IPD Quarterly Universe Index reweighted to the Companys core portfolio.
In determining the base EPRA EPS target the Committee looks to maintain consistency with longer term incentive targets but is mindful of shorter term strategic priorities and changing market conditions.
The 2017 annual bonus outcome is set out in the table below.
Financial objectives
Bonus % of maximum Bonus % of salary Total bonus Andrew Jones 61% 28% 89% 147% 751 Martin McGann 61% 28% 89% 125% 418 Valentine Beresford 61% 28% 89% 125% 441 Mark Stirling 61% 28% 89% 125% 441 Group nancial targets
Basis of calculation 0%
25% 50%
100%
EPRA EPS 35% Growth in EPRA EPS against a challenging base target
Base target plus RPI Base target plus RPI plus 1% Base target plus RPI plus 2.67% 8.16p 74% Total property return TPR 35% Growth in TPR against IPD Quarterly Universe index for the core portfolio
TPR matches index 5.94% TPR is 1.1 times index 6.53% TPR is 1.2 times index 7.13% 7.40% 100% The very strong actual TPR performance compared to the targets set at the beginning of the year was due to the strong performance of distribution assets and completed developments.
101 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued Individual non nancial targets Executive Directors non nancial targets accounted for 30% of the maximum bonus award.
Personal objectives were aligned to the delivery of the Groups key strategic objectives.
The Committee felt that all Executive Directors had substantially achieved their individual personal objectives and approved a payout based on achieving 93% of the maximum level.
The table below outlines the key personal objectives set and the Committees assessment of performance for each of the Executive Directors for the annual bonus awarded in the year to 31 March 2017 .
Objective Assessments Portfolio focus to maximise both EPS and NAV growth Recycling capital with sell down of non core and underperforming assets Focus on income growth to deliver opportunities in sustainable and progressive earnings Lengthen and strengthen relationships with key stakeholders institutional shareholders private client wealth managers occupiers and analysts Continue to realign the team in line with our evolving portfolio strategy Reinforce the position of the Company as leading investor partner of choice in logistics and out of town retail Focus on overhead costs to help deliver EPS growth 5.1% growth in EPRA EPS and 1.4% growth in EPRA NAV 62% invested in preferred distribution sector Like for like income growth of 4.6% WAULT maintained at 12.8 years and vacancy reduced to 0.4% Low EPRA cost ratio of 16% Held meetings with over 280 investors of which 36% were private wealth managers Successful equity placing which was oversubscribed at a tight 1.9% discount to the previous days share price and 6.3% premium to the last reported EPRA NAV Robust share price performance during period of political and economic uncertainty Andrew Jones Optimising the funding structure to support the real estate strategy Diversify available funding sources Deliver risk managementcorporate governance agenda to increasing satisfaction of stakeholders Focus on income quality to deliver growth in our sustainable earnings Improve our ranking in the EPRAGRESB sustainability rankings 130 million private debt placement diversifying lending sources and increasing the average maturity Successful equity placing of 62.8 million shares Awarded GRESB Green Star for rst time and EPRA sustainability Gold Award Enhanced board reporting of risk utilising risk dashboard Growth in EPRA EPS of 5.1% WAULT maintained at 12.8 years and vacancy reduced to 0.4% Martin McGann Continue to reposition portfolio with the objective of increasing distribution to c.70% and reducing retail bias to 20% over an 1824 month period Increase investment into the urban logistics sector Sell down non core exgrowth and underperforming assets Continue to strengthen team Promote the Company as partner of choice with developers vendors and agents Increased investment in distribution sector to 62% 201 6 54% and reduced investment in out of town retail parks to 13% 2016 20% 107 million of distribution acquisitions 97 million in urban logistics sector 128 million of retail sales 21 non core residential at sales Repeat business with key developers High proportion of off market deals reecting strong relationships with vendors purchasers and agents Valentine Beresford Portfolio focus to deliver both income and capital growth versus IPD benchmark Continuing to increase and improve our development pipeline through new opportunities new planning consents and new lettings Continuing focus on asset management to lengthen and strengthen our rent roll Maintain our high occupancy Retain our position as partner of choice amongst key retailers and developers Developments under construction at Crawley Dagenham and Stoke of 0.6 million sq ft Strong portfolio metrics with like for like income growth of 4.6% ERV growth of 3.8% and total property return of 7 .4% outperforming IPD by 280bps Increased asset management activity with 69 lettings and rent reviews Occupancy increased from 99 .3% to 99 .6% 70% of the logistics portfolio let to retailers Mark Stirling 102 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Deferred Bonus Plan In accordance with the existing Remuneration Policy 50% of the annual bonuses of the Executive Directors will be deferred and paid by way of shares in three equal instalments over three years subject only to continued employment.
Dividend equivalents accrue on shares held.
Income tax and employees national insurance liabilities are payable on release based on the market value of the shares at that date.
One third of the deferred shares granted on 19 June 2014 and held at 31 March 2016 vested on 19 June 2016.
One third of the deferred shares granted on 1 1 June 2015 and held at 31 March 2016 also vested on 1 1 June 2016.
Further shares representing one third of the June 2014 June 2015 and June 2016 awards are expected to vest in June 2017 .
Deferred shares representing 50% of the Executive Directors bonus entitlement for the year ended 31 March 2017 will be awarded in June 2017 .
The shares are held in an Employee Benet trust which at 31 March 2017 held 4501794 shares.
Outstanding deferred bonus shares held by the Executive Directors are set out in the table below.
Entitlement to Ordinary shares Date of grant Face value on grant At 1 April
Notional dividend shares
At 31 March Andrew Jones 19 June tel682  4582 96841 101423 11 June tel984  4457 61995 128446 8 June 2016 291  181288 6516  187804 Martin McGann 19 June 2014 166 89329  2113 44664 46778 11 June tel709  2437 33903 70243 8 June 2016 159  99142 3564  102706 Valentine Beresford 19 June tel920  2506 52960 55466 11 June tel105  2566 35702 73769 8 June 2016 168  104400 3752  108152 Mark Stirling 19 June tel920  2506 52960 55466 11 June tel105  2566 35702 73969 8 June 2016 168  104400 3752  108152 Face value is the weighted average share price over the ve business days immediately preceding the date of the award.
For 2014 this was 136.9p for 2015 this was 168.2p for 2016 this was 160.7p Long Term Incentive Plan Awards granted in the year to 31 March 2017 are summarised in the table below.
Basis of award % of salary Date of grant
Face value per share Face value of award Andrew Jones 200% 8 June 2016 637059 160.7p 1024 Martin McGann 165% 8 June 2016 344909 160.7p 554 Valentine Beresford 165% 8 June 2016 363201 160.7p 584 Mark Stirling 165% 8 June 2016 363201 160.7p 584 The face value is based on a weighted average price per share being the average share price over the ve business days immediately preceding the date of the award.
Awards will vest after three years subject to continued service and the achievement of performance conditions.
103 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued Performance condition Vesting level TSR measured against FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector excluding agencies and operators 37.5% of Award TSR less than index over 3 years 0% TSR equals index over 3 years 25% TSR between index and upper quartile ranked company in the index Pro rata on a straight line basis between 25% and 100% TSR equal or better than the upper quartile ranked company in the index 100% Total Accounting Return TAR measured against FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector excluding agencies and operators 37.5% of Award TAR less than index over 3 years 0% TAR equals index over 3 years 25% TAR between index and upper quartile ranked company in the index Pro rata on a straight line basis between 25% and 100% TAR equal or better than the upper quartile ranked company in the index 100% EPRA EPS growth against a base target plus RPI 25% of award Less than base plus RPI plus 3% over 3 years 0% Base plus RPI plus 3% over 3 years 25% Base plus RPI plus between 3% and 8% over 3 years Pro rata on a straight line basis between 25% and 100% Base plus RPI plus 8% over 3 years 100% TSR must be positive over 3 years The adjusted EPRA EPS base target for the three year performance periods commencing 1 April 2014 1 April 2015 and 1 April 2016 has been set at 7 .0p 7 .45p and 7 .77p respectively.
The Groups three year nancial forecast was taken into account when setting these targets along with consideration of strategic goals and priorities proposed investment and development plans gearing levels and previous years results.
Targets are considered challenging yet achievable in order to adequately incentivise management and are in line with the Companys strategic aim of delivering long term growth for shareholders.
Awards expected to vest in 201718 in relation to the three year performance period commencing 1 April 2014 are summarised below.
Performance measure
Weighting Basis of calculation 0% 25% 100%
Total shareholder return TSR 75% Growth in TSR against FTSE 350 Real Estate
12.27% 12.27% 18.40% 25.23% 100% EPRA EPS 25% Growth in EPRA EPS against a challenging base target 7.61p 7.61p 7.96p 8.16p 100% 104 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
LTIP% of maximum
Estimated face value of award Andrew Jones 100% 658138 1000 Martin McGann 100% 337422 513 Valentine Beresford 100% 355320 540 Mark Stirling 100% 355320 540 The face value is based on the average share price for the three months to 31 March 2017 Outstanding LTIP awards held by the Executive Directors are set out in the table below.
Number of shares under award
Date of grant Face value on grant
1 April 2016
Notional dividend shares
At 31 March
Period
Andrew Jones 19.6.2014 136.9p 635302  22836  658138 1.4.2014 to 31.3.2017 11.6.2015 168.2p 563917  20269  584186 1.4.2015 to 31.3.2018 8.6.2016 160.7p  637059 22898  659957 1.4.2016 to 31.3.2019 Martin McGann 19.6.2014 136.9p 325716  11706  337422 1.4.2014 to 31.3.2017 11.6.2015 168.2p 296057  10641  306698 1.4.2015 to 31.3.2018 8.6.2016 160.7p  344909 12397  357306 1.4.2016 to 31.3.2019 Valentine Beresford 19.6.2014 136.9p 342992  12328  355320 1.4.2014 to 31.3.2017 11.6.2015 168.2p 311759  11205  322964 1.4.2015 to 31.3.2018 8.6.2016 160.7p  363201 13055  376256 1.4.2016 to 31.3.2019 Mark Stirling 19.6.2014 136.9p 342992  12328  355320 1.4.2014 to 31.3.2017 11.6.2015 168.2p 311759  11205  322964 1.4.2015 to 31.3.2018 8.6.2016 160.7p  363201 13055  376256 1.4.2016 to 31.3.2019 Awards granted as nil cost options Directors shareholdings and share interests audited The benecial interests in the ordinary shares of the Company held by the Directors and their families who were in office during the year and at the date of this report are set out in the table on page 106.
There were no movements in Directors shareholdings between 31 March 2017 and the date of this report.
The shareholding guidelines recommend Executive Directors build up a shareholding in the Company at least equal to four times salary.
All Executive Directors complied with this requirement at 31 March 2017 and as at the date of this report.
No Director had any interest or contract with the Company or any subsidiary undertaking during the year.
During the year the Executive Directors entered into individual personal loan arrangements with J P Morgan International Bank Limited and granted pledges over ordinary shares in the Company as security in connection with the loans.
The loans were used to repay debt secured against various residential investment properties held personally.
The number of shares pledged by each of the Directors is reected in the table on page 106.
105 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration continued
Interest
31 March 2017 Ordinary shares of 10p each
Interest
31 March 2016 Ordinary shares of 10p each LTIP shares subject to performance conditions
Total interests as at 31 March
Shareholding guideline met
Executive Directors Andrew Jones 2897922 2297455 1902281 417673 5217876 905% Yes 2552922 Martin McGann 2603148 2364174 1001426 219727 3824301 1238% Yes 2341585 Valentine Beresford 2498400 2171895 1054540 237587 3790527 1129% Yes 2084523 Mark Stirling 1992062 1665557 1054540 237587 3284189 900% Yes 1523358 Non Executive Directors Patrick Vaughan 13277500 13777500 Andrew Livingston 68898 James Dean 20000 20000 Alec Pelmore 145500 120500 Andrew Varley 47000 47000 Philip Watson 264000 214000 Rosalyn Wilton 50000 50000 Based on the Companys share price at 31 March 2017 of 159.8p and the benecial interests of the Directors Performance graph The graph shows the Groups total shareholder return TSR for the period from 1 October 2010 when the Company listed on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange to 31 March 2017  compared to the FTSE All Share REIT Index the FTSE 350 Real Estate Index and the FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector index.
These have been chosen by the Committee as in previous years as they are considered the most appropriate and relevant benchmarks against which to assess the performance of the Company.
The starting point required by the remuneration regulations was close to the bottom of the property cycle where a number of property companies launched rights issues while the Company did not.
The Companys share price had not fallen as much as the average share price of the FTSE Real Estate sector prior to this starting point thereby setting a higher initial base price for this graph.
Total shareholder return measures share price growth with dividends deemed to be reinvested on the ex dividend date.
The Companys total shareholder return over the period since merger in 2013 has outperformed all indices as shown in the graph below.
LondonMetric Property Plc FTSE All Share REIT Index FTSE 350 Real Estate Index FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector Index
Apr
Oct
Oct
Apr
Oct
Apr
Apr
Oct
Oct
Apr
Oct
Apr
Oct
Apr
Oct
Apr
Oct
Apr
Oct
Apr
Apr
Oct
LondonMetric Property Plc FTSE All Share REIT Index FTSE 350 Real Estate Index FTSE 350 Real Estate Super Sector Index 106 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Chief Executives remuneration table The table below details the remuneration of the Chief Executive for the period from the Companys listing on the main market of the London Stock Exchange on 1 October 2010 to 31 March 2017 .
Year to 31 March
Annual bonus as a % of the maximum payout LTIP vesting as a % of the maximum opportunity 2017 2362tel 2792tel 1167 78 2014 1296 100 Andrew Jones
Vaughan tel Andrew Jones became Chief Executive and Patrick Vaughan became Chairman on 25 January 2013 following the merger of the Company with Metric Property Investments plc For the six months from the Companys listing on 1 October 2010 to 31 March 201 1 Percentage change in Chief Executives remuneration The percentage change in the Chief Executives remuneration from the previous year compared to the average percentage change in remuneration for all other employees is as follows % change
Taxable benets
Chief Executive 2% 4% 29% Other employees excluding Chief Executive 3% 7% 20% The increase in the Chief Executives annual bonus this year was due to the implementation of a higher bonus opportunity of 165% as reported last year.
Payments to past Directors and for loss of office There have been no payments made to retiring Directors or for loss of office in the year.
Relative importance of spend on pay The table below shows the expenditure and percentage change in spend on employee remuneration compared to other key nancial indicators.
000 % change Employee costs 9716 9734 0.2%
45904 43689 5.1% Figures taken from note 4 Administration expenses on page 125 and are stated before any amounts capitalised and exclude share scheme costs Figures taken from note 7 Dividends on page 127 Statement of voting at AGM At the AGM on 14 July 2016 the Annual Report on Remuneration was approved with votes from shareholders representing 74% of the issued share capital of the Company.
At the 2014 AGM on 17 July 2014 the Directors Remuneration Policy was approved with votes from shareholders representing 68% of the issued share capital at the time.
The details of these outcomes are below.
2016 Annual Report on
2014 Directors Remuneration Policy Votes cast % Votes cast % For 455814470 98.48 415767605 98.82 Against 7035728 1.52 4948010 1.18 Withheld 11500 6977296 Total 462861698 427692911 Statement of implementation of Remuneration Policy for the year ending 31 March 2018 The table on page 87 illustrates how we intend to implement our policy over the next nancial year and gives details of remuneration payments and targets.
James Dean Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 31 May 2017 107 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Report of the Directors Martin McGann Finance Director The Directors present their report together with the audited nancial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The principal activity of the Group continues to be property investment and development both directly and through joint venture arrangements.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting  AGM of the Company will be held at the Connaught Carlos Place Mayfair London W1K 2AL at 10 am on 1 1 July 2017 .
The Notice of Meeting on pages 149 to 153 sets out the proposed resolutions and voting details.
The Board considers that the resolutions promote the success of the Company and are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders.
The Directors unanimously recommend that you vote in favour of the resolutions as they intend to do in respect of their own benecial holdings which amount in aggregate to 23864430 shares representing approximately 3.4% of the existing issued ordinary share capital of the Company as at 30 May 2017 .
Substantial shareholders The Directors have been notied that the following shareholders have a disclosable interest of 3% or more in the ordinary shares of the Company at the date of this report Shareholder Number of shares % Rathbones 49841706 7.19 BlackRock Inc 46412504 6.70 Troy Asset Management 34981138 5.05 Cohen and Steers Inc 34565410 4.99 Ameriprise Financial Inc 25448848 3.67 Aberdeen Asset Managers 22058071 3.18 LaSalle Investment
21703121 3.13 The Vanguard Group Inc 20796019 3.00 Principal activities and business review The purpose of the Annual Report is to provide information to the members of the Company which is a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups performance business model and strategy.
A detailed review of the Groups business and performance during the year its principal risks and uncertainties its business model and strategy and its approach to responsible business is contained in the Strategic report on pages 1 to 56 and should be read as part of this report.
The Annual Report contains certain forward looking statements with respect to the operations performance and nancial condition of the Group.
By their nature these statements involve uncertainty since future events and circumstances can cause results and developments to differ from those anticipated.
The forward looking statements reect knowledge and information available at the date of preparation of this Annual Report.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a prot forecast.
Results and dividends The Group reported a prot for the year of 63.0 million 2016 82.7 million.
A second interim dividend for 2016 of 3.75p per share and the rst two quarterly dividends for 2017 totalling 3.6p per share were paid in the year of which 6.2p was paid as a Property Income Distribution PID.
The third quarterly dividend of 1.8p was paid following the year end on 18 April 2017 as a PID.
The Directors have approved a fourth quarterly dividend of 2.1p per share payable on 10 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 9 June 2017  of which 1.3p will be paid as a PID.
The total dividend charge for the year to 31 March 2017 was 7 .5p per share an increase of 0.25p or 3.4% over the previous year.
Of the total dividend for 2017 of 7 .5p 6.7p was paid as a PID as required by REIT legislation after deduction of withholding tax at the basic rate of income tax.
The balance of 0.8p was paid as an ordinary dividend which is not subject to withholding tax.
108 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Investment properties A valuation of the Groups investment properties at 31 March 2017 was undertaken by CBRE Limited and Savills Advisory Services Limited on the basis of fair value which amounted to 1533.8 million including the Groups share of joint venture property as reected in notes 9 and 10 to these accounts.
Share capital As at 31 March 2017  there were 692382431 ordinary shares of 10p in issue each carrying one vote and all fully paid.
There is only one class of share in issue and there are no restrictions on the size of a holding or on the transfer of shares.
None of the shares carry any special rights of control over the Company.
There were no persons with signicant direct or indirect holdings in the Company other than those listed as substantial shareholders on page 108.
On 27 March 2017 the Company issued 62804390 new ordinary shares at a price of 152p per share as a result of a successful equity placing.
The Company premarketed the placing largely to its top shareholders ahead of announcing.
The placing was oversubscribed with strong support from existing shareholders and several new investors.
A placing is an issue of shares directly to certain shareholders.
There are regulatory restrictions on placings designed to protect the rights of existing shareholders which the Company adhered to.
At the 2016 AGM shareholders gave the Company authority to allot shares up to a maximum amount of 20934797  representing one third of the Companys issued share capital as at 31 May 2016 and to allot shares up to a maximum nominal value of 6280439 representing approximately 10% of the Companys issued share capital at 31 May 2016 without having to rst offer those shares to existing shareholders.
The Company used the authority given to it at the 2016 AGM to issue the shares in connection with the placing which represented a 9.99% increase to the issued share capital as at 31 May 2016.
The placing raised gross proceeds of 95.5 million and the net cash received after deducting costs was 92.8 million which will be used to fund committed acquisitions and the development pipeline.
The price reected a 1.9% discount to the previous days share price and a 6.3% premium to last reported EPRA net asset value.
The fundraising structure of a placing allowed the Company to raise funds within less than one week reducing equity market risk and giving a high certainty of success.
In addition the Company issued 1534136 ordinary shares under the terms of its Scrip Dividend Scheme in the year.
Since the year end the Company issued a further 589633 ordinary shares in relation to the third quarterly dividend scrip alternative.
The rules governing appointments replacement and powers of Directors are contained in the Companys Articles of Association the Companies Act 2006 and the UK Corporate Governance Code.
These include powers to authorise the issue and buy back of shares by the Company.
The Companys Articles can be amended by Special Resolution in accordance with Companies Act 2006.
Purchase of own shares The Company was granted authority at the Annual General Meeting in 2016 to purchase its own shares up to an aggregate nominal value of 10% of the issued nominal capital.
That authority expires at this years AGM and a resolution will be proposed for its renewal.
No ordinary shares were purchased under this authority during the year.
Directors
The present membership of the Board and biographical details of Directors are set out on pages 60 and 61.
The interests of the Directors and their families in the shares of the Company are set out in the Remuneration Committee report on page 82.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all of the Directors will offer themselves for reelection at the forthcoming AGM on 1 1 July 2017 .
Directors and Officers liability insurance The Company has arranged Directors and Officers liability insurance cover in respect of legal action against its Directors which is reviewed and renewed annually and remains in force at the date of this report.
Employees
At 31 March 2017 the Group had 38 employees including all Directors.
The Company encourages employee involvement and consultation and invests time in ensuring staff are informed of the Groups transactions activities and performance through internal email communication of corporate announcements and regular briengs and presentations.
Its interim and annual results presentations are delivered to all staff along with other relevant employee matters including Health and Safety.
Certain employees are eligible to participate in the annual bonus and LTIP arrangements helping to develop an interest in the Groups performance and align rewards with Directors incentive arrangements.
The Company operates a non discriminatory employment policy and full and fair consideration is given to applications for employment made by people with disabilities having regard to their skills and abilities and to the continued employment of staff who become disabled.
The Company encourages the continuous development and training of its staff and the provision of equal opportunities for the training and career development of disabled employees.
The Company provides retirement benets for its employees excluding Non Executive Directors.
Further information relating to employees can be found on page 56 of the Strategic report.
109 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The environment Details of our approach to responsible business and its aims and activities can be found on the Companys website site where a full version of the annual Responsible Business report can be downloaded.
An overview of our responsible business activity can be found on pages 48 to 56 of this report.
The Group recognises the importance of minimising the adverse impact of its operations on the environment and the management of energy consumption and waste recycling.
The Group strives to improve its environmental performance and regularly reviews its management system and policy to ensure it maintains its commitment to environmental matters.
Shares held in the Employee Benet Trust The Trustees of the LondonMetric Long Term Incentive Plan hold 4501794 shares in the Company in trust to satisfy awards under the Companys Long Term Incentive and Deferred Bonus plans.
The Trustees have waived their right to receive dividends on shares held in the Company.
Suppliers
The Group aims to settle supplier accounts in accordance with their individual terms of business.
The number of creditor days outstanding for the Group at 31 March 2017 was 15 days 2016 16 days.
Financial instruments Details of the nancial instruments used by the Group and nancial risk management policies can be found in note 14 and in the Risk management report on page 40.
Charitable and political contributions During the year the Group made charitable donations of 35695 2016 20000.
No political donations were made during the year 2016 nil.
Provisions on change of control Under the Groups credit facilities the lending banks may require repayment of the outstanding amounts on any change of control.
The Groups Long Term Incentive Plan and Deferred Share Bonus Plan contain provisions relating to the vesting of awards in the event of a change of control of the Group.
Greenhouse gas reporting In accordance with Schedule 7 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 information regarding the Companys greenhouse gas emissions can be found on page 51.
Post balance sheet events Details of the Groups post balance sheet events are reected in note 19 to these nancial statements on page 137 .
Listing rule disclosures The information required to be disclosed in accordance with LR 9.8.4R can be found in this report on the following pages Interest capitalised page 126 Details of long term incentive schemes pages 91 and Non preemptive issue of equity page 109 Shareholder waivers of dividends page 110 All other subsections of LR 9.8.4R are not applicable.
Going concern The principal risks and uncertainties facing the Groups activities future development and performance are on pages 40 to 47 .
The Groups nancial position cash ows and liquidity borrowings undrawn facilities and hedging are described in note 14 to the accounts and in the Financial review on page 39.
Report of the Directors continued The Directors have reviewed the current and projected nancial position of the Group making reasonable assumptions about future trading performance property valuations and planned capital expenditure.
As part of this review the Group has considered its cash balances and undrawn facilities future capital commitments its debt maturity prole and the long term nature of tenant leases.
On the basis of this review and after making due enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements for the year to 31 March 2017 .
Viability statement The Companys statement on viability is presented on page 41.
Disclosure of information to auditor So far as the Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors report are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information.
Auditor
Deloitte LLP is willing to be reappointed as the external auditor to the Company and Group.
Their reappointment has been considered by the Audit Committee and recommended to the
A resolution will be proposed at the AGM on 1 1 July 2017 .
On behalf of the Board Martin McGann Finance Director 31 May 2017 110 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Directors responsibility statement The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have elected to prepare the Parent Company nancial statements in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Under Company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the prot or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing the Parent Company nancial statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent State whether applicable Financial Reporting Standard 101 FRS101 Reduced Disclosure Framework has been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the nancial statements Prepare the nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business In preparing the Group nancial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that Directors Properly select and apply accounting policies Present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information Provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specic requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys nancial position and nancial performance Make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the Company and to enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement We conrm that to the best of our knowledge The nancial statements prepared in accordance with the relevant nancial reporting framework give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities nancial position and prot or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole The Strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face The Annual Report and nancial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy By order of the Board Martin McGann Finance Director 31 May 2017 Andrew Jones Chief Executive 31 May 2017 111 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Inside this section Independent Auditors report 113 Group nancial statements 117 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements 121 Company nancial statements 138 Notes forming part of the Company nancial statements 140 Supplementary information 143 Glossary 148 Notice of Annual General Meeting 149 Financial calendar 154 Shareholder information 154
112 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent Auditors report to the members of LondonMetric Property Plc Opinion on nancial statements of LondonMetric Property Plc In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups prot for the year then ended the Group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent Company nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework the nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation The nancial statements that we have audited comprise the Group Income Statement the Group and Parent Company Balance Sheets the Group and Parent Company Statements of Changes in Equity the Group Cash Flow Statement the Statement of Accounting Policies and the related notes 1 to 19 for the Group and notes i to vii for the
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group nancial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Parent Company nancial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Summary of our audit approach Key risk The key risk that we identied in the current year was the assessment of the carrying value of the investment property portfolio.
Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 20.1 million based on 2% of equity.
For testing of balances that impacted EPRA earnings we used a lower materiality of 2.6 million based on 5% of that measure.
Scoping The Group is subject to a full scope audit on 100% of net assets revenue and prot before tax.
Signicant changes in our approach There has been no change to the basis upon which materiality is calculated our identied risks or our approach in scoping the audit from the prior year.
Going concern and the Directors assessment of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the Directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 1 to the nancial statements and the Directors statement on the longer term viability of the Group contained within the Strategic report.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors conrmation on page 40 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages 41 to 47 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors statement in note 1 to the nancial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identication of any material uncertainties to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the nancial statements the Directors explanation on page 41 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualications or assumptions We conrm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Independence
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and conrm that we are independent of the Group and we have fullled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We conrm that we are independent of the Group and we have fullled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also conrm we have not provided any of the prohibited non audit services referred to in those standards.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 113 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our assessment of risks of material misstatement The assessed risks of material misstatement described below are those that had the greatest effect on our audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
Valuation of investment property Risk description How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Key observations The Group owns a portfolio of largely retail and distribution property assets which is valued at 1534 million 2016 1521 million including share of joint venture properties as at 31 March 2017 .
The valuation of the portfolio is a signicant judgement area and is underpinned by a number of assumptions including i capitalisation yields ii future lease income and iii with reference to development properties costs to complete.
The Group uses professionally qualied external valuers to fair value the Groups portfolio at sixmonthly intervals.
The valuers are engaged by the Directors and performed their work in accordance with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Valuation  Professional
The valuers used by the Group have considerable experience in the markets in which the Group operates.
The valuation exercise also relies on the accuracy of the underlying lease and nancial information provided to the valuers by management.
Refer to page 77 Audit Committee report page 121 accounting policy and note 9 on pages 129 and 130 nancial disclosures.
We assessed managements process for reviewing and assessing the work of the external valuer and development appraisals We assessed the competence objectivity and integrity of the external valuer and read their terms of engagement with the Group to determine whether there were any matters that might have affected their objectivity or may have imposed scope limitations on their work We obtained the external valuation reports and met with the external valuers of the portfolio to assess the results of their work.
We assessed and challenged the valuation process performance of the portfolio and signicant assumptions and critical judgement areas including lease incentives future lease income and yields.
We benchmarked these assumptions to relevant market evidence including specic property sales and other external data We tested a sample of properties through benchmarking of yields understanding the valuation methodology and wider market analysis We performed audit procedures to assess the integrity of a sample of the information provided to the external valuer by agreeing that information to underlying lease agreements We tested a sample of the costs to complete in relation to the development properties via agreement to supporting documentation We concluded that the assumptions applied in arriving at the fair value of the Groups property portfolio by the external valuers were appropriate.
Property transaction accounting Risk description How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Key observations The group has undertaken a large number of property acquisitions for a total consideration of 151.0 million and disposals for total proceeds of 201.9 million including share of joint ventures.
These transactions can include complexities such as rental topup payments conditionality and deferred completion arrangements or joint venture contractual obligations requiring judgement as to the appropriate accounting to be applied.
Refer to page 78 Audit Committee report page 121 accounting policy and note 9 on pages 129 and 130 nancial disclosures.
We assessed the fair value of consideration and conrmed key transaction terms by reference to acquisition or disposal agreements and other external evidence for all signicant acquisitions and disposals in the year We considered the date at which the transactions completed based on the timing of the transfer of risks and rewards of ownership per the acquisition or disposal agreements and considered the impact of these transactions on revenue recognition We considered the adequacy of the disclosure of the transactions in the nancial statements We recalculated the prot or loss on disposals based on the terms of the transaction.
We concluded that all property transactions had been appropriately accounted for.
Independent Auditors report to the members of LondonMetric Property Plc continued 114 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Revenue recognition Risk description How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Key observations Revenue for the Group primarily consists of rental income earned on its investment property portfolio.
Total revenue for the year to 31 March 2017 was 83 million 2016 79 million including share of joint ventures.
Within revenue there are certain transactions which warrant additional audit focus and have an increased inherent risk of error due to their non standard nature.
Our risk of material misstatement focused on the accounting for unusual or more complex items including rent free periods and capital incentives requiring an understanding of specic terms and conditions which vary between lease contracts.
Refer to page 77 Audit Committee report page 121 accounting policy and note 3 on page 125 nancial disclosures.
As part of our audit of revenue we focused on any unusual and complex adjustments to revenue agreeing the lease incentives for a sample of items to the underlying leases with our sample covering both existing and new leases.
We recalculated the required adjustment to the annual rent in relation to these items to determine whether the correct amount of revenue had been recognised in the year.
We concluded that revenue was appropriately accounted for.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Our application of materiality We dene materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the nancial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or inuenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the nancial statements as a whole as follows
We determined materiality for the Group to be 20.1 million 2016 17 .9 million.
We consider EPRA Earnings as a critical performance measure for the Group and we applied a lower threshold of 2.6 million 2016 2.4 million for testing of all balances and classes of transaction which impact that measure primarily transactions recorded in the income statement other than fair value movements on investment property development property and derivatives.
Basis for determining materiality Materiality for the Group is based on 2% 2016 2% of shareholders equity.
For EPRA Earnings the basis used is 5% 2016 5% of that measure.
Rationale for the benchmark applied As an investment property company the main focus of management is to generate long term capital value from the investment property portfolio and therefore we consider equity to be the most appropriate basis for materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 1.0 million 2016 0.4 million as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identied when assessing the overall presentation of the nancial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Based on that assessment and consistent with our conclusion on scoping in the prior year our full scope audit is performed on 100% 2016 100% of the Groups net assets and 100% 2016 100% of revenue and prot before tax.
The Group is audited by one audit team led by the Senior Statutory Auditor responsible for the audit of the Company and each of its subsidiaries and joint ventures.
Our audit work on subsidiaries and joint ventures is carried out to a materiality which is lower than and in most cases substantially lower than Group materiality as set out above.
Our audit also included testing of the consolidation process and Groupwide controls.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the part of the Directors Report on Remuneration to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the information given in the Strategic report and the Report of the Directors for the nancial year for which the nancial statements are prepared is consistent with the nancial statements the Strategic report and the Report of the Directors have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identied any material misstatements in the Strategic report and the Report of the Directors.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 115 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us the Parent Company nancial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Report on Remuneration to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Corporate Governance Statement
Under the Listing Rules we are also required to review part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the Companys compliance with certain provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
Our duty to read other information in the Annual Report Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited nancial statements apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit otherwise misleading In particular we are required to consider whether we have identied any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the Directors statement that they consider the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the Annual Report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We conrm that we have not identied any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and Auditor As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibility Statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the nancial statements and for being satised that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
We also comply with International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are effective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Scope of the audit of the nancial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the nancial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the Parent Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of signicant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the nancial statements.
In addition we read all the nancial and non nancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited nancial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Claire Faulkner Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 31 May 2017 116 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent Auditors report to the members of LondonMetric Property Plc continued Group income statement For the year ended 31 March
Gross rental income 73905 67 948 Property operating expenses 814 830 Net rental income 3 73091 67 1 18 Property advisory fee income 1713 2191 Net income 74804 69309 Administrative costs 4 13268 13636 Amortisation of intangible asset 182 315 Total administrative costs 13450 13951 Prot on revaluation of investment properties 9 22200 51063 Lossprot on sale of investment properties 4503 2359 Share of prots of joint ventures 10 3560 4528 Operating prot 82611 113308 Finance income 17 40 2182 Finance costs 5 21340 32748 Prot before tax 63011 82742 Taxation 6 13 18 Prot for the year and total comprehensive income 62998 82724 Earnings per share Basic and diluted 8 10.1p 13.3p EPRA 8 8.2p 7.8p All amounts relate to continuing activities.
The notes on pages 121 to 137 form part of these nancial statements.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 11 7 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group balance sheet As at 31 March
Non current assets Investment properties 9 1373400 13461 10 Investment in equity accounted joint ventures 10 107 567 1 19666 Intangible assets  182 Other tangible assets 310 392 1481277 1466350 Current assets Trade and other receivables 11 18758 16049 Cash and cash equivalents 12 42944 42621 61702 58670 Total assets 1542979 1525020 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 13 46395 35343 46395 35343 Non current liabilities Borrowings 14 466319 567 910 Derivative nancial instruments 14 23350 23570 489669 591480 Total liabilities 536064 626823 Net assets 1006915 898197
Called up share capital 16 69238 62804 Share premium 88548 Capital redemption reserve 9636 9636 Other reserve 221374 222936 Retained earnings 6181 19 602821 Equity shareholders funds 1006915 898197 Net asset value per share 8 146.4p 143.9p EPRA net asset value per share 8 149 .8p 147 .7p The nancial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 31 May 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Martin McGann Finance Director Registered in England and Wales No The notes on pages 121 to 137 form part of these nancial statements.
118 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March
Share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings
At 1 April 2016 62804  9636 222936 602821 898197 Prot for the year and total comprehensive income  62998 62998 Equity placing 6280 86492 92772 Purchase of shares held in trust    5195  5195 Vesting of shares held in trust  3633 3629 4 Share based awards  1833 1833 Dividends 7 154 2056   45904 43694 At 31 March 2017 69238 88548 9636 221374 6181 19 1006915
Share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings
At 1 April 2015 62804  9636 223061 574650 870151 Prot for the year and total comprehensive income  82724 82724 Purchase of shares held in trust    419  419 Vesting of shares held in trust    294 12 306 Share based awards  1606 1606 Dividends 756171 At 31 March 2016 62804  9636 222936 602821 898197 The notes on pages 121 to 137 form part of these nancial statements.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 11 9 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 Cash ows from operating activities Prot before tax 63011 82742 Adjustments for non cash items Prot on revaluation of investment properties 22200 51063 Lossprot on sale of investment properties 4503 2359 Share of post tax prot of joint ventures 3560 4528 Movement in lease incentives 293 5173 Share based payment 1833 1606 Amortisation of intangible asset 182 315 Net nance costs 19 600 30566 Cash ows from operations before changes in working capital 63662 52106 Change in trade and other receivables 902 2360 Change in trade and other payables 9686 165 Cash ows from operations 74250 54301 Interest received 64 50 Interest paid 17 149 16516 Tax paid 34 8 Financial arrangement fees and break costs 6340 6960 Cash ows from operating activities 50791 30867 Investing activities Purchase of investment properties 147 348 179 000 Purchase of other tangible assets  60 Capital expenditure on investment properties 19 387 43584 Lease incentives paid 6495 26006 Sale of investment properties 165035 123353 Investments in joint ventures 450 10 Distributions from joint ventures 16109 33238 Cash ow from investing activities 7464 92069 Financing activities Dividends paid 43694 56171 Proceeds from issue of ordinary shares 92772 Purchase of shares held in trust 5195 419 Vesting of shares held in trust 4 306 New borrowings 226181 478275 Repayment of loan facilities 328000 368736 Cash ows from nancing activities 57 932 53255 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 323 7 947 Opening cash and cash equivalents 42621 50568 Closing cash and cash equivalents 42944 42621 The notes on pages 121 to 137 form part of these nancial statements.
Group cash ow statement For the year ended 31 March 120 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 2017 1 Signicant accounting policies a General information LondonMetric Property Plc is a company incorporated in the United Kingdom under the Companies Act.
The address of the registered office is given on page 154.
The principal activities of the Company and its subsidiaries the Group and the nature of the Groups operations are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 56.
The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
The nancial statements are prepared on a going concern basis as explained in the Report of the Directors on page 1 10.
The functional and presentational currency of the Group is sterling.
The nancial statements are prepared on the historical cost basis except that investment and development properties and derivative nancial instruments are stated at fair value.
The accounting policies have been applied consistently in all material respects.
The preparation of nancial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period.
If the revision affects both current and future periods the change is recognised over those periods.
The accounting policies subject to signicant judgements and estimates are as follows Property valuations The valuation of the property portfolio is a critical part of the Groups performance.
The Group carries the property portfolio at fair value in the balance sheet and engages professionally qualied external valuers to undertake sixmonthly valuations.
The determination of the fair value of each property requires to the extent applicable the use of estimates and assumptions in relation to factors such as future lease income lease incentives current market rental yields future development costs and the appropriate discount rate.
In addition to the extent possible the valuers make reference to market evidence of transaction prices for similar properties.
The fair value of a development property is determined by using the residual method which deducts all estimated costs necessary to complete the development together with an allowance for development risk prot and purchasers costs from the fair valuation of the completed property.
Signicant transactions Some property transactions are complex and require management to assess whether the acquisition of property through a corporate vehicle represents an asset acquisition or a business combination under IFRS 3.
Where there are signicant other assets and liabilities acquired in addition to property the transaction is accounted for as a business combination.
Where there are not it is accounted for as an asset purchase.
Other complexities include conditionality inherent in transactions and deferred property completions.
Revenue recognition Certain transactions require management to make judgements as to whether and to what extent revenue should be recognised and the appropriate cut off for property transactions.
Management consider whether the signicant risks and rewards of ownership of assets have been transferred between buyer and seller and the point at which developments reach practical completion.
Other complexities include accounting for rent free periods and capital incentive payments.
Presentation of information The Group operates through a number of joint venture operations which are accounted for under the equity method as described in Section dii of this note.
As management monitor the business on a proportionately consolidated basis the information presented in the Strategic report is consistent with this approach.
In addition EPRA performance measures are presented as Key Performance Indicators and in the Strategic report in line with other public real estate companies to highlight the recurring performance of the Group.
There is a reconciliation between IFRS reported prot and net assets and the equivalent EPRA measures in note 8 to these nancial statements.
REIT status The Group must comply with the UK REIT regulation to benet from the favourable tax regime.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 121 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 Signicant accounting policies continued ii Adoption of new and revised standards Standards and interpretations effective in the current period During the year the following new and revised Standards and Interpretations have been adopted and have not had a material impact on the amounts reported in these nancial statements Name Description Annual Improvements to IFRSs 2012  2014 Amendments to IFRS 5 Non Current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations IFRS 7 Financial Instruments  Disclosures IAS 19 Employee Benets and IAS 34 Interim Financial Reporting Amendments to IFRS 1 1 Accounting for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations Amendments to IFRS 16 and IAS 38 Clarication of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation Amendments to IAS 27 Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements IAS 1 and IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative Amendments to IFRS 10 IFRS 12 and IAS 28 Applying the Consolidation
Standards and interpretations in issue not yet adopted The IASB and the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee have issued the following standards and interpretations that are mandatory for later accounting periods and which have not been adopted early Name Description IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 2 amendments Classication and Measurement of Share Based Payment Transactions IAS 40 amendments Transfers of Investment Property IAS 7 amendments Disclosure Initiative IAS 12 amendments Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Annual Improvements to IFRSs 2014  2016 cycle Amendments to IFRS 12 The Directors do not expect that the adoption of the Standards listed above will have a material impact on the nancial statements of the Group in future periods except that IFRS 9 will impact both the measurement and disclosures of nancial instruments IFRS 15 may have an impact on the timing of revenue recognition and related disclosures and IFRS 16 will impact the accounting for those leases currently classied as operating leases.
Beyond the information above it is not practicable to provide a reasonable estimate of the effect of IFRS 9 IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 until a detailed review has been completed.
The consolidated nancial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries.
Subsidiaries are those entities controlled by the Group.
Control is assumed when the Group Has the power over the investee Is exposed or has rights to variable return from its involvement with the investee Has the ability to use its power to affect its returns In the consolidated balance sheet the acquirees identiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities are initially recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date.
The results of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated nancial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Where properties are acquired through corporate acquisitions and there are no signicant assets or liabilities other than property the acquisition is treated as an asset acquisition in other cases the purchase method is used.
Joint ventures are those entities over whose activities the Group has joint control.
Associates are those entities over whose activities the Group is in a position to exercise signicant inuence but does not have the power to jointly control.
Joint ventures and associates are accounted for under the equity method whereby the consolidated balance sheet incorporates the Groups share of the net assets of its joint ventures and associates.
The consolidated income statement incorporates the Groups share of joint venture and associate prots after tax.
The Groups joint ventures and associates adopt the accounting policies of the Group for inclusion in the Group nancial statements.
Investment properties are properties owned or leased by the Group which are held for long term rental income and for capital appreciation.
Investment property includes property that is being constructed developed or redeveloped for future use as an investment property.
Investment property is initially recognised at cost including related transaction costs.
It is subsequently carried at each published balance sheet date at fair value on an open market basis as determined by professionally qualied independent external valuers.
Changes in fair value are included in the income statement.
Where a property held for investment is appropriated to development property it is transferred at fair value.
A property ceases to be treated as a development property on practical completion.
In accordance with IAS 40 Investment Properties no depreciation is provided in respect of investment properties.
122 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 1 Signicant accounting policies continued Investment property is recognised as an asset when It is probable that the future economic benets that are associated with the investment property will ow to the Group There are no material conditions precedent which could prevent completion The cost of the investment property can be measured reliably All costs directly associated with the purchase and construction of a development property are capitalised.
Capital expenditure that is directly attributable to the redevelopment or refurbishment of investment property up to the point of it being completed for its intended use is included in the carrying value of the property.
An asset is classied as held for sale if its carrying amount is expected to be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
This condition is regarded as met only when the sale is highly probable the asset is available for sale in its present condition and management expect the sale to complete within one year from the balance sheet date.
Management has exercised judgement in considering the potential transfer of the risks and rewards of ownership in accordance with IAS 17 for all properties leased to tenants and has determined that such leases are operating leases.
Rental income from investment property leased out under an operating lease is recognised in the prot or loss on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Contingent rents such as turnover rents rent reviews and indexation are recorded as income in the periods in which they are earned.
Rent reviews are recognised when such reviews have been agreed with tenants.
Where a rent free period is included in a lease the rental income foregone is allocated evenly over the period from the date of lease commencement to the earlier of the rst break option or the lease termination date.
Lease incentives and costs associated with entering into tenant leases are amortised over the period from the date of lease commencement to the earlier of the rst break option or the lease termination date.
Property operating expenses are expensed as incurred and any property operating expenditure not recovered from tenants through service charges is charged to prot or loss.
Prots and losses on sales of investment properties are calculated by reference to the carrying value at the previous year end valuation date adjusted for subsequent capital expenditure.
Financial assets and nancial liabilities are recognised in the balance sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual terms of the instrument.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the nancial assets and liabilities are a reasonable approximation of the fair values.
Trade and other receivables and payables are initially measured at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
An impairment provision is created where there is objective evidence to suggest that the Group will not be able to collect receivables in full.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand deposits held at call with banks and other short term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value less attributable transaction costs.
Subsequently borrowings are stated at amortised cost with any difference being recognised in the income statement over the term of the borrowing.
The Group uses derivative nancial instruments to hedge its exposure to interest rate risks.
Derivative nancial instruments are recognised initially at fair value which equates to cost and subsequently remeasured at fair value with changes in fair value being included in the income statement.
Net nance costs include interest payable on borrowings net of interest capitalised and nance costs amortised.
Interest is capitalised if it is directly attributable to the acquisition construction or redevelopment of development properties from the start of the development work until practical completion of the property.
Capitalised interest is calculated with reference to the actual interest rate payable on specic borrowings for the purposes of development or for that part of the borrowings nanced out of general funds with reference to the Groups weighted average cost of borrowings.
Finance income includes interest receivable on funds invested at the effective rate and notional interest receivable on forward funded developments at the contractual rate.
Tax is included in prot or loss except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case the related tax is recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date together with any adjustment in respect of previous years.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 123 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 Signicant accounting policies continued Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for nancial reporting purposes and their tax bases.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner or realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable prots will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
The fair value of equitysettled share based payments to employees is determined at the date of grant and is expensed on a straight line basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
The cost of the Companys shares held by the Employee Benet Trust is deducted from equity in the Group balance sheet.
Any shares held by the Trust are not included in the calculation of earnings or net assets per share.
Dividends on equity shares are recognised when they become legally payable.
In the case of interim dividends this is when paid.
In the case of nal dividends this is when approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
2 Segmental information As at 31 March 2017 2016 Property value 100% owned
Total
100% owned
Total
Distribution 921165 6172 927 337 778340 6068 784408 Retail 290020 114800 404820 360505 114323 474828 Leisure 63245  63245 68970  68970 Offices 70000  70000 80200  80200 Residential 1655 39 456 411 1 1 1545 54350 55895 Development 27 315  27 315 56550  56550 1373400 160428 1533828 13467 41 1520851 For the year to 31 March 2017 2016 Gross rental income 100% owned
Total
100% owned
Total
Distribution 46144 411 46555 37 252 583 37 835 Retail 19 251 7 7 47 26998 20473 9112 29585 Leisure 4421  4421 5593  5593 Offices 3941  3941 4471  4471 Residential 68 953 1021 79 1389 1468 Development 80  80 80  80 73905 9  111 8301 6 67948 11084 79032 For the year to 31 March 2017 2016 Net rental income 100% owned
Total
100% owned
Total
Distribution 46200 412 46612 37 688 Retail 18677 7 683 26360 19835 9053 28888 Leisure 4421  4421 5581  5581 Offices 3678  3678 4434  4434 Residential  1014 Development 83  83 82  82 73091 8698 81789 67 1 18 10569 77 687 124 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 2 Segmental information continued An operating segment is a distinguishable component of the Group that engages in business activities earns revenue and incurs expenses whose results are reviewed by the Groups chief operating decision makers and for which discrete nancial information is available.
Gross rental income represents the Groups revenues from its tenants and net rental income is the principal prot measure used to determine the performance of each sector.
Total assets are not monitored by segment.
However property assets are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
The Group operates almost entirely in the UK and no geographical split is provided in information reported to the Board.
3 Net rental income For the year to 31 March Gross rental income 73905 67 948 Property operating expenses 814 830 73091 67 1 18 For the year to 31 March 2017  14% of the Groups gross rental income was receivable from one tenant.
For the comparative period 22% of the Groups gross rental income was receivable from two tenants.
4 Administration expenses a Total administration expenses For the year to 31 March Staff costs 9787 9852 Auditors remuneration 184 183 Depreciation 105 103 Other administrative expenses 3192 3498 13268 13636 b Staff costs For the year to 31 March Employee costs including those of Directors comprise the following Wages and salaries 8720 8567 Less staff costs capitalised 1762 1488 6958 7079 Social security costs 720 724 Pension costs 276 443 Share based payment 1833 1606 9787 9852 The emoluments and pension benets of the Directors are set out in detail within the Remuneration Committee report on page 101.
The long term share incentive plan LTIP that was created following the merger in 2013 allows Executive Directors and eligible employees to receive an award of shares held in trust dependent on performance conditions based on the earnings per share total shareholder return and total accounting return of the Group over a three year vesting period.
The Group expenses the estimated number of shares likely to vest over the three year period based on the market price at the date of grant.
In the current year the charge was 1.8 million 2016 1.6 million.
The Company awarded 2196467 LTIP shares during the year 1708370 of which were awarded to Executive Directors as shown in the Remuneration Committee report on page 103.
The cost of acquiring the shares expected to vest under the LTIP of 5.2 million has been charged to reserves.
Employee costs of 1.8 million 2016 1.5 million have been capitalised in respect of time spent on development projects.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 125 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 4 Administration expenses continued c Staff numbers The average number of employees including Executive Directors during the year was
Number
Head office and property management 33 35 d Auditors remuneration For the year to 31 March Audit services Audit of the Group and Company nancial statements pursuant to legislation 74 74 Audit of subsidiary nancial statements pursuant to legislation 79 79 Audit related assurance services 26 26 Other fees Other advisory services Total fees for audit and other services 179 179 In addition to the above audit fees 31000 2016 31000 was due to the Groups auditor in respect of its joint venture operations excluding LMP Retail Warehouse JV Property Unit Trust.
5 Finance costs For the year to 31 March Interest payable on bank loans and related derivatives 16916 15641 Debt and hedging early close out costs 3516 77 Amortisation of loan issue costs 1409 1404 Commitment fees and other nance costs 1643 1595 Total borrowing costs 23484 18717 Less amounts capitalised on the development of properties 1924 2669 Net borrowing costs 21560 16048 Fair value protloss on derivative nancial instruments 220 16700 Total nance costs 21340 32748 In April 2016 the Company bought down 66.3 million legacy out of the money interest rate swaps at a cost of 3.5 million.
6 Taxation For the year to 31 March The tax charge comprises Current tax UK tax charge on prot 13 18 The tax assessed for the year varies from the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK.
The differences are explained below For the year to 31 March Prot before tax 63011 82742 Tax at the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 2016 20% 12602 16548 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 36 63 Tax effect of income not subject to tax 1 1913 15687 Share of post tax prot of joint ventures 712 906 UK tax charge on prot 13 18 As the Group is a UKREIT there is no provision for deferred tax arising on the revaluation of properties or other temporary differences.
126 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 7 Dividends For the year to 31 March Ordinary dividends paid 2015 Final dividend 3.5p per share  21843 2015 Special dividend 2.0p per share  12482 2016 Interim dividend 3.5p per share  21846 2016 Second interim dividend 3.75p per share 23404 2017 First quarterly interim dividend 1.8p per share 11 257 2017 Second quarterly interim dividend 1.8p per share 11 243 45904 56171 Quarterly dividend payable in 201718 2017 Third quarterly interim dividend 1.8p per share 11 269 2017 Fourth quarterly interim dividend 2.1p per share 14458 The Company paid its third quarterly interim dividend in respect of the current nancial year of 1.8p per share wholly as a Property Income Distribution PID on 18 April 2017 to ordinary shareholders on the register at the close of business on 17 March 2017 .
The fourth quarterly interim dividend for 2017 of 2.1p per share of which 1.3p is payable as a PID will be payable on 10 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 9 June 2017 .
A scrip dividend alternative will be offered to shareholders as it was for the rst three quarterly dividend payments.
Neither dividend has been included as a liability in these accounts.
Both dividends will be recognised as an appropriation of retained earnings in the year to 31 March 2018.
During the year the Company issued 1534136 ordinary shares in relation to the rst two quarterly dividends which reduced the cash dividend payment by 2.2 million to 43.7 million.
8 Earnings and net assets per share Adjusted earnings and net assets per share are calculated in accordance with the Best Practice Recommendations of The European Public Real Estate Association EPRA.
The EPRA earnings measure highlights the underlying recurring performance of the property rental business.
The earnings per share calculation uses the weighted average number of ordinary shares during the year and excludes the average number of shares held by the Employee Benet Trust for the year.
The net asset per share calculation uses the number of shares in issue at the year end and excludes the actual number of shares held by the Employee Benet Trust at the year end.
EPRA earnings for the Group and its share of joint ventures are detailed as follows For the year to 31 March
JV
Group
JV
Gross rental income 73905 9  111 8301 6 67948 11084 79032 Property costs 814 413 1227 830 515 1345 Net income 73091 8698 81789 67 1 18 10569 77 687 Management fees 1713 732 981 2191 865 1326 Administrative costs 13268 85 13353 13636 172 13808 Net nance costs1 16304 2094 18398 13789 2947 16736 EPRA earnings 45219 5787 51006 41866 6585 48451 1 Group net nance costs reect net borrowing costs of 21560000 note 5 less early close out costs of 3516000 note 5 a nd nance income of Strategic report Governance Financial statements 127 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 8 Earnings and net assets per share continued The reconciliation of EPRA earnings to IFRS reported prot can be summarised as follows For the year to 31 March
JV
Group
JV
EPRA earnings 45219 5787 51006 41866 6585 48451 Revaluation of investment property 22200 1227 20973 51063 1276 49787 Fair value of derivatives 220 108 328 16700 132 16832 Debt and hedging early close out costs 3516 126 3642 77 41 1 488 Lossprot on disposal 4503 982 5485 2359 238 2121 Amortisation of intangible assets 182  182 315  315 IFRS reported prot 59438 3560 62998 78196 4528 82724 b Earnings per ordinary share For the year to 31 March Basic and diluted earnings 62998 82724 EPRA adjustments1 1 1992 34273 EPRA earnings 51006 48451 1 Adjustments shown in table reconciling EPRA earnings with IFRS reported prot For the year to 31 March Number of shares Number of shares Weighted average number of ordinary shares1 625457 624159 1 Excludes shares held in the LondonMetric Property Plc Employee Benet Trust Basic and diluted earnings per share 10.1p 13.3p EPRA earnings per share 8.2p 7.8p c Net assets per share As at 31 March Equity shareholders funds 1006915 898197 Fair value of derivatives 23350 23570 Fair value of joint ventures derivatives 229 338 EPRA net asset value 1030494 922105 As at 31 March Number of shares Number of shares Ordinary share capital 692383 628044 Number of shares held in employee trust 4502 3945 Number of ordinary shares 687 881 624099 Basic net asset value per share 146.4p 143.9p EPRA net asset value per share 149 .8p 147 .7p Further EPRA performance measures are reected in the Supplementary notes on pages 143 to 147 .
128 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 9 Investment properties a Investment properties As at 31 March 2017 2016
Under development
Completed
Under development
Opening balance 1289 560 56550 13461 10 1033045 131095 1164140 Acquisitions 81043 60840 141883 109546 70290 179836 Other capital expenditure 18055 7 901 25956 13720 34665 48385 Disposals 174965 650 175615 128493  128493 Property transfers 103976 103976  204823 204823 Revaluation movement 15615 6585 22200 41991 9 072 51063 Movement in tenant incentives and rent free uplifts 12801 65 12866 14928 16251 311 79 1346085 27 315 1373400 1289 560 56550 13461 10 Investment properties are held at fair value as at 31 March 2017 based on external valuations performed by professionally qualied valuers CBRE Limited CBRE and Savills Advisory Services Limited Savills.
The valuation of property held for sale at 31 March 2017 was 40.9 million 2016 62.8 million.
The valuations have been prepared in accordance with the RICS Valuation  Professional Standards 2014 on the basis of fair value as set out in note 1.
There has been no change in the valuation technique in the year.
The total fees earned by CBRE and Savills from the Company represent less than 5% of their total UK revenues.
CBRE and Savills have continuously been the signatory of valuations for the Company since October 2007 and September 2010 respectively.
Long term leasehold values included within investment properties amount to 102.0 million 2016 93.9 million.
All other properties are freehold.
Included within the investment property valuation is 65.3 million 2016 52.5 million in respect of unamortised lease incentives and rent free periods.
The historical cost of all of the Groups investment properties at 31 March 2017 was 1135.5 million 2016 1127 .9 million.
Capital commitments have been entered into amounting to 57 .8 million 2016 85.5 million which have not been provided for in the nancial statements.
Internal staff costs of the development team of 1.8 million 2016 1.5 million have been capitalised being directly attributable to the development projects in progress.
Forward funded development costs of 52.7 million have been classied within investment property under development as acquisitions.
Asset type
Valuation technique ERV Net initial yield Reversionary yield
Range per sq ft
Range %
Range % Retail 290020
Leisure 63245
Distribution 921165
Office 70000
Residential 1655 Comparison na na na na na na Development 27 315 Residual na na na na na na All of the Groups properties are categorised as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy as dened by IFRS 13 Fair Value
There have been no transfers of properties between Levels 1 2 and 3 during the year ended 31 March 2017 .
The fair value at 31 March 2017 represents the highest and best use.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 129 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 9 Investment properties continued i Technique The valuation techniques described below are consistent with IFRS 13 and use signicant unobservable inputs.
There have been no changes in valuation techniques since the prior year.
Yield capitalisation  for commercial investment properties market rental values are capitalised with a market capitalisation rate.
The resulting valuations are crosschecked against the net initial yields and the fair market values per square foot derived from recent market transactions.
Residual  for certain investment properties under development the fair value of the property is calculated by estimating the fair value of the completed property using the yield capitalisation technique less estimated costs to completion and a risk premium.
Comparison  for residential properties the fair value is calculated by using data from recent market transactions.
An increase or decrease in ERV will increase or decrease the fair value of the Groups investment properties.
An increase or decrease to the net initial yields and reversionary yields will decrease or increase the fair value of the Groups investment properties.
An increase or decrease in the estimated costs of development will decrease or increase the fair value of the Groups investment properties under development.
There are interrelationships between the unobservable inputs as they are determined by market conditions an increase in more than one input could magnify or mitigate the impact on the valuation.
The valuation reports produced by CBRE and Savills are based on Information provided by the Group such as current rents lease terms capital expenditure and comparable sales information which is derived from the Groups nancial and property management systems and is subject to the Groups overall control environment Assumptions applied by the valuers such as ERVs and yields which are based on market observation and their professional judgement CBRE and Savills meet the Auditors and the Audit Committee semiannually.
10 Investment in joint ventures At 31 March 2017  the following principal property interests being jointlycontrolled entities have been equity accounted for in these nancial statements Country of incorporation or registration Property sector Group share Metric Income Plus Partnership England and Wales Retail 50.0% LMP Retail Warehouse JV PUT Guernsey Retail 30.5% LSP London Residential Investments Ltd Guernsey Residential 40.0% The principal activity of all joint venture interests is property investment in the UK in the sectors noted in the table above which complements the Groups operations and contributes to the achievement of its strategy.
The Metric Income Plus Partnership MIPP in which the Company has a 50% interest acquired two assets in the year for 18.4 million Group share 9.2 million and disposed of three assets for gross proceeds of 15.9 million Group share 8.0 million.
The LMP Retail Warehouse joint venture disposed of one asset in Maidstone for 12.0 million Group share 3.7 million.
The Group also disposed of 21 residential ats for 27 .0 million Group share 10.8 million through its 40% interest in LSP London Residential Investments Limited in the year.
The associated bank loan was repaid in full in the year.
At 31 March 2017  the freehold and leasehold investment properties were externally valued by Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Registered Valuers of CBRE Limited and Savills Advisory Services Limited.
The valuation of property held for sale by joint ventures at 31 March 2017 was 1.6 million Group share 0.7 million 2016 17 .4 million and Group share 8.7 million.
130 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 10 Investment in joint ventures continued The movement in the carrying value of joint venture interests in the year is summarised as follows As at 31 March Opening balance 1 19666 148366 Additions at cost 450 10 Share of prot in the year 3560 4528 Disposals 5384 141 10 Prot distributions received 10725 19 128 The Groups share of the prot after tax and net assets of its joint ventures is as follows
Income Plus
LMP
Retail
Warehouse
JV PUT
London
Residential
Investments
Total
Group share Summarised income statement Gross rental income 10290 9 881 2381 22552 9  111 Property costs 1 15 20 87 4 1009 413 Net rental income 10175 9861 1507 21543 8698 Administration expenses 24 93 77 194 85 Management fees 774 384 570 1728 732 Revaluation 5123 2035 7 921 4833 1227 Finance income 3923 44 22 Finance cost 2766 2365 343 5474 2242 Movement in derivatives 251 80 19 190 108 Lossprot on disposal 95 977 3080 2198 982 Tax 1   1 Protloss after tax 11 928 5883 10462 7 349 3560 EPRA adjustments Revaluation 5123 2035 7 921 4833 1227 Movement in derivatives 251 80 19 190 108 Lossprot on disposal 95 977 3080 2198 982 Debt and hedging early close out costs 204  60 264 126 EPRA earnings 6853 7 021 580 14454 5787 Group share of EPRA earnings 3426 2128 233 5787 Summarised balance sheet Investment properties 174370 1 10775 98641 383786 160428 Other current assets 268  289 557 240 Cash 4029 779 2371 7 179 3200 Current liabilities 3089 1021 526 4636 2068 Bank debt 75900 54470  130370 54563 Unamortised nance costs 716 658  1374 559 Derivative nancial instruments 462 6  456 229 Net assets 99932 56727 100775 257 434 107 567 Group share of net assets 49967 17 290 40310 107 567 Strategic report Governance Financial statements 131 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 10 Investment in joint ventures continued
Income Plus
LMP
Retail
Warehouse
JV PUT
London
Residential
Investments
LSP
Green Park
Holdings
LSP
Green Park
Total
Group share Summarised income statement 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Gross rental income 12359 10964 3472 343  27 138 1 1084 Property costs 1 17 2 11 13 21  1253 515 Net rental income 12242 10962 2359 322  25885 10569 Administration expenses 124 1 17 1 13 26 38 418 172 Management fees 939 425 550 93  2007 865 Revaluation loss 1534 960 540   3034 1276 Finance income 45 4 3   52 14 Finance cost 3555 2935 1432 277  8199 3372 Movement in derivatives 338 188 105 105  316 132 Lossprot on disposal 514 1006 1108 185 771 30 238 Protloss after tax 5283 7 347 1276 159 733 11928 4528 EPRA adjustments Revaluation loss 1534 960 540   3034 1276 Movement in derivatives 338 188 105 105  316 132 Lossprot on disposal 514 1006 1108 185 771 30 238 Debt and hedging early close out costs 36tel 981 41 1 EPRA earnings 8033 7 815 420 59 38 16289 6585 Group share of EPRA earnings 4014 2387 168 21 5 6585 Summarised balance sheet Investment properties 165335 123685 135875   424895 174741 Other current assets 12912 75 349   13336 6620 Cash 3198 3285 3596 20  10099 4049 Current liabilities 3588 3971 860   8419 3349 Bank debt 77 075 60328 14933   152336 6291 1 Unamortised nance costs 1068 101 1 29   2108 854 Derivative nancial instruments 713 86 19   646 338 Net assets 101137 63843 124037 20  289 037 1 19 666 Group share of net assets 50569 19 472 49 615 10  1 19 666 11 Trade and other receivables As at 31 March Trade receivables 280 1771 Amounts receivable from property sales 14931 11 402 Prepayments and accrued income 3455 2744 Other receivables 92 132 18758 16049 All amounts fall due for payment in less than one year.
Trade receivables comprise rental income which is due on contractual quarter days with no credit period.
At 31 March 2017 there were no trade receivables which were overdue and considered at risk 2016 none.
132 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 12 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include 5.3 million 2016 4.9 million retained in rent and restricted accounts which are not readily available to the Group for day to day commercial purposes.
13 Trade and other payables As at 31 March Trade payables 9 1 18 4780 Amounts payable on property acquisitions and disposals 1832 9595 Rent received in advance 13724 12160 Accrued interest 1664 1897 Other payables 3102 525 Other accruals 16955 6386 46395 35343 The Group has nancial risk management policies in place to ensure that all payables are paid within the credit timeframe.
14 Borrowings and nancial instruments a Non current nancial liabilities As at 31 March Secured bank loans 196170 179 989 Unsecured bank loans 277 000 395000 Unamortised nance costs 6851 7 079 On 21 September 2016 the Group entered into a 130 million private placement at a blended xed coupon of 2.7% and a weighted average maturity of 8.3 years.
The proceeds were used to repay debt drawn under the existing unsecured credit facility.
Certain bank loans at 31 March 2017 are secured by xed charges over Group investment properties with a carrying value of 388.6 million.
Financial risk factors The Groups overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of nancial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups nancial performance.
The Groups nancial risk management objectives are to minimise the effect of risks it is exposed to through its operations and the use of debt nancing.
The principal nancial risks to the Group and the policies it has in place to manage these risks are summarised below i Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of nancial loss to the Group if a client or counterparty to a nancial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The Groups principal nancial assets are cash balances and deposits and trade and other receivables.
The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its cash deposits and trade receivables.
The Group mitigates nancial loss from tenant defaults by dealing with only creditworthy tenants.
The trade receivable amounts presented in the balance sheet are net of allowances for doubtful receivables.
An allowance for impairment is made where there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables concerned.
The balance is low relative to the scale of the balance sheet and therefore the credit risk of trade receivables is considered to be low.
Cash is placed on deposit with a diverse mix of institutions with suitable credit ratings and rates of return and for varying periods of time.
The credit ratings of the banks are monitored and changes are made where necessary to manage risk.
The credit risk on liquid funds and derivative nancial instruments is limited due to the Groups policy of monitoring counterparty exposures with a maximum exposure equal to the carrying amount of these instruments.
The Group has no signicant concentration of credit risk with exposure spread over a large number of counterparties.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 133 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 14 Borrowings and nancial instruments continued ii Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital and the nance charges and principal repayments on its debt instruments.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting its nancial obligations as they fall due.
The Group actively maintains a mixture of long term and short term committed facilities that are designed to ensure that the Group has sufficient available funds for operations and committed investments.
The Groups funding sources are diversied across a range of banks and institutions.
Weekly cash ow forecasts are prepared for the Executive Committee to ensure sufficient resources of cash and undrawn borrowing facilities are in place to meet liabilities as they fall due.
The Group had cash reserves of 42.9 million 2016 42.6 million and available and undrawn bank loan facilities at 31 March 2017 of 296.8 million 2016 64.9 million.
The following table shows the contractual maturity prole of the Groups nancial liabilities on an undiscounted cash ow basis and assuming settlement on the earliest repayment date.
As at 31 March 2017 Less than one year One to two years Two to ve years More than ve years
Bank loans 12245 12245 265620 251672 541782 Derivative nancial instruments 5712 6500 21529 16 33757 17 957 18745 287 149 251688 575539 As at 31 March 2016 Less than one year One to two years Two to ve years More than ve years
Bank loans 14358 14358 431 12 578087 649915 Derivative nancial instruments 5750 6279 18389 5767 36185 20108 20637 61501 583854 686100 iii Market risk  interest rate risk The Group is exposed to interest rate risk from the use of debt nancing at a variable rate.
It is the risk that future cash ows of a nancial instrument will uctuate because of changes in interest rates.
It is Group policy that a reasonable portion of external borrowings are at a xed interest rate in order to manage this risk.
The Group uses interest rate swaps and caps to manage its interest rate exposure and hedge future interest rate risk for the term of the bank loan.
Although the Board accepts that this policy neither protects the Group entirely from the risk of paying rates in excess of current market rates nor eliminates fully the cash ow risk associated with interest payments it considers that it achieves an appropriate balance of exposure to these risks.
At 31 March 2017  87% of the Groups exposure including share of joint ventures to interest rate uctuations was hedged by way of current and forward starting swaps and caps assuming existing debt facilities are fully drawn 2016 84%.
The average interest rate payable by the Group including share of joint ventures on all bank borrowings at 31 March 2017 including the cost of amortising nance arrangement fees was 3.5% 2016 3.5%.
A 1% change in interest rates would decrease or increase the Groups annual prot before tax by less than 0.1 million.
The Groups objectives when maintaining capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can provide returns to shareholders and as such it seeks to maintain an appropriate mix of debt and equity.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt which includes long term borrowings and undrawn debt facilities and equity comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings.
The Group balances its overall capital structure through the payment of dividends new share issues as well as the issue of new debt or the redemption of existing debt.
Loans and receivables As at 31 March Current assets Cash and cash equivalents note 12 42944 42621 Trade receivables note 1 1 280 1771 Other receivables note 1 1 92 132 43316 44524 134 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 14 Borrowings and nancial instruments continued Measured at amortised cost Measured at fair value As at 31 March Non current liabilities Borrowings note 14 466319 567 910 Current liabilities Trade payables note 13 9 1 18 4780 Accrued interest note 13 1664 1897 Other accruals note 13 16955 6386 Other payables note 13 3102 525 Derivative nancial instruments see 14ciii   23350 23570 497 158 581498 23350 23570 ii Fair values To the extent nancial assets and liabilities are not carried at fair value in the consolidated balance sheet the Directors are of the opinion that book value approximates to fair value at 31 March 2017 .
Details of the fair value of the Groups derivative nancial instruments that were in place at 31 March 2017 are provided below As at 31 March Average rate Notional amount Fair value Interest rate caps  expiry % % Less than one year 2.0 2.4 16313 77 500 One to two years 2.0 2.0 100000 16313 1 4 Two to ve years 2.3 2.1 29620 110000 121 128 More than ve years  2.0  19 620  234 As at 31 March Average rate Notional amount Fair value Interest rate swaps  expiry % % Less than one year  3.3  10500  12 One to two years 0.6 3.2 50000 16313 134 624 Two to ve years 2.0 2.9 166960 60000 6187 3185 More than ve years 2.1 2.0 425000 581960 17 151 201 15 1.9 2.2 641960 668773 23472 23936 Total fair value 23350 23570 All derivative nancial instruments are non current interest rate derivatives and are carried at fair value following a valuation as at 31 March 2017 by J C Rathbone Associates Limited.
The market values of hedging products change with interest rate uctuations but the exposure of the Group to movements in interest rates is protected by way of the hedging products listed above.
In accordance with accounting standards fair value is estimated by calculating the present value of future cash ows using appropriate market discount rates.
For all derivative nancial instruments this equates to a Level 2 fair value measurement as dened by IFRS 13 Fair Value
The valuation therefore does not reect the cost or gain to the Group of cancelling its interest rate protection at the balance sheet date which is generally a marginally higher cost or smaller gain than a market valuation.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 135 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 15 Commitments under operating leases The Groups minimum lease rentals receivable under non cancellable operating leases excluding joint ventures are as follows As at 31 March Less than one year 78420 73090 Between one and ve years 304595 288518 Between six and ten years 292985 287 566 Between 1 1 and 15 years 192168 186977 Between 16 and 20 years 92599 82761 Over 20 years 59872 43387 1020639 962299 The Groups minimum lease payments under non cancellable operating leases excluding joint ventures are as follows As at 31 March Less than one year 810 810 Between one and ve years 337 1147 1147 1957 16 Share capital As at 31 March
Number
Issued called up and fully paid Ordinary shares of 10p each 692382431 69238 628043905 62804 On 27 March 2017 the Company issued 62804390 ordinary shares through a placing undertaken by Peel Hunt and J P Morgan Cazenove at 152p per share which raised gross proceeds of 95.5 million.
After costs of 2.7 million net proceeds received were 92.8 million.
In addition the Company issued 1534136 shares under the terms of its Scrip Dividend Scheme in the year.
In June 2016 the Company granted options over 271 1575 ordinary shares under its Long Term Incentive Plan and Deferred Bonus Plan.
In the year to 31 March 2017  414727 ordinary shares in the Companys Deferred Bonus Plan and 2503419 ordinary shares in the Companys Long Term Incentive Plan that were granted in 2013 vested.
17 Reserves The Group statement of changes in equity is shown on page 1 19.
The following describes the nature and purpose of each reserve within equity Share capital The nominal value of shares issued.
Share premium The premium paid for new ordinary shares issued above the nominal value.
Capital redemption reserve Amounts transferred from share capital on redemption of issued ordinary shares.
Other reserve A reserve relating to the application of merger relief in the acquisition of LondonMetric Management Limited and Metric Property Investments plc by the Company the cost of the Companys shares held in treasury and the cost of shares held in trust to provide for the Companys future obligations under share award schemes.
Retained earnings The cumulative prots and losses after the payment of dividends.
136 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Group nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued 18 Related party transactions Management fees and prot distributions receivable from the Groups joint venture arrangements in which it has an equity interest were as follows For the year to 31 March Management fees Prot distributions Group interest LSP Green Park Property Trust 31.4%   10 231 LSP Green Park Distribution Holdings 50.0%  92  11 210 LSP London Residential Investments 40.0% 475 458 5120 Metric Income Plus Partnership 50.0% 854 1216 3434 4161 LMP Retail Warehouse JV Property Unit Trust 30.5% 384 425 2161 3526 1713 2191 10725 19 128 Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation.
19 Events after the balance sheet date On 1 1 April 2017 the Group exchanged to sell the Morrisons store at Loughborough for 32.5 million.
On 18 April 2017 the Group acquired a distribution warehouse in Crawley let to TNT for 6.4 million.
On 1 1 May 2017 the Group exchanged to sell Vue Cinema Conway Park in Birkenhead for 5.8 million.
On 26 May 2017 the Group acquired a distribution warehouse in Coventry let to DHL for 5.7 million.
On 26 May 2017 the Group completed the disposal of Barracks Road Retail Park in Newcastle Under Lyme for 2.8 million.
On 30 May 2017 the Group acquired an urban logistics warehouse in Huyton let to Antolin Interiors for 1 1.8 million.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 137 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company balance sheet As at 31 March
Fixed assets Investment in subsidiaries iii 785413 751072 Other tangible assets 310 392 785723 751464 Current assets Trade and other receivables iv 312732 325209 Cash at bank 37 103 35653 349835 360862 Total assets 1135558 11 12326 Current liabilities Trade and other payables v 10849 8225 10849 8225 Non current liabilities Borrowings vi 272505 390700 Derivative nancial instruments vi 17 600 18058 290105 408758 Total liabilities 300954 416983 Net assets 834604 695343
Called up share capital 69238 62804 Share premium 88548 Capital redemption reserve 9636 9636 Other reserve 69101 80112 Retained earnings 598081 542791 Equity shareholders funds 834604 695343 The Company reported a prot for the nancial year to 31 March 2017 of 93.5 million 2016 42.3 million.
The nancial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 31 May 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Martin McGann Finance Director Registered in England and Wales No The notes on pages 140 to 142 form part of these nancial statements.
138 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 March
Share premium
Other
Retained earnings
At 1 April 2016 62804  9636 801 12 542791 695343 Prot for the year  93541 93541 Ordinary share capital issued 6280 86492 92772 Purchase of shares held in trust    5195  5195 Vesting of shares held in trust  3633 3629 4 Share based awards  1833 1833 Reserve transfer of impairment in subsidiary    9449 9449 Dividends paid 154 2056   45904 43694 At 31 March 2017 69 238 88548 9636 69 101 598081 834604
Share premium
Other
Retained earnings
At 1 April 2015 62804  9636 1 10517 524784 707 741 Prot for the year  42280 42280 Purchase of shares held in trust    419  419 Vesting of shares held in trust    294 12 306 Share based awards  1606 1606 Reserve transfer of impairment in subsidiary    30280 30280 Dividends paid  56171 56171 At 31 March 2016 62804  9636 801 12 542791 695343 The notes on pages 140 to 142 form part of these nancial statements.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements 139 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Company nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 2017 i Accounting policies Accounting convention The separate nancial statements of the Company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006.
They have been prepared in accordance with FRS 101 Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework as issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
As permitted by FRS 101 the Company has taken advantage of the disclosure exemptions available under that standard in relation to share based payments nancial instruments capital management presentation of a cash ow statement and certain related party transactions.
The accounting policies relevant to the Company are the same as those set out in the accounting policies for the Group except as noted below.
Subsidiary undertakings Investments in subsidiary companies are stated at cost less any provision for impairment.
As permitted by Section 408 Companies Act 2006 the income statement of the Company is not presented as part of these nancial statements.
The reported prot of the Company was 93.5 million 2016 42.3 million.
Audit fees in relation to the Company only were 75480 in the year 2016 74000.
Subsidiary undertakings At 1 April 2016 751072 Additions 43790 Impairment of investment 9449 At 31 March 2017 785413 The carrying value of the Companys investments was impaired by 9.4 million following an impairment review to assess the recoverable amount based on the net assets of the subsidiary companies.
The Company is incorporated in England and is the ultimate holding company of the Group and has the following subsidiary undertakings Country of incorporation or registration Proportion of voting rights held by way of share capital or units held Nature of business London and Stamford Property Limited Guernsey 100% Intermediate holding company LondonMetric Management Limited Guernsey 100% Management company Metric Property Investments plc England 100% Intermediate holding company Metric Property Finance 1 Limited England 100% Intermediate holding company Metric Property Finance 2 Limited England 100% Intermediate holding company LMP Retail Warehouse JV Holdings Limited England 81.88% Intermediate holding company Metric LP Income Plus Limited England 100% Intermediate holding company Metric Property Finance Holdings Limited England 100% Intermediate holding company Metric MIPP Asset Management Limited England 100% Property management LSI Investments Limited England 100% Property investment LSI Developments Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Saturn Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Retail Distribution I Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Saturn II Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Retail Distribution II Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Retail Distribution III Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Liverpool Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Swindon Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Distribution Limited England 100% Property investment 140 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Country of incorporation or registration Proportion of voting rights held by way of share capital or units held Nature of business LondonMetric Retail Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Edinburgh Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Derby Limited England 100% Property investment Goresbrook Property Limited England 100% Property investment LondonMetric Crawley Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Launceston Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Loughborough Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Coventry Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Bedford Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Milford Haven Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Hove Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Kirkstall Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Kings Lynn Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property St Albans Limited England 100% Property investment Metric Property Cannock Limited England 100% Property investment LandS Business Space Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LandS Highbury Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LSP Marlow Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LMP Green Park Cinemas Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LMP Thrapston Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LMP Bell Farm Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LMP Omega II Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LMP Wakeeld Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment LMP Dagenham Limited Guernsey 100% Property investment Undertakings held indirectly by the Company Exempt from the requirement to le audited accounts under S256 Companies Guernsey Law 2008 The registered address for companies incorporated in England is One Curzon Street London W1J 5HB.
The registered address for companies incorporated in Guernsey is Regency Court Glategny Esplanade St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 3AP All of the undertakings listed above operate in their country of incorporation except those who are tax resident in the UK.
All shares held are ordinary shares.
As at 31 March Prepayments and accrued income 514 532 Other receivables 933 773 Amounts due from subsidiary undertakings 31 1285 323904 312732 325209 All amounts under receivables fall due for payment in less than one year.
As at 31 March Trade payables 797 135 Other accruals and deferred income 7627 6951 Other payables 2425 1139 10849 8225 iii Fixed asset investments continued Strategic report Governance Financial statements 141 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 vi Borrowings and nancial instruments Non current nancial liabilities As at 31 March Secured bank loan 277 000 395000 Unamortised nance costs 4495 4300 272505 390700 The following table shows the contractual maturity prole of the Companys nancial liabilities on an undiscounted cash ow basis and assuming settlement on the earliest repayment date.
As at 31 March
Derivative nancial instruments Less than one year 7 846 3648 1 1494 13734 One to ve years 65570 22087 87 657 57 722 More than ve years 251672 16 251688 39991 1 325088 25751 350839 471367 Derivative nancial instruments The Company is exposed to market risk through interest rate uctuations.
It is the Companys policy that a signicant portion of external bank borrowings are at either xed or capped rates of interest in order to manage this risk.
The Company uses interest rate swaps and caps to manage its interest rate exposure and hedge future interest rate risk for the term of the bank loan.
Although the Board accepts that this policy neither protects the Company entirely from the risk of paying rates in excess of current market rates nor eliminates fully the cash ow risk associated with interest payments it considers that it achieves an appropriate balance of exposure to these risks.
The market values of hedging products change with interest rate uctuations but the exposure of the Company to movements in interest rates is protected by way of the hedging products listed below.
In accordance with accounting standards fair value is estimated by calculating the present value of future cash ows using appropriate market discount rates.
For all derivative nancial instruments this equates to a Level 2 fair value measurement as dened by IFRS 13 Fair Value
The valuation therefore does not reect the cost or gain to the Company of cancelling its interest rate protection at the balance sheet date which is generally a marginally higher cost or smaller gain than a market valuation.
Details of the fair value of the Companys derivative nancial instruments that were in place are provided below.
As at 31 March Average rate Notional Fair value Interest rate caps  expiry % % Less than one year 2.0% 2.4% 16313 77 500 One to two years 2.0% 2.0% 70000 16313 1 4 Two to ve years 3.0% 2.1% 10000 80000 1 96 2.1% 2.2% 96313 173813 2 100 As at 31 March Average rate Notional Fair value Interest rate swaps  expiry % % Less than one year  3.3%  10500  12 One to two years 0.6% 3.2% 50000 16313 134 624 Two to ve years 2.0% 2.9% 10000 60000 318 3185 Greater than ve years 2.1% 2.1% 425000 425000 17 150 14337 1.9% 2.2% 485000 51 1813 17 602 18158 Total fair value 17 600 18058 Further information on nancial risk management policies and practices can be found in note 14 of the Group accounts.
Related party transactions for the Company are as noted for the Group in note 18 to the Group nancial statements.
142 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes forming part of the Company nancial statements For the year ended 31 March 201 7 continued i EPRA summary table 2017 2016 EPRA earnings per share 8.2p 7.8p EPRA net asset value per share 149 .8p 147 .7p EPRA triple net asset value per share 146.4p 143.9p EPRA vacancy rate 0.4% 0.7% EPRA cost ratio including vacant property costs 16% 17% EPRA cost ratio excluding vacant property costs 15% 17% EPRA net initial yield 4.5% 4.9% EPRA topped up net initial yield 5.4% 5.4% The denition of these measures can be found on page 148.
For the year to 31 March
JV
Group
JV
Gross rental income 73905 9  111 8301 6 67948 11084 79032 Property costs 814 413 1227 830 515 1345 Net income 73091 8698 81789 67 1 18 10569 77 687 Management fees 1713 732 981 2191 865 1326 Administrative costs 13268 85 13353 13636 172 13808 Net nance costs 16304 2094 18398 13789 2947 16736 EPRA earnings 45219 5787 51006 41866 6585 48451 iii EPRA proportionally consolidated balance sheet As at 31 March
JV
Group
JV
Investment property 1373400 160428 1533828 13467 41 1520851 Gross debt 473170 54563 527 733 574989 6291 1 637 900 Cash 42944 3200 46144 42621 4049 46670 Other net liabilitiesassets 20476 1269 21745 1 1641 4125 7 516 EPRA net assets 922698 107 796 1030494 802101 120004 922105 Loan to value 30% 32% 30% 38% 34% 38% Cost of debt 3.6% 3.4% 3.5% 3.5% 3.6% 3.5% Undrawn facilities 296750 2938 299688 64931 5000 69931 Supplementary information not audited Strategic report Governance Financial statements 143 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 iv EPRA cost ratio For the year to 31 March Property operating expenses 814 830 Administration expenses 13268 13636 Share of joint venture property operating administration expenses and management fees 1230 1552
Joint venture property management fee income 1713 2191 Ground rents 121 59 Total costs including vacant property costs A 13478 13768 Group vacant property costs 548 369 Share of joint venture vacant property costs 236 292 Total costs excluding vacant property costs B 12694 13107 Gross rental income 73905 67 948 Share of joint venture gross rental income 9  111 11 084 83016 79032
Ground rents 121 59 Total gross rental income C 82895 78973 Total EPRA cost ratio including vacant property costs AC 16% 17% Total EPRA cost ratio excluding vacant property costs BC 15% 17% v EPRA net initial yield and topped up net initial yield As at 31 March Investment property  wholly owned 1373400 13461 10 Investment property  share of joint ventures 160428 17 47 41 Less development properties 27 315 56550 Less residential properties 4 1  111  55895 Completed property portfolio 1465402 1408406 Allowance for Estimated purchasers costs 99647 95772 Estimated costs to complete 39309 43967 EPRA property portfolio valuation A 1604358 1548145 Annualised passing rental income 65169 71945 Share of joint ventures 8814 8064 Less development properties 1243 3972 Less residential properties 526 856 Annualised net rents B 72214 75181 Contractual rental increases for rent free periods 10558 5334 Contractual rental increases for xed uplifts 3151 3641 Topped up net annualised rent C 85923 84156 EPRA net initial yield BA 4.5% 4.9% EPRA topped up net initial yield CA 5.4% 5.4% vi EPRA Vacancy rate As at 31 March Annualised estimated rental value of vacant premises 384 604 Portfolio estimated rental value 86228 82720 EPRA vacancy rate 0.4% 0.7% Excludes residential and development properties Supplementary information not audited continued 144 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 vii EPRA capital expenditure analysis As at 31 March
JV
Total
Group
JV
Total
Opening valuation 13467 41 1520851 1164140 236245 1400385 Acquisitions 81043 9 146 90189 109546 3477 1 13023
68741  68741 104955  104955 Capital expenditure 18055 561 18616 13720 761 14481 Disposals 175615 22631 198246 128493 64749 193242 Revaluation 22200 1227 20973 51063 1276 49787 Lease incentives 12866 162 12704 31179 283 31462 Closing valuation 1373400 160428 1533828 13467 41 1520851 Includes capitalised interest of 1.9 million 2016 2.7 million and capitalised staff costs of 1.8 million 2016 1.5 million Capital expenditure on completed properties viii Total accounting return For the year to 31 March EPRA net asset value at end of year 1030494 922105 at start of year 922105 877 226 Increase 108389 44879 Dividend paid 43694 56171 Equity placing 92772 Net increase 5931 1 101050 Total accounting return 6.4% 11 .5% ix Portfolio split and valuation As at 31 March % % Distribution 927 .4 60.4 784.4 51.6 Leisure 63.2 4.1 69.0 4.5 Investment portfolio 1465.4 95.5 1408.4 92.6 Development  distribution 22.8 1.5 40.0 2.6 Development  retail 4.5 0.3 16.6 1.1 Residential 41.1 2.7 55.9 3.7 1533.8 100.0 1520.9 100.0 Retail Group and JV split Wholly owned  retail parks 197 .0 12.8 293.9 19.3 Wholly owned  convenience retail 93.0 6.1 66.6 4.4 Metric Income Plus Partnership 87 .2 5.7 82.7 5.4 LMP Retail Warehouse JV Property Unit Trust 27 .6 1.8 31.6 2.1 Strategic report Governance Financial statements 145 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 x Investment portfolio yields As at 31 March EPRA NIY %
Equivalent yield % EPRA NIY %
Equivalent yield % Distribution 4.9 5.0 5.5 4.7 5.2 5.4 Investment portfolio 4.5 5.4 5.8 4.9 5.4 5.7 xi Investment portfolio  Key statistics As at 31 March 2017
000 sq ft
WAULT to rst break years
Average rent per sq ft Distribution 900912.912.3100.05.73 Retail 208012.511.599.217.33 Investment portfolio 11 581 1 2.8 1 2.
Distribution development Retail development 31 Total investment and development portfolio 12003 Excludes conditional development site at Bedford xii Total property returns For the year to 31 March All property % All property % Capital return 1.7 4.9 Income return 5.6 5.3 Total return 7.4 10.5 xiii Contracted rental income As at 31 March Distribution 50.9 42.3 Retail 25.8 31.3 Leisure 3.9 4.4 Office 4.9 4.9 Investment portfolio 85.5 82.9 Development  distribution 0.8 2.5 Development  retail 0.5 0.8 Residential 0.5 0.9 Total portfolio 87 .3 87 .1 xiv Rent subject to expiry As at 31 March 2017 Within 5 years % Within 10 years % Within 15 years % Within 20 years % Over 20 years % Distribution 7 .6 41.0 63.7 81.7 100.0 Leisure   1 1.4 1 1.4 100.0 Supplementary information not audited continued 146 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 xv Contracted rent subject to RPI or xed uplifts for investment portfolio As at 31 March % % Distribution 29.9 57 .8 26.0 57 .9 Commercial portfolio Excluding residential assets xvi Top ten assets by value As at 31 March 2017
000 sq ft
Occupancy
WAULT to expiry years
Primark Distribution Centre Islip 1062 5.4 100.0 23.5 23.5 Primark Distribution Centre Thrapston 783 41 100.0 15.5 15.5 Dixons Carphone Newark Distribution Centre 726 4.4 100.0 16.3 16.3 Argos Bedford 658 3.8 100.0 5.7 5.7 Eddie Stobart Dagenham 456 4.1 100.0 26.5 26.5 Marlow International Marlow 231 4.9 96.7 7 .2 7 .0 Royal Mail Daventry 273 2.5 100.0 6.4 6.4 Poundworld Wakeeld 527 2.6 100.0 14.5 14.5 MandS Sheffield 626 2.6 100.0 6.7 4.3 Kirkstall Bridge Shopping Park Leeds 120 2.4 95.3 1 1.4 9.0 xvii Top ten occupiers As at 31 March 2017
Market capitalisation bn
Primark
Dixons Carphone 6.2 4.5 7 .2 MandS 5.5 5.8 6.3
Eddie Stobart 4.1 0.6 4.7 Odeon 3.5 3.1 4.0 Royal Mail 3.3 4.1 3.8 Allergan 3.0 58.2 3.5
Top ten 45.0 51.8 Other commercial income 41.8 48.2 Total commercial 86.8 100.00 Residential income 0.5 Total Group income 87 .3 Market capitalisation of Parent Company Strategic report Governance Financial statements 147 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Glossary Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Methodology
A set of assessment methods and tools designed to help construction professionals understand and mitigate the environmental impacts of the developments they design and build Capital Return The valuation movement on the property portfolio adjusted for capital expenditure and expressed as a percentage of the capital employed over the period Contracted Rent The annualised rent excluding rent free periods Cost of Debt Weighted average interest rate payable Debt Maturity Weighted average period to expiry of drawn debt
The activity of delivering a product for consumption by the end user Energy Performance Certicate EPC Required certicate whenever a property is built sold or rented.
An EPC gives a property an energy efficiency rating from A most efficient to G least efficient and is valid for ten years.
An EPC contains information about a propertys energy use and typical energy costs and recommendations about how to reduce energy use and save money EPRA Cost Ratio Administrative and operating costs including and excluding costs of direct vacancy as a percentage of gross rental income EPRA Earnings per Share EPS Recurring earnings from core operational activities divided by the average number of shares in issue over the year EPRA NAV per Share Balance sheet net assets excluding fair value of derivatives divided by the number of shares in issue at the balance sheet date EPRA NNNAV per Share EPRA NAV per share adjusted to include the fair value of nancial instruments debt and deferred taxes at the balance sheet date EPRA net initial yield Annualised rental income based on cash rents passing at the balance sheet date less non recoverable property operating expenses expressed as a percentage of the market value of the property after inclusion of estimated purchasers costs EPRA topped up net initial yield EPRA net initial yield adjusted for expiration of rent free periods or other lease incentives such as discounted rent periods and stepped rents EPRA Vacancy The Estimated Rental Value ERV of immediately available vacant space as a percentage of the total ERV of the Investment Portfolio Equivalent Yield The weighted average income return expressed as a percentage of the market value of the property after inclusion of estimated purchasers costs Estimated Rental Value ERV The external valuers opinion of the open market rent which on the date of valuation could reasonably be expected to be obtained on a new letting or rent review of a property European Public Real Estate Association
The European Public Real Estate Association EPRA is the industry body for European Real Estate Investment Trusts REITs Gross rental income Rental income for the period from let properties reported under IFRS after taking into account the net effects of straight lining for lease incentives including rent free periods.
Gross rental income will include where relevant turnover based rent surrender premiums and car parking income
LondonMetric Property Plc and its subsidiaries
The International Financial Reporting Standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and adopted by the European Union Income Return Net rental income expressed as a percentage of capital employed over the period Investment Portfolio The Groups property portfolio excluding development land holdings and residential properties Investment Property Databank IPD Investment Property Databank IPD is a wholly owned subsidiary of MSCI producing an independent benchmark of property returns and the Groups portfolio returns Like for Like Income Growth The movement in contracted rental income on properties owned through the period under review excluding properties held for development and residential Loan to Value LTV Net debt expressed as a percentage of the total property portfolio value at the period end
The organisation and implementation of operations to manage the ow of physical items from origin to the point of consumption Net Rental Income Gross rental income receivable after deduction for ground rents and other net property outgoings including void costs and net service charge expenses Occupancy Rate The ERV of the let units as a percentage of the total ERV of the Investment Portfolio OmniChannel Retailing The evolution of multichannel retailing providing a seamless shopping experience for the consumer through all available shopping channels ie physical internet mobile social media telephone catalogue etc Passing Rent The gross rent payable by tenants under operating leases less any ground rent payable under head leases Property Income Distribution PID Dividends from prots of the Groups taxexempt property business under the REIT regulations.
The PID dividend is paid after deducting withholding tax at the basic rate Real Estate Investment Trust REIT A listed property company which qualies for and has elected into a tax regime which is exempt from corporation tax on prots from property rental income and UK capital gains on the sale of investment properties Total Accounting Return TAR The movement in EPRA NAV plus the dividend paid during the period expressed as a percentage of the EPRA NAV at the beginning of the period Total Property Return TPR Unlevered weighted capital and income return of the property portfolio as calculated by IPD Total Shareholder Return TSR The movement in the ordinary share price as quoted on the London Stock Exchange plus dividends per share assuming that dividends are reinvested at the time of being paid Weighted Average Interest Rate The total loan interest and derivative costs per annum including the amortisation of nance costs divided by the total debt in issue at the period end Weighted Average Unexpired Lease Term
Average unexpired lease term across the investment portfolio weighted by Contracted Rent 148 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Notice of Annual General Meeting Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting of the members of LondonMetric Property Plc Registered number  will be held at The Connaught Carlos Place Mayfair London W1K 2AL on 1 1 July 2017 at 10.00 am.
Resolutions 1 to 17 inclusive will be proposed as ordinary resolutions and resolutions 18 to 21 inclusive will be proposed as special resolutions.
That the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 be considered and approved.
That the Remuneration Policy in the form set out in the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 be approved.
That the Annual Report on Remuneration in the form set out in the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 other than the part containing the Remuneration Policy be approved.
That Deloitte LLP be reappointed as auditor of the Company to hold office until the conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid before the Company.
That the Directors be authorised to determine the remuneration of the auditor.
That Patrick Vaughan be reelected as a Director.
That Andrew Jones be reelected as a Director.
That Martin McGann be reelected as a Director.
That Valentine Beresford be reelected as a Director.
That Mark Stirling be reelected as a Director.
That James Dean be reelected as a Director.
That Alec Pelmore be reelected as a Director.
That Andrew Varley be reelected as a Director.
That Philip Watson be reelected as a Director.
That Rosalyn Wilton be reelected as a Director.
That Andrew Livingston be reelected as a Director.
That the Directors be and they are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised in accordance with Section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the 2006 Act in substitution for all existing authorities a.
2006 Act allotted under paragraph 17b below in excess of 23099069 and b.
17b shall expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company after the passing of this resolution or if earlier on the date which is 15 months after the date of the Annual General Meeting except that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require Relevant Securities or equity securities as the case may be to be allotted and treasury shares to be sold after such expiry and the Directors may allot Relevant Securities or equity securities and sell treasury shares in pursuance of any such offer or agreement as if the authority in question had not expired.
That the Directors be and are empowered in accordance with Sections 570 and 573 of the 2006 Act to allot equity securities as dened in section of the 2006 Act for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 17 or by way of a sale of treasury shares as if section  of the 2006 Act did not apply This document is important and requires your immediate attention.
If you are in any doubt as to the action you should take you should seek your own personal nancial advice from your stockbroker bank manager solicitor accountant or other nancial advisor authorised under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
If you have sold or otherwise transferred all your ordinary shares please send this document together with the accompanying documents as soon as possible to the purchaser or transferee or to the stockbroker bank or other agent through whom the sale or transfer was effected for delivery to the purchaser or transferee.
149 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 to any such allotment or sale provided that this power shall be limited to a.
17b of resolution 17 above by way of a rights issue only to ordinary shareholders in proportion as nearly as may be practicable to their existing holdings and ii to holders of other equity securities as required by the rights of those securities or if the Directors otherwise consider necessary as permitted by the rights of those securities and so that the Directors may impose any limits or restrictions and make any arrangements which they consider necessary or appropriate to deal with any treasury shares fractional entitlements record dates legal regulatory or practical problems in or under the laws of any territory or any other matter and b. not expired.
That the Directors be and are empowered in addition to any authority granted under resolution 18 to allot equity securities as dened in Section  of the 2006 Act for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 17 or by way of a sale of treasury shares as if Section  of the 2006 Act did not apply to any such allotment or sale such power to be a.
3464860 and b.
PreEmption Rights most recently published by the PreEmption Group prior to the date of this notice provided that this power shall expire at the end of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or if earlier on the date which is 15 months after the date of the Annual General Meeting but in each case prior to its expiry the Company may make offers and enter into agreements which would or might require equity securities to be allotted and treasury shares to be sold after the authority expires and the Directors may allot equity securities and sell treasury shares under any such offer or agreement as if the authority in question had not expired.
That the Company be and is hereby generally and unconditionally authorised in accordance with Section 701 of the 2006 Act to make market purchases within the meaning of Section  of the 2006 Act of ordinary shares of 10p each in the capital of the Company ordinary shares on such terms and in such manner as the Directors may from time to time determine provided that a. b. c.
Company cannot be more than the higher of 105% of the average market value of an ordinary share for the ve business days prior to the day on which the ordinary share is contracted to be purchased and ii the value of an ordinary share calculated on the basis of the higher of
B. the highest current independent bid for any number of ordinary shares on the trading venue where the market purchase by the Company will be carried out and the authority conferred shall expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company except that the Company may before such expiry make a contract to purchase its own shares which will or may be completed or executed wholly or partly after such expiry.
That the Company is authorised to call any general meeting of the Company other than the Annual General Meeting by notice of at least 14 clear days during the period beginning on the date of the passing of this resolution and ending on the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company.
By order of the Board Jadzia Duzniak Company Secretary 31 May 2017 Notice of Annual General Meeting continued 150 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Notes to the Notice of the Annual General Meeting Shareholders entitled to attend and vote at the meeting may appoint one or more proxies who need not be shareholders to attend speak and vote on their behalf provided that each proxy is appointed to exercise the rights attaching to the different shares held by him or her.
Your proxy could be the Chairman another Director of the Company or another person who has agreed to attend to represent you.
Your proxy will vote as you instruct and must attend the meeting for your vote to be counted.
Details of how to appoint the Chairman or another person as your proxy using the proxy form are set out in the notes to the proxy form.
Any person to whom this notice is sent who is a person nominated under Section 146 of the 2006 Act to enjoy information rights a Nominated Person may under an agreement between himher and the shareholder by whom heshe was nominated have a right to be appointed or to have someone else appointed as a proxy for the Annual General Meeting.
If a Nominated Person has no such proxy appointment right or does not wish to exercise it heshe may under any such agreement have a right to give instructions to the shareholder as to the exercise of voting rights.
The statement of rights of shareholders in relation to the appointment of proxies in paragraph i above does not apply to Nominated Persons.
The rights described in that paragraph can only be exercised by shareholders of the Company.
To have the right to attend and vote at the meeting you must hold ordinary shares in the Company and your name must be entered on the share register of the Company in accordance with note vi below.
To be valid Forms of Proxy and the power of attorney or other authority if any under which it is signed or a notarially certied copy thereof must be completed and signed and received by Capita Asset Services at PXS1 The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4ZF as soon as possible but in any event so as to arrive no later than 10 am on 7 July 2017 .
A Form of Proxy accompanies this notice.
Completion and return of a Form of Proxy will not preclude members from attending and voting at the meeting should they wish to do so.
Where you have appointed a proxy using the hard copy proxy form and would like to change the instructions using another hard copy proxy form please contact Capita Asset Services at PXS1 The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4ZF.
The deadline for receipt of proxy appointments see above also applies in relation to amended instructions.
Any attempt to terminate or amend a proxy appointment received after the relevant deadline will be disregarded.
Where two or more valid separate appointments of proxy are received in respect of the same share in respect of the same meeting the one which is last sent shall be treated as replacing and revoking the other or others.
The time by which a person must be entered on the register of members in order to have the right to attend or vote at the meeting is close of business on 7 July 2017 .
If the meeting is adjourned the time by which a person must be entered on the register of members in order to have the right to attend or vote at the adjourned meeting is close of business on the day that is two days before the date xed for the adjourned meeting.
Changes to entries on the register of members after such times shall be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend or vote at the meeting.
CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies by utilising the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so by utilising the procedures described in the CREST Manual.
CREST Personal Members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service providers should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service providers who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
In order for a proxy appointment or instruction made by means of CREST to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST Proxy Instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with Euroclear UK and Irelands specications and must contain the information required for such instructions as described in the CREST
The message regardless of whether it constitutes the appointment of a proxy or an amendment to the instruction given to a previously appointed proxy must in order to be valid be transmitted so as to be received by the issuers agent ID number RA10 by 10 am on 7 July 2017 .
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the timestamp applied to the message by the CREST Applications Host from which the issuers agent is able to retrieve the message by enquiry to CREST in the manner prescribed by CREST.
The Company may treat as invalid a CREST Proxy Instruction in the circumstances set out in Regulation a of the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 2001.
CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers should note that Euroclear UK and Ireland does not make available special procedures in CREST for any particular messages.
Normal system timings and limitations will therefore apply in relation to the input of CREST Proxy Instructions.
It is the responsibility of the CREST member concerned to take or if the CREST member is a CREST personal member or sponsored member or has appointed a voting service providers to procure that his or her CREST sponsor or voting service providers takes such action as shall be necessary to ensure that a message is transmitted by means of the CREST system by any particular time.
In this connection CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting system providers are referred in particular to those sections of the CREST Manual concerning practical limitations of the CREST system and timings.
Any corporation which is a member can appoint one or more corporate representatives who may exercise on its behalf all of its powers as a member provided that they do not do so in relation to the same shares.
You may not use any electronic address provided either in this Notice of Annual General Meeting or any related documents including the form of proxy to communicate with the Company for any purposes other than those expressly stated.
As at 30 May 2017 being the closest practical business day before the publication of this Notice the Companys issued share capital consisted of 692972064 ordinary shares carrying one vote each.
Members satisfying the thresholds in Section 527 of the 2006 Act can require the Company to publish a statement on its website setting out any matter relating to a.
151 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 b.
Company ceasing to hold office since the last Annual General Meeting that the members propose to raise at the meeting.
The Company cannot require the members requesting the publication to pay its expenses.
Any statement placed on the website must also be sent to the Companys auditor no later than the time it makes its statement available on the website.
The business which may be dealt with at the meeting includes any statement that the Company has been required to publish on its website.
Any member attending the meeting has the right to ask questions.
The Company must cause to be answered any such question relating to the business being dealt with at the meeting but no such answer need be given if a. b. c. be answered.
A copy of this Notice and other information required by Section 31 1A of the 2006 Act can be found at site xvii The following documents are available for inspection at the registered office of the Company during normal business hours on each weekday public holidays excluded from the date of this notice until the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting and at the place of the Annual General Meeting for 15 minutes prior to and during the meeting a. b.
Directors and c. a copy of the Articles of Association of the Company.
In the case of joint registered holders the signature of one holder on a proxy card will be accepted and the vote of the senior holder who tenders a vote whether in person or by proxy shall be accepted to the exclusion of the votes of the other joint holders.
For this purpose seniority shall be determined by the order in which names stand on the register of members of the Company in respect of the relevant joint holding.
Explanatory notes The information below is an explanation of the business to be considered at the Annual General Meeting.
Resolution 1  To receive the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements The Chairman will present the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 to the meeting.
Resolution 1 is to consider and approve the Report of the Directors the nancial statements and the Auditors report on the nancial statements and on the auditable part of the Annual Report on Remuneration for the nancial year ended 31 March 2017 .
Resolution 2  Remuneration Policy Resolution 2 is an ordinary resolution to approve the new Directors Remuneration Policy which will replace the Companys existing Remuneration Policy.
Shareholders are invited to approve the Directors Remuneration Policy which is set out on pages 88 to 99 of the Annual Report.
The policy which sets out the Companys forward looking policy on Directors remuneration is subject to a binding shareholder vote by ordinary resolution at least every three years.
Once the Directors Remuneration Policy has been approved all payments by the Company to the Directors and any former Directors must be made in accordance with the policy unless a payment has separately been approved by shareholder resolution.
If the Company wishes to change the Directors Remuneration Policy it will need to put the revised policy to a shareholder vote again before it can implement any payments pursuant to the amended policy.
If the Directors Remuneration Policy remains unchanged the 2006 Act requires the Company to put the policy to shareholders for approval again no later than 1 1 July 2020.
Resolution 3  Annual Report on Remuneration Resolution 3 is an ordinary resolution to approve the Annual Report on Remuneration on the implementation of the Remuneration Policy.
Section 439 of the 2006 Act requires UK incorporated listed companies to put their Annual Report on Remuneration to an advisory shareholder vote.
As the vote is advisory it does not affect the actual remuneration paid to any individual Director.
The Annual Report on Remuneration is set out in full in the Annual Report and Financial Statements.
Resolutions 4 and 5  Reappointment of auditors Resolution 4 relates to the reappointment of Deloitte LLP as the Companys auditor to hold office until the next Annual General Meeting of the Company and Resolution 5 authorises the Directors to set their remuneration.
Resolutions 6 to 16  Reelection and election of Directors Resolutions 6 to 16 deal with reelection of the Directors.
Biographies of each of the Directors seeking reelection can be found on pages 60 and 61 of the Annual Report and Accounts.
The Board has conrmed following a performance review that all Directors standing for reelection continue to perform effectively and demonstrate commitment to their role.
Resolution 17  Allotment of share capital At the last Annual General Meeting of the Company the Directors were given authority to allot ordinary shares in the capital of the Company.
This authority expires at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting or if earlier on the date which is 15 months after the date of the Annual General Meeting.
Your Board considers it appropriate that a similar authority be granted to allot ordinary shares in the capital of the Company up to a maximum nominal amount of 23099069 representing approximately one third of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 30 May 2017 during the period up to the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company.
Such authority is sought in paragraph 17a of Resolution 17 .
In accordance with the guidelines issued by the Investment Association paragraph 17b of Resolution 17 will allow Directors to allot including the shares referred to in paragraph 17a of Resolution 17  shares in the Company in connection with a preemptive offer by way of a rights issue to shareholders up to a maximum nominal amount of 46198137  representing approximately two thirds of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company as at 30 May 2017 .
152 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notice of Annual General Meeting continued Strategic report Governance Financial statements Your Board considers it appropriate to seek this additional allotment authority at the Annual General Meeting in order to take advantage of the exibility it offers.
However the Board has no present intention of exercising either authority.
If they do exercise the authority the Directors intend to follow best practice as regards its use as recommended by the Investment Association.
As at the date of this Notice the Company does not hold any ordinary shares in the capital of the Company in treasury.
Resolutions 18 and 19  General and additional authority to disapply preemption rights At the last Annual General Meeting of the Company the Directors were also given authority to allot equity securities for cash without rst being required to offer such shares to existing shareholders.
This authority expires at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting or if earlier on the date which is 15 months after the date of the Annual General Meeting.
The passing of Resolutions 18 and 19 would allow the Directors to allot equity securities or sell any shares which the Company may purchase and hold in treasury without rst offering them to existing holders in proportion to their existing holdings.
The authority set out in Resolution 18 is limited to a allotments or sales in connection with preemptive offers and offers to holders of other equity securities if required by the rights of those shares or b otherwise than in connection with a preemptive offer up to an aggregate nominal amount of 3464860 representing 34648600 shares.
This aggregate nominal amount represents 5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company as at 30 May 2017 .
Taking into account the template resolutions published by the UK PreEmption Group in May 2016 the authority set out in Resolution 19 is limited to allotments or sales of up to an aggregate nominal amount of 3464860 representing 34648600 shares in addition to the authority set out in Resolution 18 which are used only for the purposes of nancing or renancing if the authority is to be used within six months after the original transaction a transaction which the Directors determine to be an acquisition or other capital investment of a kind contemplated by the Statement of Principles on disapplying preemption rights most recently published by the UK PreEmption Group prior to the date of this Notice.
This aggregate nominal amount represents an additional 5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company as at 30 May 2017 .
The Directors also conrm their intention to follow the provisions of the UK PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles regarding cumulative usage of authorities within a rolling three year period where the Principles provide that usage in excess of 7 .5% of issued ordinary share capital of the Company excluding treasury shares should not take place without prior consultation with shareholders except in connection with an acquisition or specied capital investment as referred to above.
Resolution 20  Authority to purchase own shares Resolution 20 gives the Company authority to buy back its own ordinary shares in the market as permitted by the 2006
The authority limits the number of shares that could be purchased to a maximum of 69297 206 representing approximately 10% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 30 May 2017 and sets minimum and maximum prices.
This authority will expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company.
The Directors have no present intention of exercising the authority to purchase the Companys ordinary shares but will keep the matter under review taking into account the nancial resources of the Company the Companys share price and future funding opportunities.
The authority will be exercised only after consideration by the Directors of the effect on net asset value and if the Directors believe that to do so would be in the interests of shareholders generally.
Any purchases of ordinary shares would be by means of market purchases through the London Stock Exchange.
Listed companies purchasing their own shares are allowed to hold them in treasury as an alternative to cancelling them.
No dividends are paid on shares whilst held in treasury and no voting rights attach to treasury shares.
If Resolution 20 is passed at the Annual General Meeting it is the Companys current intention to hold in treasury the majority of the shares it may purchase pursuant to the authority granted to it.
However in order to respond properly to the Companys capital requirements and prevailing market conditions the Directors will need to reassess at the time of any and each actual purchase whether to hold the shares in treasury or cancel them provided it is permitted to do so.
The Company may hold a maximum of up to 10% of its issued share capital in treasury in accordance with guidelines issued by the Investment Association.
As at 30 May 2017 the latest practicable date before publication of this Notice there were share awards over 6889357 ordinary shares in the capital of the Company representing 0.99% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital.
If the authority to purchase the Companys ordinary shares was exercised in full these awards would represent 0.99% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital.
Resolution 21  Notice period for general meetings It is proposed in Resolution 21 that shareholders should approve the continued ability of the Company to hold general meetings other than the Annual General Meeting on 14 clear days notice.
This resolution is required under Section 307A of the 2006 Act.
Under that section a traded company which wishes to be able to call general meetings other than an Annual General Meeting on 14 clear days notice must obtain shareholders approval.
Resolution 20 seeks such approval.
The resolution is valid up to the next Annual General Meeting of the Company and needs to be renewed annually.
The Company will also need to meet the requirements for voting by electronic means under Section 307A of the 2006 Act before it can call a general meeting on 14 days notice.
The shorter notice period would not be used as a matter of routine for general meetings but only where the exibility is merited by the business of the meeting and is thought to be to the advantage of shareholders as a whole.
153 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial calendar REIT status and taxation As a UK REIT the Group is exempt from corporation tax on rental income and UK property gains.
Dividend payments to shareholders are split between Property Income Distributions PIDs and non PIDs.
For most shareholders PIDs will be paid after deducting withholding tax at the basic rate.
However certain categories of shareholder are entitled to receive PIDs without withholding tax principally UK resident companies UK public bodies UK pension funds and managers of ISAs PEPs and Child Trust Funds.
There is a form on the Companys website for shareholders to certify that they qualify to receive PIDs without withholding tax.
Payment of dividends Shareholders who would like their dividends paid direct to a bank or building society account should notify Capita Asset Services.
Tax vouchers will continue to be sent to the shareholders registered address.
Announcement of results 31 May 2017 Annual General Meeting 11 July 2017 Shareholder information Advisors to the Company Joint Financial Advisors and Brokers Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET JP Morgan Securities Limited 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf London E14 5JP
Deloitte LLP 2 New Street Square London EC4A 3BZ Property Valuers CBRE Limited St Martins Court 10 Paternoster Row London EC4M 7HP Savills Advisory Services Limited 33 Margaret Street London W1G 0JD Tax Advisors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 1 Embankment Place London WC2N 6RH Solicitors to the Company Jones Day 21 Tudor Street London EC4Y 0DJ CMS Cameron McKenna Nabarro Olswang LLP Cannon Place 78 Cannon Street London EC4N 6AF Stephenson Harwood LLP 1 Finsbury Circus London EC2M 7SH Mourant Ozannes PO Box 186 1 Le Marchant Street St Peter Port
Channel Islands GY1 4HP
Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU Secretary and Registered Address Jadzia Duzniak One Curzon Street London W1J 5HB site 154 LondonMetric Property Plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Design and production Radley Yeldar  site
The cover is printed on Revive 100 Silk which is 100% recycled waste.
The report text is printed on Revive 100 Silk which is 50% recycled waste and 50% virgin bre Revive 100 Offset which is 100% recycled waste.
LondonMetric Property Plc One Curzon Street
