Annual report and accounts 2017
Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited and Charles Stanley Investment Choices Limited are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and are wholly owned subsidiaries of Charles Stanley Group PLC.
Charles Stanley Group PLC June 2017 .
Annual report and accounts 2017 Charles Stanley Group PLC Company information Company Secretary Julie Ung Registered of ce 55 Bishopsgate London EC2N 3AS Company registration number 48796 England and Walessite
Capita Registrars Limited Northern House Woodsome Park Fenay Bridge Hudders eld HD8 0GA Principal bankers Bank of Scotland New Uberior House 11 Earl Grey Street Edinburgh EH3 9BN External auditor KPMG LLP Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL
Canaccord Genuity 88 Wood Street London EC2V 7QR Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET 14 June 2017 Results announcement 29 June 2017 Exdividend date for  nal dividend 30 June 2017 Record date for  nal dividend 27 July 2017 Annual General Meeting 31 July 2017 Final dividend paid Financial calendar Where we are We operate in 24 UK locations.
For a list of our of ces visitsite Designed and produced by Frank Bright and Abel We operate in 24 UK locations.
Charles Stanley is one of the UKs leading independentlyowned wealth managers tracing its origins back directly to 1792 and is one of the oldest  rms on the London Stock Exchange.
Charles Stanley provides holistic wealth management services to private clients charities and smaller institutions.
These are delivered by over 400 professionals located in 24 of ces throughout the UK both direct to clients and to intermediaries.
Over the years we have constantly re ned our proposition to meet the changing needs of our clients.
Our services include personalised investment portfolio management pooled solutions  nancial planning advice and an awardwinning executiononly dealing platform Charles Stanley Direct.
Our vision Our vision is to become the UKs leading wealth manager by 2020.
We de ne leading in terms of quality rather than quantity .
Focusing on client satisfaction as well as staff engagement and equity market rating we measure our progress against these targets yearonyear.
Two years into our vision positive transformation across the business sees us on track to achieving this.
Our values Charles Stanleys core values  Caring Fair and Progressive  have provided an overarching framework within which we operate supporting our underlying strategy to always work in our clients best interests and offer a truly personal service.
At a glance
Chairmans statement
Chief Executive Of cers report Strategy and operating principles overview 08 Key performance indicators Our business Our markets Strategy progressing Review of the year
Risk management
Corporate social responsibility report Strategic report
C h a ir m a n  s in tr o d u c ti o n Board of Directors and Executive Committee Co rp o r a t e g o v e rna n c e report 56 Audit Committee report N om i n a t ion C om m i t t e e report 62 Directors remuneration report 86 Risk Committee report 89 Directors report 92 Directors responsibilities I n dep en den t a ud i t o r s report to the Members of Charles Stanley Group PLC only Financial statements 99 Consolidated income statement 100 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 101 Consolidated statement of  nancial position 102 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 104 Consolidated statement of cash  ows Notes to the  nancial statements 146 Parent Company nancial statements Notes to the Parent Company sitesite 01 Governance Financial statements Strategic report At a glance The four main operating divisions
Management Services
Management
Financial
Planning
Charles Stanley
Revenue
Revenue
Revenue
Revenue
Group highlights Group returned to profitability Core Business operating margin improved to 7.1% Balance sheet strengthened and higher cash balances 2017 dividend increased by 20% to 6.0 pence per share New investment managers remuneration arrangements successfully concluded Transformation programme foundations in place All noncore activities disposed of Governance framework overhaul completed Financial highlightstel 9.8tel 5.0 5.0tel 28.6tel 21.3tel 9.3tel el 2017 13.46tel Reported protloss before tax m Core Business prot before tax m Reported basic earnings per share p Core Business earnings per share p Dividend per share p Cash m FuMA bn
The Core Business figures represent the results of our four main operating divisions excluding held for sale activities and adjustments for oneoff items  refer to pages 20 and 31.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 02
Chairmans statement
Financial results The Groups reported revenue for the year ended 31 March 2017 was 141.6 million in line with that reported in the previous year.
The reported profit before tax improved to 8.8 million compared with a loss of 0.3 million in the previous year and a loss of 6.1 million in the year before that.
The positive direction of travel is clear as is the success of our programme of cost control.
Funds under Management and Administration stood at 24.0 billion at the yearend compared with 20.5 billion the year before an increase of 17.1%.
This mirrors the improvement in the market index that we track though the increase in Discretionary funds was significantly ahead of this over the 12month period up from 9.4 billion to 11.4 billion or 21.3%.
Our cash position remains strong at 58.4 million compared with 48.4 million at the previous yearend both years are inclusive of cash balances held within assets held for sale.
Remuneration structures It is pleasing to report that by the yearend we had substantially completed our major project of restructuring the remuneration arrangements of our investment managers.
The Board has been closely involved in the remuneration project as I described in my statement last year and I should like to thank all of our investment managers for their help and support in bringing this exercise to a successful completion.
As a consequence we have greater alignment with the strategy of the business and better regulatory outcomes  for example the incentive structures in Investment Management Services and Financial Planning are no longer purely financial but are also linked directly to standards of conduct.
Throughout the interests of our clients have always been and remain uppermost.
The high score of 93% overall client satisfaction achieved in this years surveys are testament to this.
On page 4 of our Chief Executive Officer CEO Paul Abberley addresses in greater detail our strategic development and implementation.
Governance review During the year considerable work has been carried out reviewing our corporate governance framework.
We have restructured the relationship between our two principal boards  Charles Stanley Group PLC the holding company or CSG and Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited the principal regulated entity or CSC  and reorganised the committee arrangements.
More senior managers have joined the Executive Committee chaired by Paul Abberley which not only develops and implements strategy as agreed by the CSG Board but also manages the business on a daytoday basis.
More detail of the new governance framework is set out in the Governance section on pages 46 to 97.
Sir David Howard
2017 has been another year of significant transformation for the Group and we have made good progress against our articulated strategy.
It is pleasing to announce that the transformation programme is bearing fruit with sustained revenues despite the disposal of noncore activities last year and a welcome return to profitability.
Chairmansite 03 Governance Financial statements Strategic report Board changes David Pusinelli has decided not to put his name forward for reelection as a Nonexecutive Director at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
David has been a highly valued member of the team and has managed his roles as Chairman of the Audit Committee and as Senior Independent Director with skill and effectiveness.
David joined the Board in 2012 and has contributed significantly to the progress of the
The Board thanks him sincerely for his help and advice and wishes him good health and a long retirement.
A search is well advanced for additional Nonexecutive Directors with the guidance of professional external consultants and we hope to make an announcement to shareholders in the near future.
Turning to our Executive Directors it was to our regret that Michael Lilwall advised us in the autumn of his wish to step down from the Board for personal reasons.
Michael joined Charles Stanley in 1997 and has played a significant role in many of our developments since that time.
We are delighted that though no longer a Director he remains with the Group and will continue to look after a number of valued clients.
In last years report I referred to the resignation just after the yearend of Anthony Scott.
Anthony was a Director and the cohead of the Investment Management Services division which represents the great majority of our business.
To both Michael and Anthony I express the warmest thanks on behalf of the Group for their substantial contribution.
Our team Throughout a very busy year our staff have worked tirelessly to look after our clients demonstrating our core values of being Caring Fair and Progressive.
So it gives me great pleasure to announce that the annual staff engagement survey carried out in November 2016 showed a sharp 11% increase in the overall engagement score to 67%.
This illustrates that our staff are taking an active and engaged approach to our significant programme of improvement.
I would also like to pay tribute on behalf of the Board to the considerable achievements of our CEO Paul Abberley in masterminding the transformation process that is under way.
He has led from the front and carried us all with him embodying our theme of One Charles Stanley.
He has been ably supported by Ben MoneyCoutts our Chief Financial Officer and Gary Teper the Head of our Investment Management Services division.
Our Nonexecutive Directors have also had a very busy and challenging year and have contributed greatly.
I also thank our shareholders for their continuous support.
Dividend
I have previously outlined our policy to return to a pattern of steadily increasing dividends once profitability starts to improve significantly.
The Board is therefore recommending a final dividend of 4.5 pence per share.
Taken together with the interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share this results in a total dividend for the year of 6.0 pence per share an increase of 20% compared to 5.0 pence per share paid in the prior year.
Outlook
The two principal external drivers of our growth  the level of markets and the volume of investment trading  both surged after the Brexit vote on 23 June 2016 and have remained buoyant ever since.
Much of the uncertainty which I spoke of last year has now dissipated with the EU referendum result and the election of President Trump but we now have further uncertainty over the shape of the UK government following the UK election on 8 June 2017.
Looking further ahead the macro uncertainties remain as great as ever.
There is a lot of focus on what the UKs exit from the EU will mean for the UK financial services industry.
Our business being predominantly UKbased and serving UKbased clients is we believe relatively well placed to ride out any storm that might arise for the financial services sector from the Brexit negotiations.
Despite these longer term uncertainties market conditions are more settled and more favourable than they were at this time last year.
This provides a favourable backdrop for our transformation programme and should bring growth in revenues profits and margins which in turn will support our progressive dividend policy and thus generate longterm shareholder value.
Sir David Howard
13 June 2017 The positive direction of travel is clear as is the success of our programme of cost control.
Strategic report  Chief Executive Officers report
Chief Executive Officers report
Financial performance The Group made a healthy return to profitability with a reported profit before tax of 8.8 million compared to a loss of 0.3 million in the previous year.
This was aided by strong financial markets but driven primarily by the transformation implemented over the past two years.
The Group is streamlined focused and positioned to deliver profitably the wealth management services and products sought and needed by UK clients.
This has been delivered without recourse to a restructuring charge and the precautionary capital raised from shareholders in April 2015 remains intact.
As planned the financial improvements were broadbased.
A strong cost control culture was evident across all units and each of our four clientfacing divisions delivered positive underlying momentum.
Profits from the Core Business increased from 4.2 million in 2016 to 9.8 million this year reflecting an improvement in operating margin from 3.1% to 7.1% paving the way towards our mediumterm target of a 15% operating margin.
Strategy implementation The strategy determined in early 2015 required considerable preparatory work but I am pleased to be able to report that this is now largely in place and the benefits to both clients and shareholders are materialising.
Our four clientfacing divisions provide a full service holistic wealth management offering from discretionary fund management to simple execution with financial planning advice as needed.
We remain an investmentled firm and the delivery of discretionary fund management by empowered investment professionals is at the heart of our offering.
Indeed we are experiencing a steady trend in previously selfdirected clients seeking a discretionary service instead.
Paul Abberley
Chief Executive Officer
Charles Stanleys transformation programme is on track.
As previously communicated our aim is to push our business into the first quartile for client satisfaction staff engagement and stock market rating by 2020.
We have made good progress during the 2017 financial year and I am confident that we will hit our targets and become the UKs leading wealth manager within three years.
Strategic report pages 04 site 05 Governance Financial statements Strategic report The year ahead The benefits of the strategy have started to crystallise and we remain confident that this momentum will be maintained.
Indeed with a renewed focus on reaching new clients and serving our existing clients more comprehensively we expect an acceleration in new business revenues.
The underlying commercial models in each of our four clientfacing divisions have been reengineered to ensure profitable delivery and to underpin the operational gearing which over time will support margin growth.
Growing revenues and building operational efficiency will now be the central focus.
Recourse to technology in divisions such as Charles Stanley Direct allows the Group to serve a broader range of client needs often at an earlier stage in our clients lifetime financial journeys.
While profound digital disruption is not yet on the horizon it is important to ensure that our technology platforms permit a timely and flexible response to evolving client needs.
We intend to foster such preparedness whilst continuing to provide firstclass advice to our clients.
Our Chairman Sir David Howard referred to the new governance framework and this will become a vital enabler particularly given the new wave of regulatory requirements for which implementation is under way.
We are well prepared.
Continuing successful delivery of our strategy moves the Group closer to the 2020 vision of becoming the UKs leading wealth manager as measured by the quantitative scores for relative client satisfaction staff engagement and stock market rating.
Delivery will ensure that all our stakeholders are appropriately served and we look forward to the new financial year with growing confidence.
Paul Abberley
Chief Executive Officer
13 June 2017 The underlying commercial models in each of our four clientfacing divisions have been reengineered to ensure profitable delivery and to underpin the operational gearing which over time will support margin growth.
Growing revenues and building operational efficiency will now be the central focus.
Strategic report The strategic report as approved by the Board outlines our performance for the year an update on our markets and our business how we delivered against our objectives and the strategic focus for the years ahead.
Contents
Strategy and operating principles overview Key performance indicators Our business Our markets Strategy progressing Review of the year Risk management and principal risks Corporate social responsibility report Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 06 Strategic report  Strategy and operating principles overview What we do Clientfocused investment management Charles Stanley has a distinctive clientfacing approach offering a genuine personal service across the full range of investment management services.
We provide these services in three forms our time to interact with clients our investment insights and our willingness to make investment decisions on clients behalf.
Holistic wealth management We are committed to holistic wealth management.
Broadly defi ned wealth management includes our core capability for private clients Investment Management Services Asset Management Services where our investment specialists manage pooled vehicles and funds Financial Planning where clients are advised on how they should plan their fi nancial arrangements and deploy their investments and Charles Stanley Direct which gives clients the ability to access our executiononly services online without the need for direct personal contact.
Focusing on you Financial Planning Charles Stanley Direct Investment Management Services Asset Management Personal Approach Full Service Offer Holistic Wealth Management Transformation journey to 2020 The journey to refocus our business has three phases The strategic review which is now complete Implementation of the revised strategy which is progressing well To deliver a sizeable platform capable of sustainable growth.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report How we do it  four operating divisions Asset Management Investment Management Services Investment Management Services offers a comprehensive personalised service to direct private clients managing discretionary portfolios providing investment advice and offering executiononly services covering a wide range of financial instruments.
Increasingly the division is working with financial planners both internal and external to offer a comprehensive wealth management service particularly around pension planning and inheritance tax planning.
The division also looks after significant assets on behalf of charities and foundations.
Financial Planning The Financial Planning division provides holistic financial planning advice and works with clients to ensure that their financial arrangements and plans are optimised to address their current and future needs and circumstances.
It can be delivered standalone or in conjunction with the Investment Management Services division.
Charles Stanley Direct provides a directtoclient investment service created to meet the needs of the modern selfdirected investor.
Investments can be made online or with telephone support in a wide range of funds shares gilts and bonds.
The Asset Management division provides pooled solutions model portfolios and inheritance tax solutions for a range of clients.
It also provides investment solutions for institutional investors.
Charles Stanley Direct Three strategic measures The delivery of our strategy will be independently measured against targets over three strategic measures client satisfaction staff engagement and equity market rating.
Our client satisfaction surveys are being remodelled to allow benchmarking within the wealth management industry and to ensure clients feedback is adequately captured and monitored.
We hold annual staff engagement surveys benchmarked within the wealth management sector and ensure staff feedback is actively acted upon.
We compare the Groups threeyear total shareholder return to a basket of peer group listed companies.
Client satisfaction Equity market rating Staff engagement For more on Investment Management Services go to page 23 For more on Financial Planning go to page 27 For more on Charles Stanley Direct go to page 28 For more on Charles Stanley Direct go to page 25 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report Key performance indicators The Group considers the following financial and strategic measures as key performance indicators KPIs of the Groups overall performance for the year ended 31 March 2017 against the prior year comparative.
Financial measures  FuMA and revenue margins
FuMA by investment category.
Performance
FuMA increased by 17.1% compared to a 15.9% increase in the WMA Balanced Index.
Definition
Discretionary funds divided by the Discretionary client accounts.
Performance
The Discretionary average client portfolio size increased by 16.9%.
Both the Discretionary funds value and the number of client accounts recorded an increase during the year.
Definition
Value of net new inflows as a percentage of opening FuM for Discretionary funds.
Performance
Net inflows were 0.6 billion in 2017 in line with those recorded in the prior year.
Definition
Fee commission and interest income measured as a percentage return on average annual Discretionary funds.
Performance
Total Discretionary revenue margin increased by 2bps overall with a 3bps increase in fee revenue offset by reductions in commission and interest margin.
Definition
Fee commission and interest income measured as a percentage return on average annual Executiononly assets.
Performance
The return on Executiononly assets has decreased by 8bps during the year due to a change in Charles Stanley Directs revenue mix.
Definition
FuMA divided by the number of CF30s investment managers who provide advisory services regarded as a controlled function by the FCA.
Performance
The increase from 62.8 million to 84.9 million in 2017 was due to both an increase in FuMA and a reduction in the number of CF30s in the year.
Strategic report  Key performance indicators
Advisory Dealing Advisory Managed
2016 2017
Advisory Dealing Advisory Managed
FuMA bn Discretionary funds inflows % FuMA per CF30 m Discretionary client account portfolio size 000
Commission
Fee
Discretionary revenue margin bps
Commission
Fee
Executiononly revenue margin bpssite Governance Financial statements Strategic report Financial measures  operating efficiency Financial measures  shareholder return
Fee income as a percentage of total revenue comprising fee commission and interest income.
Performance
The ratio of fees to revenue remained in line with prior year.
Definition
The reported profit or loss before tax for the Group.
Performance
Reported profit before tax has increased by 9.1 million due to the significantly improved profitability during the year.
Definition
Profit before tax measured as a percentage of revenue for the Core Business.
Performance
Higher revenues and cost control within the Core Business has resulted in a significant four percentage point increase in operating margin.
Definition
The percentage change in the total dividend per share.
Performance
The total dividend per share for 2017 increased by 20% to 6.0p per share.
Fees to revenue ratio % 2016 2017 Core Business operating margin % Reported profitloss before tax m Dividend growth % Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report
The Groups regulatory capital resources to its minimum regulatory capital requirement.
Performance
The ratio decreased from 144% to 127% due to an increase in the Groups regulatory capital requirement during the year.
Definition
Reported operating profit or loss as shown on page 20 divided by capital employed total assets less current liabilities.
Performance
The return on capital employed improved during the year due to a return to profitability.
Return on capital employed %
Reported profit after tax dvided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares.
Performance
The increase in earnings per share is due to the higher profit after tax recognised in the year.
Reported basic earnings per share ptel Capital adequacy ratio % Financial measures  shareholder return continued Financial measures  balance sheet strength Strategic report site Governance Financial statements Strategic report Strategic measures Our objective Staff engagement is viewed as being fundamental to our success.
In November 2016 we carried out our second annual staff engagement survey.
There was a 73% response rate and a 67% overall engagement score up from 56% in 2016.
Charles Stanley is in the upper quartile when benchmarked against the CIPDs annual data scoring 28 percentage points above the UK average.
We also scored above average within the Financial Services industry according to the Hay Group Employee Engagement Index benchmark which is at 61%  Charles Stanleys rating is 6 percentage points above this benchmark and only 4 points below the high performing benchmark.
Staff engagement will continue to be assessed on an annual basis.
Staff engagement
86% of participants praised Charles Stanley for being a friendly place to work.
This represents an Upper quartile rating within the Financial Services industry.
Our objective We are committed to improving our relations with our clients and ensuring that our services meet and exceed their expectations.
We conduct client surveys to help monitor clients satisfaction with our services and to help instruct us as to how we might adapt them to meet their requirements.
Client satisfaction surveys were carried out for all of our operating divisions during the year.
The results of the surveys were overwhelmingly encouraging with high satisfaction scores achieved by every division.
93% overall weighted average rating maintaining the score achieved in 2016 of 94%.
Client satisfaction
Management
Services
Asset
Management
Financial
Planning
Charles Stanley
Client satisfaction by division % Our objective The Board is committed to delivering strong shareholder returns over the longer term.
The adjacent table illustrates Charles Stanleys threeyear total shareholder return representing the change in share price and dividends paid over the period relative to that of a basket of peer group listed companies.
Compared to 2016 the Group moved Up 1 place in market rating position.
Equity market rating Company name 2017 2016 Rathbone Brothers Plc 1 2 Brooks Macdonald Group plc 2 6 WH Ireland Group plc 3 3 Brewin Dolphin Holdings PLC 4 5 Walker Crips Group plc 5 4 Charles Stanley Group PLC 6 7 Shore Capital Group Limited 7 1 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 12 Strategic report  Our business Our business Asset Management Working arminarm with the Investment Management Services division is our Asset Management division.
This division provides bespoke and pooled solutions to a range of clients from institutional investors with multimillion pound portfolios to managing the assets of valued retail clients.
We believe Asset Management provides both an excellent growth opportunity in itself and in partnership with our Investment Management Services division.
Financial Planning With each Government budget making the savings landscape more complex our clients increasingly need highquality advice to best deal with their wealth for retirement and for future generations.
Our Financial Planning division is well positioned to grow and capture market share including supporting the clients of our Investment Management Services division.
Charles Stanley Direct For investors who want to manage their own money we have enabled them to utilise our dealing settlement and custody services through our digital execution platform Charles Stanley Direct.
While the wealth management industry is often divided between discretionary or execution services Charles Stanley Direct can help provide a bridge between the two.
The division helps customers often younger to manage their own investments online or over the phone in a wide range of funds shares gilts and bonds.
Over time as their needs evolve and they require advice or help in managing their wealth they can easily access Charles Stanleys Discretionary services.
This will open up new growth opportunities for both our Investment Management Services and Financial Planning divisions.
In summary our four divisions each have the capacity to grow revenues in their respective markets.
Moreover together they offer a set of complementary services which will support our vision to become the UKs leading wealth manager by 2020.
Charles Stanley is one of the UKs leading wealth managers managing and administering 24.0 billion on behalf of our clients.
Over the last 225 years we have constantly refined our proposition to meet the changing needs of our clients.
This has led to high levels of trust with client satisfaction scores of 93%.
For more on Strategy progressing go to page 14 Personal service and dependable stewardship of clients money will always be the chief virtues of our firm.
We have built on our stockbroking heritage and are now structured to allow us to bring that culture to four complementary divisions  Investment Management Services Asset Management Financial Planning and Charles Stanley Direct.
Investment Management Services Our Investment Management Services division offers discretionary advisory and executiononly services to private clients trusts charities and companies.
Around
68000 client accounts are supported through a network of 24 offices around the UK.
Our operating model empowers highquality investment managers to look after clients money in a tailored manner either directly or in partnership with a financial planner.
This premium service creates deep bonds of trust with clients and typically leads to discretionary mandates generating strong revenue yields.
Furthermore the empowered model has led to nearconsistent asset growth since 2010.
Recent awards received by Charles Stanley Direct The Platforum Best Direct Platform for Service FT and Investors Chronicle Best Selfselect Isa Provider site Governance Financial statements Strategic report Strategic report  Our markets Our markets The wealth management market in the UK is evolving in four ways.
This section explains each change and the opportunities for Charles Stanley.
New customer segments Wealth management firms are finding fresh and innovative ways to grow revenues including tailoring products to target customers who had not traditionally used these companies.
New technology and digital channels mean firms can target customers more efficiently and open up new revenue streams.
The biggest growth area is in directtoclient marketing in particular to three segments  women millennials and retirees  whose concentration of wealth is growing.
Charles Stanley is working hard to segment better its customers to help it tailor its offering to meet their specific needs.
Currently few wealth management firms segment their clients in a manner that allows them to tailor their offerings.
Charles Stanleys Distribution department has already started a segmentation project and once complete a refreshed website will follow shortly thereafter.
Designed to showcase our broad offering in a more targeted manner these initiatives will improve our market share in the most fertile areas of the market.
Intermediary sales The Retail Distribution Review in 2013 has meant many independent financial advisers are now semitied to an investment manager.
This creates an opportunity for Charles Stanley to leverage its 225 year old trusted name and network of 24 offices to forge strategic alliances with groups of independent financial advisers.
To that end we have expanded our Intermediary Sales Team to grow our relationships in this market.
Financial planning Traditionally many wealth management firms focused on purely discretionary investment management but it is clear that there is a growing demand for financial planning as customers have increasingly complex needs.
To meet this demand Charles Stanley has adopted a vertically integrated model so we are better placed to offer financial planning services to our Investment Management Services divisions 68000 client accounts and to cement further our position as trusted adviser to our customers.
New technology There has been a flurry of fintech startups launching highlyscalable automatedadvice solutions with established wealth management players also beginning to enter the market.
So far few offerings have gained traction.
Charles Stanley has the opportunity to expand in this market.
We can capitalise on our asset management expertise distribution capability and technology platform to provide a highquality investment management range for clients with smaller portfolios.
Our recently launched Personal Portfolio Service will allow us to grow our assets in an open market segment our customers more efficiently and grow capacity in our Investment Management Services division.
Together these four themes illustrate that the wealth management market is evolving quickly.
Opportunities
606tel XO Stockbrokers Wealth Managers 742tel XO Stockbrokers Wealth Managers 6Advisory
Nonmanaged
Total investment assets bn Total revenue m 2016 investment assets split % Source Compeer Limited data at 31 December 2016.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 14 Strategy progressing To achieve the ambition we have made two fundamental decisions The first is to maintain the empowered investment manager model.
By trusting our front line advisers to make investment decisions service existing clients and attract new business we are differentiating ourselves as a service provider in an increasingly productdriven market.
We believe that offering clients access to the person who manages their portfolio is increasingly a unique selling point as many of our peers are favouring a centralised approach with relationship managers.
We believe that many investment managers will want to join Charles Stanley in order to service their clients in this way.
We also believe the effect of our differentiated proposition will be a faster growth in funds versus other firms.
This should in turn mean that because we have a predominantly fixed cost base our margins will increase.
The second key decision is to build a holistic wealth offering around our core investment management business.
Alongside Investment Management Services we now offer clients advice from our Financial Planning division pooled solutions from our Asset Management division and online executiononly services from Charles Stanley Direct.
Combined these decisions mean we have a unique proposition within the wealth sector a fullservice holistic offering but with the discretionary fund management component delivered through the traditional empowered investment manager model.
Our vision at Charles Stanley is to become the UKs leading wealth manager by 2020.
Progress will be assessed by three measures client satisfaction staff engagement and stock market rating.
These will be benchmarked annually to the UK wealth sector with the aim of delivering first quartile results in three years.
Strategic report site Governance Financial statements Strategic report Implementation milestones achieved With the pillars in place over the last 12 months we have made significant progress in terms of implementing our strategy across each of our divisions.
Investment Management Services We have delivered on our promise to revise the remuneration arrangements of our investment managers.
This has been achieved in three ways.
Firstly our remuneration model has changed from one that was mostly revenuebased to be more centred on profit.
This better aligns the interests of investment managers and shareholders.
Secondly the incentive schemes for our employed and associate investment managers have also been harmonised while recognising the differences between them.
Finally the ratio of compensation to revenue has been lowered while simultaneously providing the potential for investment managers to increase their total compensation subject to profit contribution.
The overwhelming majority of staff signed up  amounting to in excess of 96% of FuMA with the new profitorientated scheme coming into effect from 1 April 2017.
Alongside remuneration changes we have delivered growth initiatives in the Investment Management Services division.
Following our rebrand we reinvigorated our intermediary distribution network with the topdown strategy of concentrating on nationals and networks.
We have also significantly improved our client onboarding process.
Finally we have integrated a Client Relationship Management system which allows us to analyse the success of our sales campaigns and allocate shareholder capital more effectively.
Over the year FuMA have grown by 17.1% to 24.0 billion.
Crucially this growth comes with an increasing return on assets.
Higheryielding discretionary FuM are up 21.3% to 11.4 billion with the discretionary element of the business mix rising by 1.7% to 47.5%.
Meanwhile we have implemented a new rate card.
While it already applies to new clients existing clients are being phased on to the new rates with a significant proportion expected to move in financial year 2018.
Implementation milestones achieved Implementation milestones planned for 2018
Management
Services
Revised the investment managers remuneration arrangements to be better aligned with the Groups strategy and shareholders interests Reinvigorated our intermediary distribution network Implemented a new rate card phased in over three years Improved our client onboarding process Encourage greater access to holistic wealth management and work more closely with Financial Planning Recruit talented investment management professionals Increase focus on the needs of IFAs Introduce endtoend process management Refresh client reporting and redesign the digital interface Asset Management Refreshed the product offering Launched an OEIC range to capitalise on IFA outsourcing and provide a more costeffective solution to smaller clients Optimise the operating model Provide efficiencies and capacity for further revenuegenerating activities Financial Planning Restructured the division and streamlined operating processes Revamped customer value proposition Grow the number of financial planners Increase revenues and profitability by a wider market offering  existing and new clients Implement a new business processing system Charles Stanley Direct Implemented a new pricing structure Released a new mobileoptimised website Enhanced the digital marketing strategy Offer Personal Portfolio Service on the platform Implement a new corporate actions service to streamline processes Launch a tabletfriendly mobile application Support Functions Consolidated our London footprint into a single head office site Invested in systems to ensure efficiency Rationalise front and back office procedures Support greater online functionality Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 16 Asset Management We have refreshed the asset management product offering.
A range of multiasset portfolios have been developed to provide IFAs with tailored segregated portfolios for their larger clients.
Moreover an OEIC range has been launched to capitalise on IFA outsourcing.
They are a logical home for clients with lower value portfolios for whom the bespoke solution is not costeffective.
Financial Planning In Financial Planning our focus is on internal and external business development and the adoption of a streamlined operating process.
We have revamped our customer proposition pricing and literature and now that we have the fundamentals of our holistic Financial Planning in place we will focus on offering these services to our clients.
Moreover we have introduced a new variable reward scheme which incentivises revenue growth.
Charles Stanley Direct This year we have released an allnew mobileoptimised website with enhanced registration.
The new website is delivering 350400 accounts to the business per week with an average client age of 42.
We are feeding the outlet through a scientific approach to digital marketing which has given us a much lower costperacquisition than the industryquoted levels.
Simultaneously we amended our pricing in October 2016 to attract frequent traders and pension clients.
Complementing that we have made it easier for Investment Management Services to transfer Executiononly clients to Charles Stanley Direct.
Support Functions We have made efficiencies to support the changes in the front line divisions.
We have consolidated our London footprint into a single building at 55 Bishopsgate lowering costs while improving efficiency.
We have also invested in systems to ensure that our links to external custodians as well as to existing and new fund platforms are more efficient.
Finally we have refreshed our Business Change department drawing on experience learnt from other companies to ensure that we deliver the right projects in the right manner.
Implementation milestones in prospect With the foundations now in place we have further initiatives planned for the financial year 2018.
In headline terms the Group is sharply focused on two goals revenue growth and operational effectiveness.
Investment Management Services In Investment Management Services numerous initiatives are under way including repricing encouraging greater access to holistic wealth management improving the way we work with intermediaries recruiting talented investment management professionals and undertaking more business development and sales initiatives.
To aid overall growth we need to create efficiencies and improvements so we have more time to focus on servicing our clients and undertaking businessenhancing activities.
While the Support Functions will lead a number of projects a number of initiatives will be progressed by Investment Management Services in order to improve service.
Examples of developments in this area include refreshing client reporting refining the systems around our investment management process and redesigning our digital interface with clients.
At the same time we continue to refine and improve the control and oversight environment with initiatives that will protect and futureproof our business model.
While many of these developments go unseen by clients they are vital to ensure we continue to offer topquality investment services.
Asset Management In Asset Management we will optimise our operating model in such a manner that provides efficiencies and capacity for further revenuegenerating activities.
Strategic report site Governance Financial statements Strategic report Financial Planning In Financial Planning we will focus on three key areas.
First we will look to increase revenues and profitability.
Our proposition will be rolled out and actively offered to existing Charles Stanley clients and the wider marketplace.
The proposition will be supported by our new pricing model which is in place for all new clients and will be passed on where appropriate to existing clients as part of our normal client reviews.
We expect a meaningful uptick of our revenues as a result.
Secondly having reduced our clientfacing staff numbers by 28% to ensure we have the right quality individuals we will look to materially grow our number of financial planners.
It is intended that these new hires will make a contribution in the year but of course the full benefit from these hires will be seen in years to come.
Finally we will focus on implementing our streamlined business processing system with the hope that significant productivity gains will be captured.
Charles Stanley Direct In Charles Stanley Direct we will expand the offering by introducing our new Personal Portfolio Service.
To improve client service we will implement a new Corporate Actions service to streamline processes.
We will also reinforce our security features via an extension of our existing mobile text messaging applications.
Finally we will launch a tabletfriendly mobile application.
This will be built on the existing architecture of the current iPhone application to address the current trend that 40% of our clients now access the website via mobile devices.
Support Functions In the Support Functions we will develop the Groups operating model to support the more focused strategies of the front office business units.
With increasing standardisation of processes we will ensure that the systems and back office deliver with minimal manual intervention.
Key areas that will be targeted during this year will be transfers and payments.
Both of these will be supported by a greater online functionality where our clients want it.
The strategic changes will be achieved against the backdrop of the significant regulatory changes for MiFID II and PRIIPs and the increasing focus on ensuring resilience against cyber attacks.
Summary
All the elements are in place to be the UKs leading wealth manager by 2020.
We have a fully engaged workforce in place structured in the right manner and working towards one clear objective.
After formalising the structures and cultures needed Charles Stanley is primed for growth.
Strategic report  Review of the year Review of the year Overview of 2017 full year results The Groups overall revenues for 2017 were at the same level as 2016 at 141.6 million.
This is due to the fact that the 3.8% increase in revenues of our Core Business comprising the Investment Management Services Asset Management Financial Planning and Charles Stanley Direct divisions was offset by the elimination of revenues associated with our held for sale activities disposed of during the previous year.
Overall expenditure decreased by 3.7% to 136.8 million 2016 142.1 million mainly due to tight cost control.
Various aspects of our reorganisation programme gave rise to an exceptional level of net finance income of 3.8 million 2016 0.1 million.
The main contributor was the profit on disposal of a long leasehold office in Luke Street London which helped finance the rationalisation of all our London offices into a single office at 55 Bishopsgate.
Details of this and other oneoff adjusting items are set out on page 31.
As a result of the above factors the adjusted profit before tax from the Core Business excluding held for sale activities for 2017 improved by 133.3% to 9.8 million 2016 4.2 million and overall the Group achieved a reported profit before tax of 8.8 million compared to a loss of 0.3 million in the prior year.
Funds under Management and Administration The Groups revenue is substantially driven by the level of its FuMA.
These increased by a very healthy 17.1% to 24.0 billion at 31 March 2017 2016 20.5 billion.
The increase was ahead of the benchmark WMA Balanced Index which rose 15.9% over the same period.
Ben MoneyCoutts Chief Financial Officer Financial year 2017 was the second year of our fiveyear turnaround programme.
Whereas the focus for 2016 had been to reduce losses dispose of noncore activities strengthen the balance sheet and formulate a detailed plan to achieve the Groups strategy that for 2017 was to return to profitability and to lay down the foundations for longterm growth.
Whilst we still have a long way to travel in terms of improving top line growth productivity and operating efficiency good progress has been achieved during 2017 across all divisions.
We remain on track to deliver on the Groups strategic targets by 2020.
Review of the year pages 18 site Governance Financial statements Strategic report FuMA movement bn bn
As at 31 March Discretionary funds 11.4 Advisory Managed funds 2.4 Total managed funds 13.8 Advisory Dealing funds 1.8 Executiononly funds 8.4 Total administered funds 10.2 Total Funds under Management and Administration 24.0 WMA Balanced Index 4122 3556 15.9 The movement of FuMA continued the trend of recent years toward Discretionary and online Executiononly services.
These increased by 21.3% and 23.5% respectively yearonyear.
Advisory Dealing funds showed modest growth of 5.9% whilst Advisory Managed funds fell 7.7% largely as a result of clients upgrading to the Discretionary service.
The Executiononly funds on the Charles Stanley Direct platform increased by 35.7% to 1.9 billion.
The 3.5 billion net increase in FuMA since 31 March 2016 comprised inflows from new 1.4 billion and existing 0.5 billion clients and positive market performance of 3.0 billion offset by client accounts closed during the period of 1.4 billion of which 0.4 billion was accounted for by clients of departing investment managers.
Funds at 1 April 2016 New clients Lost clients Net inow outow from existing clients
Funds at 31 March 2017 FuMA flows bn Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year Results and performance The Groups financial performance for the year ended 31 March 2017 and for the prior year are summarised in the tables below.
These tables show the results of the Core Business the held for sale activities Charles Stanley Securities and Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited both of which were disposed of by 1 April 2016 and EBS Management PLC the sale of which was completed on 31 May 2017 and various adjusting items details of which are set out on page 31.
Core
Business
Held for sale
Reported performance 31 March 2017 Revenue 138.6 Expenses 129.1 3.0 4.7 136.8 Other income 0.2 Operating profitloss 9.7 Net finance income 0.1 Profitloss before tax 9.8 Tax expense 2.0 Profitloss after tax 7.8 Basic earnings per share p 15.33   12.35 31 March 2016 Revenue 133.5 Expenses 129.5 8.7 3.9 142.1 Other income 0.2 Operating profitloss 4.2 0.6 3.9 0.3 Net finance income 0.1 Lossgain on sale of business 0.1 Profitloss before tax 4.2 0.5 4.0 0.3 Tax expensecredit 0.7 0.1 Profitloss after tax 3.5 0.6 3.2 0.3 Basic earnings per share p 6.90   0.61
The 2016 figures for the Core Business have been restated to include the results of EBS Management PLC within held for sale activities so as to report a more appropriate yearonyear comparison.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Core Business revenues Revenues from the Core Business increased by 3.8% from 133.5 million in 2016 to 138.6 million in 2017.
The anticipated reduction in trail commissions and interest earned on client cash balances was more than offset by higher investment management fees largely arising from the uplift in markets seen during the year.
2017 2016 Trail and interest turn
Fees
Charles Stanley Direct Financial Planning Asset Management Investment Management
2017 2016 Core Business revenue by type m Core Business revenue by division m Core Business expenditure Expenditure within the Core Business has remained relatively flat on prior year at 129.1 million 2016 129.5 million.
The Groups single largest cost is staff costs and these rose 0.4 million as the variable element increased by 3.2 million and the fixed element reduced by 2.8 million.
The increase in the variable compensation amount was to be expected given the improved operating performance while the reduction in the fixed element followed a lower average headcount excluding employees included within held for sale activities of 778 2016 831.
Other significant changes in expenditure included increases in IT and marketing spend of 0.5 million each and a 1.6 million reduction in external professional fees.
Core Business expenditure m Core Business costs 2016
Professional fees
IT and communications Marketing and entertainment Others Core Business costs 2017 129.1 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year Core Business pretax profit The Core Business pretax profit increased from 4.2 million to 9.8 million reflecting a margin improvement from 3.1% to 7.1%.
This was in line with our expectations but still a long way from our stated mediumterm target of 15%.
To achieve this we need to continue along the path of increasing FuMA and revenues achieving greater productivity in the front office and improving operating efficiency in the back office.
Divisional review The table below shows the Core Business results broken into the Groups four main operating divisions Investment Management Services Asset Management Financial Planning and Charles Stanley Direct.
The services provided by each division are set out on page 7.
Investment
Management
Services
Asset
Management
Financial
Planning
Charles
Stanley
Direct
Core
Business
31 March 2017 Revenue 122.7 Expenditure 109.0 6.1 7.8 6.2 129.1 Other income 0.2 Operating profitloss 13.9 Net finance income 0.1 Profitloss before tax 14.0 31 March 2016 Revenue 117 .2 Expenditure 109.6 6.5 7.2 6.2 129.5 Other income 0.2 Operating profitloss 7.8 1.0 1.3 1.3 Net finance income 0.1 Loss on sale of business    0.1 0.1 Profitloss before tax 7.9 1.0 1.3 1.4 The 2016 figures have been restated to exclude the results of EBS Management PLC so as to report a comparable yearonyear performance.
Moreover the comparative results for Investment Management Services and Financial Planning have been restated to account for a number of investment managers who transferred out of the latter to the former at the start of the year.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Investment Management Services Trading review The financial performance of the Investment Management Services division is largely driven by the value and mix of FuMA the revenue margin earned on these assets expressed as a basis point return and the operating costs associated with managing them comprising both fixed and variable costs.
FuMA
Revenue 122.7 117 .2 Direct costs Fixed staff costs 19.8 20.7 Variable staff costs 35.5 35.3 Other direct operating expenses 9.7 10.3 Other income 0.2 Contribution 57.9 Allocated costs 44.0 43.3 Operating profit 13.9 KPIs 2017 2016 Discretionary funds per CF30 42.6m 32.1m Discretionary funds as a percent of total FuMA 61.1% 61.7% Discretionary average client account size 300k 261k Discretionary revenue margin 85bps 84bps Total revenue margin 65bps 66bps Staff costs to revenue ratio 45.1% 47.8% Other costs to revenue ratio 43.8% 45.7% Operating margin 11.3% 6.7% Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year The divisions FuMA increased by 16.0% overall in line with markets.
Discretionary assets grew by 22.4% and now represent 51.2% of the divisions overall FuMA.
The level of average managed funds per regulated investment manager CF30 which is a key productivity measure improved 26.5% to 51.6 million 2016 40.8 million.
One of Managements key objectives is to increase this further with a mediumterm target set of 70.0 million per CF30.
Discretionary
Advisory Dealing Advisory Managed
2016 bn
Advisory Dealing Advisory Managed
2017 bn Although FuMA grew overall revenue margins decreased from 66bps to 65bps largely as a result of a halving of interest turn to 1bp.
Whilst this particular element of revenue is likely to decline further it is anticipated that the revenue margin will begin to increase again as we continue to grow the Discretionary book as a proportion of the whole and phase in a repricing programme across the book.
The combined effect of increased FuMA but lower revenue margins led to the divisions overall revenues increasing 4.7% to 122.7m 2016 117.2m.
Total costs for the division were relatively flat on last year at 109.0 million 2016 109.6 million.
Staff costs as a proportion of revenues reduced significantly from 47.8% to 45.1% largely as a result of the staged implementation of the revised investment manager remuneration model and reduced headcount of 411 2016 435.
Overall the Investment Management Services division reported a 78.2% improvement in its operating profit from 7.8 million in 2016 to 13.9 million in 2017 and its operating margin grew from 6.7% to 11.3%.
Outlook
The twin challenges faced by the division are to increase revenues through FuMA inflows repricing and service upselling whilst improving overall productivity levels which are below top industry standards most notably in relation to FuMA per CF30 and staff costs ratios.
As has been covered in the Strategy progressing section on page 6 we have a wide number of specific initiatives in train to help deliver on these key metrics and remain confident that subject to stable or improving market conditions we can continue to deliver progress on the divisions overall performance.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Asset Management Trading review The Asset Management divisions performance is driven by Funds under Management FuM and the revenue margin earned on these assets.
By comparison to the Investment Management Services division its costs are relatively fixed.
FuM  on platform 1.1 FuM  off platform FuM  total 1.3 Off platform FuM comprises model portfolios on third party platforms and Open Ended Investment Companies OEICs or other clients whose assets are held by a third party custodian.
Revenue 6.6 Direct costs Fixed staff costs 1.7 1.9 Variable staff costs 0.9 1.2 Other direct operating expenses 1.0 1.5 Contribution 3.0 Allocated costs 2.5 1.9 Operating profitloss 0.5 KPIs 2017 2016 Revenue margin 59bps 60bps Operating margin 7.6% 18.2% Revenue margin calculated on total funds including both on and off platform FuM.
The divisions total FuM have grown steadily by 30.0% during the year to 1.3 billion 2016 1.0 billion.
This was due to both investment performance and strong inflows notably into the Inheritance Tax Portfolio service and the pension and institutional business.
These latter accounts are typically of a larger average size and so attract a lower revenue margin which explains the divisions slight overall revenue margin reduction from 60bps to 59bps.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year
OEICs
Model portfolio
IHT
OEICs
Model portfolio
2016 % % During the year the division underwent a restructuring to rationalise its product offering to make it fit both for the intermediary and institutional market as well as to provide a scalable range of services for internal and external clients.
This enabled the division to reduce its direct costs by 21.7% to 3.6 million 2016 4.6 million and overall costs including Support Functions allocations by 6.2% to 6.1 million 2016 6.5 million.
Consequently the division moved from an operating loss in 2016 of 1.0 million to a profit for 2017 of 0.5 million.
Outlook
After a year of restructuring and reorganisation the focus for the Asset Management division is now to grow its FuM.
Its most scalable business provision of discretionary model portfolios to the adviser industry will be a key focus for financial year 2018 taking advantage of a streamlined product suite and an enlarged and retrained Intermediary Sales
It also plans to extend its institutional marketing plan to include larger charities academic institutions and other institutional funds while continuing to grow the fiduciary management service for defined benefit pension schemes.
New literature is being produced to support this marketing effort.
For the firms smaller clients we softlaunched our Personal Portfolio Service PPS in April.
This comprises a range of riskrated multiasset model portfolios managed by the division.
In the first instance the PPS is being marketed to existing smaller clients of the Investment Management Services division for whom a bespoke solution is likely to be overengineered and costly.
We plan to extend the service to new clients and also to make a nonadvised version of PPS available via Charles Stanley Direct.
We will look to market the funds more widely as they gain in scale and traction.
The Inheritance Tax Portfolio service continues to attract good inflows and there is potential to develop this area further over the coming years.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Financial planning Trading review The principal driver of the Financial Planning divisions performance is now its revenue per financial planner.
Historically the division also included some investment management activities which were transferred to the Investment Management Services division at the start of the year.
Revenue 5.0 Direct costs Fixed staff costs 3.6 4.1 Variable staff costs 0.5 Other direct operating expenses 1.1 1.0 Contribution 0.2 0.9 Allocated costs 2.6 2.2 Operating loss 2.8 1.3 KPIs 2017 2016 Number of financial planners 19 Revenue per financial planner 268k 197k Operating margin 56.0% 21.7% The 2017 financial performance of the Financial Planning division reflected the restructuring the department underwent during the year.
Firstly a number of investment managers who had previously been part of the division and had accounted for 0.7 million of revenues in 2016 transferred to Investment Management Services.
Secondly there were a number of planned departures for underperforming financial planners.
These changes led to the divisions revenues declining to 5.0 million 2016 6.0 million and to an overall increase in its operating loss to 2.8 million 2016 1.3 million.
Underlying these figures the revenue per financial planner which is a key productivity metric rose 36% from 197 thousand in 2016 to 268 thousand in 2017.
This was as a result of the measures taken and improved focus.
The mediumterm target is to achieve 300 thousand per financial planner.
Outlook
Financial year 2018 is expected to see further investment in the Financial Planning division.
It is intended to increase materially the number of financial planners by hiring good quality experienced practitioners and to improve the productivity of the division by replacing the current business processing system.
This investment coupled with the rollout of the new Financial Planning value proposition and pricing model will see the division making an enhanced contribution to the Group and to its commitment to be the leading wealth manager by 2020.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year Charles Stanley Direct Trading review Charles Stanley Directs financial performance is driven by the value of Assets under Administration AuA on which a platform fee is charged and by the number of commissionearning bargains undertaken by clients.
AuA
Charles Stanley Direct 1.9 Charles Stanley Investment Choices 0.4
AuA grew 27.8% to 2.3 billion 2016 1.8 billion.
The assets on the Charles Stanley Direct platform increased from 1.4 billion to 1.9 billion during the year owing both to market increases and client takeon up 29.3% with the platform now servicing around 37000 accounts.
Charles Stanley Investment Choices previously known as Garrison Investment Analysis maintained its assets over the year.
Investment account JISA 0%
Charles Stanley Investment choices
2016 % %site Governance Financial statements Strategic report Revenue 4.3 Direct costs Fixed staff costs 1.6 1.4 Other direct operating expenses 1.4 1.5 Other income  0.1 Contribution 1.3 Allocated costs 3.2 3.3 Operating loss 1.9 1.3 KPIs 2017 2016 AuA growth 27.8% 12.5% Revenue margin 22bps 28bps Operating margin 44.2% 27.1% As anticipated the divisions revenues declined in 2017 by comparison to the prior year owing to the conclusion in February 2016 of white label trading services provided to the Fidelity network which accounted for 0.9 million of revenue in that year.
This also accounted for the decline in the divisions overall revenue margin to 22bps.
Excluding Fidelity underlying revenues increased by 11% and revenue margins were steady.
Overall costs have been kept stable on prior year at 6.2 million.
As a result of the reduction in revenues the division has reported an increase in its operating loss to 1.9 million 2016 1.3 million.
Outlook
During the year the division completed a number of initiatives which are expected to help improve performance further during the coming financial year.
These have included changes to the pricing tariffs which took effect from November 2016 the mobile optimisation of the website and changes to processes that make it easier for existing voicebroked Executiononly clients of Charles Stanley to switch to the Charles Stanley Direct platform.
Although the charges for the online service are less than for the traditional voicebroked service and may therefore lead to a reduction in the overall revenue generated for the Group from this source we believe it is often in the clients best interests to make the switch and it enables the Group to provide the service through a scalable delivery platform.
It is also the intention shortly to launch the Groups Personal Portfolio Service via Charles Stanley Direct which will provide guided but nonadvised access to the Groups range of riskrated multiasset model portfolios.
Having rebranded our fund broking business as Charles Stanley Investment Choices during the course of the year and relaunched its website this business is set to grow again in the coming year.
This is being supported both by a significant paperbased marketing exercise proactive engagement with existing clients and greater internal marketing within the rest of the Charles Stanley Group.
Costs have also been addressed so this activitys contribution is expected to increase significantly in the coming financial year.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year Support Functions The costs incurred by the Groups support functions are either charged directly to the four main operating divisions for example market data costs or recharged as an allocated cost.
However it is worthy of note that an important contribution to the Groups improved profitability is coming about through savings and process efficiencies being achieved in support areas.
Examples include changes to automate the transfers process the dematerialisation of paper holdings using Allfunds as custodian and the streamlining of the client amendment process.
Moreover the London office rationalisation has allowed us to move some support teams to our Chelmsford site and outsource the provision of certain services which will bring further savings on occupancy costs in the coming financial year.
Ongoing costs for all Support Functions for 2017 were 48.8 million reflecting a 4.5% reduction on the prior year of 51.1 million.
The key area of reduction was in fixed employment costs down by 1.4 million primarily driven from a 4.4% decrease in headcount.
The increased spend in IT and Marketing costs was more than offset by savings on external professional fees net decrease of 0.6 million on 2016.
As noted above the Group has achieved a number of operational efficiencies across its Support Functions during the year.
Looking forward we see further opportunity to reduce Support Functions operating costs by reviewing process flows and increasing straight through processing.
The extent and pace with which we will be able to do this will in part be dependent on the harmonisation of front office processes.
Conversely we expect to see continued cost pressure in a number of areas including Market data IT and regulation.
Held for sale activities  EBS Management PLC EBS Following the announcement on 11 April 2017 that the Group had exchanged contracts for the sale of EBS the Groups pension administrator to Embark Group Limited its results have been presented as held for sale for both 2017 and 2016.
During 2017 EBS grew the number of pension schemes under administration by 18.3% to 15068 2016 12737 and revenues by 3.5% to 3.0 million 2016 2.9 million.
The decision to sell EBS was taken because significant investment was required in its operating systems and because pension administration was not a core area of focus for the Groups Management.
The disposal which completed on 31 May 2017 was in the best interest of all stakeholders of the EBS business and most importantly the underlying consumers.
Under Embarks ownership EBS will continue to provide white label SIPP services to Charles Stanley so we look forward to a long commercial partnership with them.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Adjusting items The Board considers the Core Business profit before tax and earnings per share to be a better reflection of underlying business performance than the statutory figures reported in the consolidated financial statements.
To calculate the Core Business results the Board has excluded the adjusting items detailed below London office rationalisation Net gain on surrender of longterm lease 3.2 Overlapping rent and occupancy costs
Amortisation of client relationships Impairment of intangible assets 0.7 0.4 Profit on partdisposal of investment in Runpath Group Limited 0.4 Refund of underrecovered VAT in prior years Transition bonus accrual Exceptional professional fees Profit on disposal of Matterley Undervalued Fund Defined benefit pension scheme credit Net charge from adjusting items 1.0 4.0 These adjusting items are included within administrative expenses in the Consolidated income statement on page 99.
London office rationalisation A number of the adjusting items relate to the rationalisation of the Groups London office footprint.
The Group historically occupied five buildings in the City of London and has now consolidated into one building at 55 Bishopsgate.
This has enabled the Group to sell the remainder of its long lease at 35 Luke Street to realise a profit but has also resulted in double running costs of the new office whilst it was fitted out prior to occupancy.
The specific oneoff income and expenditure comprised Net gain on surrender of longterm lease 3.2 million credit On 8 September 2016 the Group surrendered the remaining term of its longterm lease at 35 Luke Street for proceeds of 5.6 million.
This gain was partially offset by the acquisition costs of the new lease at 55 Bishopsgate of 0.2 million and a loss incurred on decommissioning the fixed assets held in the vacant London offices at their carrying value of 2.2 million resulting in a net gain of 3.2 million.
Overlapping rent and occupancy costs 3.1 million expense During the year the Group incurred double running costs in respect of rent rates and other occupancy costs of 3.1 million covering both the vacating sites primarily 131 Finsbury Pavement and the new offices at 55 Bishopsgate.
Since the move of the Groups London employees to 55 Bishopsgate had fully completed by the end of the financial year no further double running costs are expected.
Dilapidations 0.1 million credit A leasehold dilapidations provision was set up in March 2016 in respect of obligations applicable under the lease agreements of the Groups vacating London sites.
The current year credit of 0.1 million represents a release to the income statement of unutilised amounts following the settlement of these obligations.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Review of the year Amortisation of client relationships 1.6 million expense Payments made for the introduction of customer relationships that are deemed to be intangible assets are capitalised and amortised over their useful life which has been assessed to be 10 years.
This amortisation charge has been excluded from the Core Business profit since it is a significant noncash item.
Impairment of intangible assets 0.7 million expense During the year the Group recognised an impairment charge in respect of goodwill held in connection with a departing investment management team based in one of the regional offices for 0.7 million.
Profit on partdisposal of investment in Runpath Group Limited 0.4 million credit In June 2016 the Group entered into an agreement to convert loan notes held in Runpath Group Limited into equity and subsequently disposed of 25% of its enlarged equity holding in the company resulting in a an overall gain of 0.4 million.
Refund of underrecovered VAT in prior years 0.7 million credit During the year the Group recognised a credit of 0.7 million in respect of underrecovered VAT in prior years.
Taxation
The corporation tax charge for the year was 2.5 million 2016 0.05 million credit representing an effective tax rate of 28.4%.
A detailed reconciliation between the standard and effective rate of corporation tax is provided in note 12 of the Consolidated financial statements.
Earnings per share The Groups reported basic earnings per share for the year were 12.35 pence 2016 loss of 0.61 pence.
The Core Business basic earnings per share increased significantly to 15.33 pence from 6.90 pence in 2016.
Dividends
The Board has proposed a final dividend of 4.5 pence per share 2016 3.5 pence per share.
Taking into account the interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share this results in a total dividend for the year of 6.0 pence per share 2016 5.0 pence per share an increase of 20%.
The proposed total dividend is 2.1 times covered by basic reported earnings and 2.6 times covered by basic Core Business earnings.
The recommended final dividend is subject to shareholders approval which will be sought at the Companys Annual General Meeting on 27 July 2017.
Financial position The Group maintained its strong financial position with total net assets at 31 March 2017 of 89.1 million 2016 85.4 million including 58.4 million of cash resources.
The Group operates a defined benefit pension scheme which was closed to new members in 1998 and also closed to further accruals for the remaining 25 active members at 31 March 2016.
The most recent actuarial assessment of the Groups defined benefit schemes liabilities shows a deficit at 31 March 2017 of 10.5 million 31 March 2016 10.1 million.
During the second half of the year the Schemes Trustees changed the investment management strategy of the schemes assets.
The longterm investment objective is now to achieve selfsufficiency which means achieving a funding level whereby scheme assets grow to the same level as their liabilities.
A five stage derisking flight plan has been adopted to reduce risk gradually over life of the plan as the scheme nears its objective.
Stage 1 of the flight plan which has involved restructuring the underlying portfolio to increase asset class diversification and building an initial liability hedge of 70% of assets is substantially complete.
Further details on the Groups defined benefit pension scheme and the assumptions underpinning the valuation are provided in note 11 of the Consolidated financial statements.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Regulatory capital resources Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited the Groups main operating subsidiary is an IFPRU 125k Limited License Firm regulated by the
In view of this the Group is classified as a regulated group and subject to the same regime.
At 31 March 2017 the Group had regulatory capital resources of 61.4 million 2016 55.4 million Ordinary share capital 12.7 12.7 Share premium 4.4 4.4 Retained earnings 51.1 48.7 Other reserves 16.0 16.4 Regulatory adjustments 22.8 26.8 Total regulatory capital resources 61.4 55.4 The Group monitors a range of capital and liquidity statistics on a daily weekly and monthly basis.
As required under FCA rules the Group maintains an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP which includes performing a range of stress tests to determine the appropriate level of regulatory capital and liquidity that the Group needs to hold.
The last review of the ICAAP conducted and signed off by the Board was in October 2016.
Regulatory capital forecasts are performed monthly and take into account expected dividends and intangible asset acquisitions and disposals as well as budgeted and forecast trading results.
The Groups Pillar III disclosures are published annually on the Groups website site and provide further details about the Groups regulatory capital resources and requirements.
Risk management and principal risks Charles Stanleys approach to risk management is documented in the Group Risk Policy and the Risk Appetite Statement RAS which is reviewed challenged and approved by the Board on an annual basis.
The RAS takes into consideration the Groups strategic objectives strategy and business plans and underpins the implementation of robust risk monitoring and risk reporting processes which continue to evolve.
The RAS sets out the Groups tolerance to various types of risks and includes both quantitative and qualitative measures against which Management and the Board monitor risk on a periodic basis.
The Board has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks of the Group including those that may threaten its business model performance solvency and liquidity.
These are listed out pages 36 to 39.
Set out below is the Directors Viability statement covering the three years to 31 March 2020 which is then followed with an assessment of the principal risks relevant to the Groups longterm performance.
Viability statement In accordance with the revised UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the prospects of the Group over the threeyear period from 31 March 2017 to 31 March 2020.
The assessment of the Groups viability over a threeyear time period is in alignment with the Groups strategy budgeting process and the scenarios set out in the ICAAP.
The Directors consider a threeyear time horizon appropriate as it is most meaningful in planning the Groups new longterm strategy a fiveyear horizon stretches forecasting inputs and assumptions beyond a realistic threshold.
In assessing the future viability of the overall business the Directors have considered the corporate strategy see Strategy progressing and the changes within the business executed in the last two years including the significant business divisional restructuring and changes to reward arrangements.
They have also considered the business environment of the Group and the potential threats to its business model arising from progressive technological sectorial demographic and regulatory changes.
Peter Kelk Chief Risk Officer The Groups risk management framework is a fundamental component of the operating model and is embedded across all processes and controls.
The Chief Risk Officer CRO under the supervision of the Risk Committee has the principal responsibility for risk awareness monitoring and management across all areas of the business.
Risk management
Strategic report site 35 Governance Financial statements Strategic report The Board oversees the Groups principal risks see the Risk Committee report in the Governance section and is accountable for the Groups risk management by Overseeing the processes and procedures to monitor and mitigate the principal risks Reviewing high level management information from key departments which monitor whether the Group is operating within the parameters set out in the RAS linked to the principal risks Deciding the appropriate actions if any of the Groups risk appetites are breached.
On a detailed level extensive management information is analysed by the Enterprise Risk Committee ERC which meets monthly and oversees operational risk across the Group by Monitoring quantitative and qualitative management information across the Group to highlight areas of risk which require enhanced or additional controls Delegating to the appropriate committees any issues raised as part of the management information which require further action Carrying out annual deep dive risk analysis of key departments which are discussed by the Committee and department heads Reviewing the reports of the internal and external auditors concerning systems and controls reviewing the resolution of proposed control enhancements and monitoring any remaining open issues.
The Risk Committee has oversight of the above processes ensuring the monitoring and escalation procedures are operating effectively and completed in a timely manner see Risk Committee report on page 86 for details.
The Board reviews and challenges the Groups threeyear strategic plan against the principal risks at least annually stress testing the base case projections by applying multiple shock events.
These stresses have been derived from workshops attended by Senior Management with the use of external events to substantiate the Boards comfort level that the shock events are sufficiently severe and appropriate.
The Group undertakes an ICAAP which is a detailed process owned and overseen by the Board and regularly assesses The Groups processes strategies and systems The major sources of risks faced by the Group that may impact its ability to meet its obligations The results of internal stress testing of these risks The amounts and types of financial resources and internal capital including own funds and liquidity resources and whether these are adequate both as to amount and quality to ensure that there is not significant risk that its liabilities cannot be met as they fall due.
Scenario analysis and stress testing are performed as part of the ICAAP to assess the Groups exposure to a range of extreme but plausible situations as well as an assessment of the Groups winddown scenarios and a review of the reverse stress tests which would cause the Groups business model to become unviable.
Based on the results of the latest ICAAP the Board believes that by taking the projected actions to reduce expenditure and if required dividends the Groups business model is resilient and holds sufficient capital to survive a range of severe but plausible scenarios.
Given the extensive controls and procedures in place the Directors are of the opinion that it is reasonable to conclude that the Group has sufficient resources to meet its obligations and continue business operations over the assessed threeyear period.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Risk management and principal risks
Increased risk Static risk Decreased risk Principal risks Key mitigants and controls Trend Business Model and Strategy Risk The risk that the business model and strategy do not respond in an optimal manner to changing market conditions such that sustainable growth market share or profitability is adversely impacted.
The Group Chief Risk Officer participates in the setting of Group strategic plans from the beginning and has a voice in the early stage of strategy development as well as providing a formal report on the strategy and on key business decisions.
As part of the strategy setting process a review is undertaken of the risks to the business model which includes an analysis of internal and external pressures on the Group strategy and the potential threats to its business model.
The report is presented to the Executive Committee and the Board alongside the proposed business plan to support the decision making.
Financial Strength Risk Failing to maintain financial strength in order to support business objectives meet regulatory capital requirements and provide shareholders with an acceptable return.
To achieve our financial goals a series of risk appetite limits have been set around operating margin cash balances regulatory capital and dividend cover.
These are monitored by the Board on a regular basis.
The Group is exposed to interest rate movements directly through its variable rate assets and liabilities.
This is tracked by reporting on exposure levels at the Treasury Committee.
Credit and Counterparty Risk The potential failure of clients or counterparties to fulfil their contractual obligations.
Charles Stanley does not offer any formal lines of credit to clients.
The Group however has an exposure to counterparty failures and late payment and settlement.
It therefore establishes clear risk appetite limits for client and Group cash placed and maintained with authorised institutions and for trading purposes which must be adhered to by the business.
The Groups Treasury Committee is responsible for the initial assessment and ongoing monitoring of deposittaking counterparties.
The following criteria govern how the Groups credit and counterparty risk is managed Assets will only be placed and maintained with counterparties deemed to be financially sound Client and Group cash held at any individual counterparty should not exceed its respective limit set by the Treasury Committee unless written approval has been provided Counterparty limits for the purpose of trading are set by the Market Exposure Committee MEC Counterparties with no set trading limits should be assessed on an individual basis on the day of the trade by the MEC Breaches of any counterparty trading limits without approval must be escalated immediately to the MEC.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report
Increased risk Static risk Decreased risk Principal risks Key mitigants and controls Trend Market Risk The risk of losses arising as a result of exposure to market movements including foreign exchange and interest rates.
Charles Stanley does not undertake any proprietary trading other than that arising from incidental dealing errors and therefore takes minimal market risks.
Dealing losses are captured as operational losses.
The majority of the Groups cash is kept in GBP across a number of banks.
Limited foreign currency is held only to facilitate settlement and dealing activity on behalf of clients.
The Treasury Committee manages the Groups account balances both in GBP and foreign currencies to our requirements and limits exposures to the Groups operational needs.
Liquidity Risk The risk that the Group although solvent either does not have available sufficient financial resources to enable it to meet its obligations as they fall due or can only secure such resources at excessive cost.
Charles Stanleys liquidity risk is overwhelmingly shortterm in nature and arises predominantly from the settlement of trades within its investment management and executiononly broking business.
The Treasury Committee operates within strict policies and procedures approved by the Board to manage the Groups liquidity risk.
These include The Group ensuring that all legal entities have sufficient funds to meet their liabilities as they fall due with surplus cash transferred on a monthly basis to Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited.
The Group will ensure that it has overdraft facilities if the Committee considers them necessary to meet liabilities Utilising financial instruments which include borrowings cash and liquid resources and various items including trade debtors and trade creditors that arise directly from its operations.
The credit quality of counterparties is reviewed frequently and we limit aggregate credit exposures accordingly.
The Group has for many years not used overdraft facilities for working capital purpose as it has not required such a facility.
Pension Risk The risk that the cost of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme increases or its valuation affects dividends reserves and capital.
This would materialise when the pension obligations exceed the assets set aside to cover them.
Charles Stanley continues to support a defined benefit pension scheme which is closed to new members and ceased accruing for existing members in April 2016 and which is reviewed regularly for viability and to remain within an agreed deficit level.
Bond yields continued to fall globally during 2016 which has been reflected in the Groups pension deficit levels which are monitored regularly and stand at 10.5 million at 31 March 2017.
The Group is working closely with the trustees of the scheme to reduce the deficit and where possible match investments with future liabilities.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report  Risk management and principal risks
Increased risk Static risk Decreased risk Principal risks Key mitigants and controls Trend Operational and IT Infrastructure Risk A material failure of business processes or IT infrastructure may result in unanticipated financial loss or reputational damage.
Charles Stanley has constructed its framework of internal controls to minimise the risk of unanticipated financial loss or damage to its reputation.
However no system of internal control can completely eliminate the risk of error financial loss fraudulent actions or reputational damage.
The Group records and monitors operational losses and near misses which are reviewed at the Enterprise Risk Committee with reporting to the Joint Risk Committee and the Board where required.
Management is required to notify the Board of all individual losses exceeding 10000 and to provide regular reports to the Board on dealing and trading losses.
These should not exceed 100000 in any 12month rolling period.
Insurance cover is in place and reviewed on an annual basis to ensure that there is an appropriate amount of cover to manage the impact of operational losses against our capital reserves.
The continuing incidence of low level technical issues are driving the technology risk up.
Charles Stanleys strategic change programme and its plans to continue growing the business also inherently lead to an increase to the operational risk profile of the Group which will continue to invest in its system capabilities and business processes to ensure that it meets the expectations of its customers complies with regulatory legal and financial reporting requirements and mitigates the risk of loss or reputational damage from operational risk events and external threats.
IT Security and Cyber Security Risk The risk that Charles Stanleys system infrastructure is breached by external counterparties with or without malicious intention.
Possible breaches could involve data theft ransomware or a shutdown of systems.
Charles Stanley has limited appetite for unauthorised or inappropriate access to its IT systems due to the potential disruption to its business operations adverse customer impacts and damage to its reputation.
Similarly the Group wishes to minimise the threat to its business activities from third party actions such as denial of service attacks.
Alongside setting a framework to prevent and detect unauthorised access attempts to its business systems Charles Stanley seeks to ensure that the systems are resilient to current and emerging threats and maintains a rolling programme of activity which is informed by the daytoday experience threat intelligence and any emerging vulnerabilities identified.
Although Charles Stanley has not experienced any significant issues in relation to its own cyber security arrangements the cyber security risk has increased due to the number of high profile attacks suffered by other firms in recent months.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report
Increased risk Static risk Decreased risk Principal risks Key mitigants and controls Trend People and Conduct Risk The risk that clients or the wider market as opposed to the Group suffer detriment as a result of the Groups services products or activities.
The Group recognises that its reputation and financial success is dependent on the performance and conduct of its staff.
Charles
Stanleys clientcentric culture is founded on the Groups core values of being Caring Fair and Progressive.
It is committed to delivering good outcomes for clients by communicating effectively and providing products and services that meet their needs throughout the customer journey.
It acts with integrity in the market and operates in line with the agreed strategy and within the risk appetite.
Eighteen Conduct Outcomes have been identified and will be monitored and reported via various metrics through to the Conduct dashboards.
A Conduct and Culture Committee has been instituted in May 2017 to provide enhanced oversight.
All clients are risk profiled to ensure that we clearly define agree and manage our clients portfolios in accordance with these risk profiles investment objectives and capacity for loss.
Suitability is a major focus which has quality assurance processes in place to assess suitability reviews performed by our staff.
Careful monitoring of investment decisionmaking against the risk profile helps ensure that we achieve appropriate and suitable outcomes for our clients.
Legal and Regulatory Risk The risk of breaching or noncompliance with regulations and restrictions enforced on the industry and the Group resulting in regulatory censure andor fines.
The Group has built a reputation as a highquality provider of wealth management services.
This has been carefully developed over many years and as such there is an emphasis on maintaining this status.
The risk is monitored and managed by emphasis on compliance with all aspects of relevant regulation including those of the FCA.
There remains a significant regulatory change agenda with the Senior Managers and Certification Regime SMCR the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive MIFID II the Packaged Retail Investment and Insurancebased Products PRIIPS and the General Data Protection Regulation.
While in the longer term the UK exit from the EU will potentially lead to a rewriting of some legislation until the UK formally leaves and the UK government legislate otherwise EUderived legislation will remain in force.
The FCA continues to focus on its approach to consumer regulation with the inherent risk that thematic reviews of historic industry practices lead to unanticipated additional costs.
Charles Stanley monitors the changes in the regulatory and legal agenda and has formal projects for major changes to ensure their successful implementation.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 40 Strategic report  Corporate social responsibility report Corporate social responsibility report Being an established and trusted wealth manager our primary responsibility is the stewardship and preservation of our clients assets.
Each year we report on our aim and activities to further our CSR Policy and practices in our four key areas business integrity our people the community and the environment.
Following a governance review that the Group undertook in early 2017 it was agreed that the CSR Committee which has overseen our CSR initiatives should be incorporated into the Conduct and Culture Committee chaired by the CEO.
The implementation and management of the CSR Policy continues to be viewed as a Groupwide responsibility championed from the top and this report evidences our commitment to reporting openly and honestly on our efforts at all levels across the business.
We recognise the fundamental importance of good corporate citizenship and sensitivity towards the people around us and the areas and communities in which we operate.
We appreciate that our business has an environmental and social impact on society through our actions donations and contribution to the wider economy.
We believe in being both responsible and caring.
Business integrity The Group is committed to ensuring appropriate client outcomes.
Our primary responsibility is to preserve our clients wealth and maximise investment returns in accordance with our contractual responsibilities in an appropriate manner and in line with regulatory requirements.
In this our eleventh year of reporting corporate social responsibility CSR we are pleased to share the initiatives and actions that the Group has taken over the past year.
Our Group Values of being Caring Fair and Progressive provide a framework within which we operate and support our approach to doing the right things for our clients colleagues the environment marketplace and the wider communities within which we work.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report Corporate governance The Group undertook a governance review at the start of 2017 to ensure that Charles Stanley has clear direction plans structure controls and resources all of which are necessary for financial success and to ensure suitable client outcomes.
The Group appreciates that companies which demonstrate a commitment to improving their corporate culture and the conduct of staff and acknowledge their responsibilities within the local community and markets are more likely to enjoy a superior reputation.
The Group is headed by an effective Board which is collectively responsible for the longterm success of the business.
The Board provides leadership within a framework of prudent and effective controls which enables risk to be assessed and managed.
The Board sets the Groups strategic aims and ensures that necessary financial and human resources are in place for the business to meet its objectives and review management performance.
The Board supports the Groups Values and sets the culture and standards expected of the business and ensures that obligations to shareholders and others are understood and met.
We follow the corporate governance guidelines contained in the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council and annexed to the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority.
We ensure that where practical the Group complies with the Code.
We compete fairly in the markets in which we operate and believe in the concept of business transparency and ethical behaviour.
More details can be found in the Corporate governance report on page 52.
Client care We are committed to the highest standards of client care and support the regulatory framework Treating Customers Fairly from the FCA.
We work with our clients to ensure our relationships deliver investment performance protection from inappropriate risk and communications that are caring clear fair and not misleading.
Disclosure
At Charles Stanley all individuals are expected to conduct business in such a way as to ensure that appropriate client outcomes are achieved and that business is conducted in a manner that will enhance the Groups reputation and to safeguard against unfair or unethical business practices.
Our disclosure policy concerning instances of whistleblowing and data protection is monitored and enforced where necessary.
Conscious of our obligations under the Bribery Act 2010 and other related rules and regulations we take a zero tolerance approach to bribery and corruption.
We carry out regular risk assessments to determine exposure and possibility of risks including potential new risks arising within a changing environment and update our policies procedures and systems to mitigate them.
We have strict AntiBribery and Gifts and Hospitality policies in place and provide regular training to staff to ensure understanding and compliance.
We review our approaches on a regular basis and adhere to high level principles for procurement.
1 Over 20 runners took part in the City 5k run 2 Sandeep Ladva from Operations climbed Kilimanjaro in September Nine of the Edinburgh branch took part in the Survival of the Fittest and raised 1000 Bootcamp fundraising in the City Group Head of HR raised over 4000 in support of a childrens charity in Uganda Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 42 Strategic report  Corporate social responsibility report
Charles Stanley is a peopledriven business specialising in the provision of advice and appropriate wealth management to private clients and institutions such as charities and trusts.
We believe that all people should be treated in a fair manner with due care and consideration and be given opportunities to progress both for their own benefit and for those with whom they interact.
People are and should be at the centre of all we do.
Employee involvement Charles Stanley recognises the importance of communication.
Over the past year we have significantly enhanced our ability to communicate with staff and to establish twoway channels of dialogue so that peoples opinions can be heard and suggestions made.
The Company now publishes a regular magazine highlighting staff achievements and news.
We also recognise individual actions for example employees who had gone beyond what was expected of them were publicly acknowledged at an award ceremony at the Group conference in January 2017.
Internal
Women in Finance Awards 2017 which is supported by HM Treasurys Women in Finance Charter.
In 2015 the Group launched its first staff engagement survey recording an overall engagement score of 56%.
The results of our second survey held in November 2016 resulted in an 11% enhancement raising the score to 67%.
This uplift reflects the work that has been done over the past year to enhance the working environment.
Many successful initiatives were proposed designed and then achieved by staff working together in selfnominated crossdivisional and departmental workstreams.
Training
The Group believes in having a highly trained and professional workforce well equipped to provide the service that our clients require and deserve.
We launched the Group Leadership Development Programme in November 2016 to enhance the skills of our leaders during this period of change.
In addition the first cohort delivered a project sponsored by the CEO to improve the working environment and our position within the wider community via a range of actions.
We have a dedicated Learning and Development team who work with staff at all levels across the organisation to ensure that they have the right skills and approach to do their work as expected and in an appropriate manner.
Benefits
In addition to base salary and the potential for earning a performancerelated discretionary bonus the Group provides a range of benefits to attract motivate and retain suitable highcalibre individuals.
All employees are able to benefit from life assurance permanent health insurance and an abovemarket employer contribution towards their pension.
In addition people can choose from a comprehensive selection of flexible benefits namely childcare vouchers Kids Pass family discounts at a range of childfriendly venues Babylon private doctor or specialist consultation cancer screening dental insurance health screening the opportunity to purchase up to five days holiday fitness and leisure club membership will writing access to an approved cycle to work scheme season ticket loans Gourmet Society dining discounts phone and laptop purchase with the opportunity to pay in instalments through salary deductions charitable giving in a taxefficient manner and access to shares via a Save As You Earn plan that provides shares at a discounted rate as well as a Share Incentive Plan for the taxefficient purchasing of Charles Stanley shares.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report
Diversity and inclusion are important issues for Charles
The Innovation Through Inclusion Group was founded in January 2016 to foster a supportive diverse and inclusive culture across the Group and to propose initiatives to enhance the business for example by broadening sources for recruitment introducing a mentoring programme encouraging flexible working inviting external speakers participating in networking groups and attending external events.
We believe in recognising accepting and valuing differences and where appropriate capitalising on them to accelerate the Groups growth.
A diverse workforce adds value to our business.
It helps us understand clients and counterparties from all walks of life and creates compelling wealth management services that are appropriate for our clients.
An inclusive workplace culture helps us attract the most talented people from all backgrounds.
We are committed to challenging discrimination in all its forms and ensuring that equality lies at the heart of everything we do.
We want to be a fair and unbiased organisation one where everyone accepts difference between individuals and values the benefits that diversity brings.
As a provider of services to private clients we need to be proactive so that we can meet the changing needs of diverse communities and provide an environment where dignity and individuality is respected and promoted.
As an employer we strive to build on our culture in which diversity is valued and staff can promote equality and are comfortable to challenge when appropriate.
Specific questions relating to diversity and inclusion were included in the 2016 Engagement Survey with followup focus groups to discuss matters raised.
We are committed to responding swiftly and appropriately whenever action is required.
The Group has a clearly defined diversity policy which is reflected in our recruitment processes support of flexible working and our equal opportunities policy.
The Group is aware of the Governments recommendations on gender diversity and HM Treasurys Women in Finance
At 31 March 2017 women represented 38% of all Charles Stanley employees and 25% of the Nonexecutive Directors are female.
Male
Female
Male vs female split across the CSG Board %
Female
Male vs female split across Charles Stanley % Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 44 Strategic report  Corporate social responsibility report
Charles Stanley has a tradition of fostering strong relationships with the people and communities in the areas in which it operates.
We have links with local businesses schools colleges charities and clubs.
We believe in being socially responsible and wish to make a positive contribution and build a sustainable legacy both locally and nationally as a responsible business leader.
We believe that we should seek to support an environment in which people and organisations can survive and thrive.
Part of the rationale for opting for the catering specialists CHandCo who work onsite through their subsidiary Lusso in the Charles Stanley Head Office at 55 Bishopsgate was due to their excellent approach towards the environment and their impact on local communities including sponsoring sustainable farming and fishing and providing training for children and students at an innercity farm.
This year Charles Stanley has become a supporter of the Marylebone Cricket Club Foundation MCCF initiative to promote cricket and thereby the health and wellbeing of young people.
The MCCF has established 41 Hubs across the UK to identify talented athletes in state schools between the ages of 1115 and provide them with professional coaching.
Charles Stanley is proud to be supporting the Hub in Tower Hamlets and is actively involved in supporting young people in the area.
In February the annual Charlotteville Jubilee Trust Guildford Pancake Race took place on the picturesque cobbled streets of Guildford.
Our Guildford Branch Manager Charles Turton is a Director of the Trust and in conjunction with the local radio station Charles Stanley sponsors this event.
The race together with its various events has become a tradition and is much valued by the local community.
Schools
The Group has for many years provided support to Lawdale Primary School via the Tower Hamlets Business Education
Each week a group of Londonbased employees assists pupils at the school by helping them with their reading.
All parties involved benefit from the experience.
Charities
The Head and Neck Cancer Foundation was chosen by a staff vote to be the Charles Stanley Charity of the Year.
This charity was founded by doctors and supports ground breaking research into the treatment of head and neck cancer A brush with cancer is perhaps something that will always internally leave a deep mark but via the specialist skills provided by the charity patients can have treatment that does not require them to be openly scarred for life.
Through the hard work and generosity of Charles Stanleys staff 41000 was raised 6000 of which was a direct donation from the Company.
The money will be used to help introduce Sentinel Node Biopsy SNB which will revolutionise the management of mouth cancer in the UK.
Currently without SNB all patients with mouth cancer undergo a complex 3hour neck dissection operation in order to protect the 30% of patients in whom the disease has spread.
This means that 70% of patients have a major and avoidable operation.
Environment
In 2016 the Group consolidated its London estate which comprised five properties into a single Head Office providing many opportunities to reduce environmental impact.
Health and Safety The Group is committed to providing a workplace that not just meets but exceeds the required health and safety standards.
Greenhouse gas emissions report The report details the Groups Greenhouse Gas GHG emissions for the 12 months ended 31 March 2017.
Charles Stanley is mindful of its impact on the environment and has taken action over the past year to significantly reduce emissions for example by vacating less energyefficient buildings in Finsbury Pavement and Luke Street in London and consolidating into a single London site at 55 Bishopsgate.
Other offices such as Cirencester and Bath have been amalgamated in this case into the existing premises in
The new London office benefits from an innovative fitout that includes energyefficient measures such as LED lighting.
The Group is pleased to share information relating to the Groups energy consumption and resultant emissions.
This data has been verified and the emissions calculated by the independent energy reduction specialists EnStrat UK Limited.
Through the hard work and generosity of Charles Stanleys staff 41000 was raised for the Head and Neck Cancer Foundation.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report The majority of emissions generated are associated with the cooling and power for data rooms together with heating cooling and lighting for the Groups various business premises around the UK.
Over the past year Charles Stanley has succeeded in noticeably reducing its carbon footprint.
The Group is required to report on the annual quantity of GHG emissions in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent tCOe.
This report is split into two aspects Scope 1 relating to direct emissions that are from sources directly controlled by the Group Activity 2017 2016 Consumption Emissions tCO e Consumption Emissions tCO Natural Gas 206881 kWh 38.1 306699 kWH 56.6 Diesel for generators 40 litres 0.1 80 litres 0.2 Fuel for Groupowned vehicles 44595 Miles 13.3 37032 Miles 11.1 Fugitive emissions from air conditioners 31.0 Kg 64.7 33.5 Kg 69.9 Scope 2 relating to emissions from indirect sources.
For Charles Stanley this is solely in the form of purchased electricity Activity 2017 2016 Consumption Emissions tCO e Consumption Emissions tCO Grid electricity 3830413 kWh 1578.3 3897148 kWH 1801.0 Total 3830413 kWh 1578.3 3897148 kWH 1801.0 The yearonyear reduction was primarily due to the closure of coal fired power stations in the UK and the increased usage of renewable energy sources combined with the vacation of less efficient buildings in London.
The Group continues to procure all of its electricity from green renewable energy sources and remains committed to reviewing and where possible acting upon opportunities identified to reduce emissions.
Environmental initiatives Recycling  In 2016 Charles Stanley recycled 60940 kg at 25 and 35 Luke Street 10960 kg at 131 Finsbury Pavement and 2370 kg at 55 Bishopsgate.
This is equivalent to a total of 102870 kg of CO or 663 trees.
Stationery  51% of stationery purchased during 2016 was in category 3 or above defined as easy to recycle or from sustainable sources or with better environmental accreditation.
Relocation  Recycling and reuse were paramount in the process of the consolidation of the five London buildings into one.
More than half of the desks in the new building were reused.
All the filing storage was existing stock.
Chairs were reused and where it was necessary to replace noncompliant chairs they were replaced with recycled and refurbished stock.
All the furniture that was surplus to requirements was removed by a company that specialises in recycling and refurbishing second hand furniture.
Investment
While the overall investment policy of the Group is concerned solely with obtaining the best return for clients in addition to the financial analysis that occurs as part of normal investment procedures we also offer our clients a completely personal socially responsible investment service that takes into account their personal preferences in relation to environmental and ethical matters.
The phrase focusing on you reflects the way that we operate.
We understand that people are individuals and hence are committed to providing a bespoke wealth management service.
Governance  Chairmans introduction
Chairmans introduction Chairmans introduction Under the new structure the CSG Board will meet quarterly and the CSC Board 68 times each year.
Our CEO Paul Abberley has been charged with implementing the strategy set by the CSG and CSC Boards with the daytoday decisionmaking and running of the business and for fulfilment of regulatory obligations.
To assist him with the discharge of these duties the CEO has formed an Executive Committee comprising senior managers from across the Group though responsibility rests with the CEO rather than with the Executive Committee.
This clarity of individual responsibility is reflected throughout the executive chain of command in preparation for the Senior Managers and Certification Regime which for the Group is expected to come into effect from May 2018.
The Groups committee structure remains unchanged except that The Audit Remuneration and Risk Committees now operate as joint committees of both Boards CSC has now established a separate Nomination Committee I chair the CSG Nomination Committee and Andrew Didham chairs that of CSC.
While this and the Corporate governance reports have been prepared during the transitional period to the new governance structure the period on which they are reporting was largely under the previous structure during which each Board committees duties were in respect of the whole Group.
At 31 March 2017 the CSG Board comprised seven directors the Chairman three independent Nonexecutive Directors and three Executive Directors.
Anthony Scott and Mike Lilwall resigned as Directors of CSG on 18 April 2016 and 23 November 2016 respectively.
The structure and representation of the various Board committees is shown on the right.
The roles main responsibilities and achievements during the year are set out in their respective reports on pages 48 to 51.
The Groups Executive Committee chaired by Paul Abberley and the underlying management teams have delivered further progress towards the Groups strategic objectives.
The biographies of the Board of Directors and Executive Committee members are set out on pages 48 to 51.
Charles Stanley operates in a highly and constantly developing regulatory environment.
Therefore a great deal of time has been dedicated by the Board and committees to regulatory matters to ensure that a robust compliance framework is appropriately embedded within the Groups daytoday activities.
Our values revolve at all times around the best interests of our clients and the Board proactively seeks to promote and embed that in our culture.
Sir David Howard
During the year we have restructured the Groups governance framework to differentiate clearly the Board responsibilities of Charles Stanley Group PLC CSG the listed holding company from those of Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited CSC our principal regulated operating subsidiary.
Governance pages 46  97 Under the new framework which came into effect in March 2017 The CSG Board has been charged with the responsibility to set strategy for the Group and to monitor the performance of the operating subsidiaries The CSC Board has been charged with the responsibility to oversee govern and direct the operation of CSC and the Groups other regulated subsidiaries in line with the Group strategy.
Consequently the bulk of the regulated activity and focus now rests with the CSC Board.
The composition of the CSC Board has also changed Gary Teper and myself have stepped down as Directors of CSC and Andrew Didham has been appointed as Chairman.
I remain Chairman of CSG and Gary Teper also remains a Director of CSG.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Board and committee structure For more on the Risk Committee go to page 86 For more on the Remuneration Committee go to page 62 For more on the Nomination Committee go to page 60 For more on the Audit Committee go to page 56 Nomination Committee Sir David Howard Chairman of the Nomination Committee Andrew Didham Independent Nonexecutive Director Bridget Guerin Independent Nonexecutive Director David Pusinelli Independent Nonexecutive Director Remuneration Committee Bridget Guerin Chair of the Remuneration Committee Andrew Didham Independent Nonexecutive Director David Pusinelli Independent Nonexecutive Director Risk Committee Andrew Didham Chairman of the Risk Committee Bridget Guerin Independent Nonexecutive Director David Pusinelli Independent Nonexecutive Director Audit Committee David Pusinelli Chairman of the Audit Committee Andrew Didham Independent Nonexecutive Director Bridget Guerin Independent Nonexecutive Director CSG Board Sir David Howard Chairman Paul Abberley Andrew Didham Bridget Guerin Ben MoneyCoutts David Pusinelli Gary Teper
Committee
Paul Abberley Chairman Christopher Aldous Michael Bennett Howard Burchett Kate GriffithsLambeth Chris HarrisDeans Steve Jones Peter Kelk Andrew Meigh Ben MoneyCoutts Gary Teper Magnus Wheatley Dominic Wilson CSC Board Andrew Didham Chairman Paul Abberley Bridget Guerin Ben MoneyCoutts David Pusinelli Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 48 Board of Directors
Paul Abberley BA Hons
Chief Executive Officer
Paul Abberley was appointed to the Board and became Chief Executive Officer following regulatory approval in December 2014.
From April 2016 Paul also took over the oversight of the Financial Planning and Charles Stanley Direct divisions.
A graduate of Keble College Oxford Paul joined Charles Stanley as Chief Investment Officer in June 2014.
Prior to this appointment Paul was
the interim Chief Executive Officer
Aviva Investors Global Services Ltd and a member of the Aviva Group Executive Committee leading a series of strategic realignments with Aviva Investors Holdings Ltd where he had worked since 2008.
Prior to Aviva Investors Paul spent eight years at ABN AMRO Asset Management as Chief Investment Officer for the companys Fixed Income and Investment Solutions Division as well as being Chairman of the companys London Board and a member of the Global Executive Management Team.
Ben MoneyCoutts BA Hons ACA Chief Financial Officer Ben MoneyCoutts was appointed as Chief Financial Officer in March 2015.
Ben joined Charles Stanley in May 2013 from Saltus Partners LLP where since 2007 he had been a Partner Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer.
Prior to Saltus LLP Ben was Head of Corporate Broking at Bridgewell
He qualified as an ACA at Arthur Andersen worked at Charterhouse from 1987 to 2000 and was then a Corporate Finance Managing Director at ING Barings from 2000 to 2003.
Prior to becoming CFO Bens roles within Charles Stanley included acting as Chief Operating Officer of the Charles Stanley Financial Services division and separately as interim Group Head of Compliance.
Gary Teper LLB Hons MSc MCSI Head of Investment Management Services Gary Teper joined Charles Stanley in November 1998.
In 2000 he was appointed Group Company Secretary in 2005 he was appointed a Director of Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited and in July 2012 he was appointed to the Board of Charles Stanley Group PLC.
Gary is a qualified solicitor and has an MSc in Financial Regulation.
He is responsible for the Investment Management Services division and has oversight of the Legal and Human Resources functions.
In October 2016 Gary joined the Board of the Chartered Institute of Securities and Investment as a Trustee.
Governance site 49 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Bridget Guerin MA Cantab Independent Nonexecutive Director Bridget Guerin joined Charles Stanley as a Nonexecutive Director in September 2012.
She has over 30 years of experience in the financial services industry most recently serving as a Director of Matrix Group Limited.
Prior to that Bridget was Marketing Director of Schroder Unit Trusts Limited.
Bridget is Chair of the Groups Remuneration Committee and until January 2016 was also Chair of the Groups Risk Committee.
Other
Income and Growth VCT Schroder Income Growth Fund PLC Cantab Quantitative Fund Cantab Core Macro Fund and Cantab Capital LTIP Limited.
She is also a member of the York Race Committee and a trustee of the York Racecourse Pension Fund.
Sir David Howard
MA DSc FCSI Hon Chairman and Nonexecutive
Sir David Howard joined Charles Stanley in 1967.
He became Managing Partner in 1971 Managing Director in 1988 and Chairman in 1999.
He was Lord Mayor of London in 20002001.
He has served as a Director of the Chartered Institute for Securities and Investment CISI and on London Stock Exchange CREST and LIFFE
He has also served as a Director of the Financial Services Skills Council as Chairman of the Council of City University as President of the Chartered Management Institute and as Chairman of the CISI Examinations
He is an alternate member of the Takeover Panel and serves on the CREST Settlements Appeals
He is a Director of The Wealth Management Association the private client stockbrokers trade association.
Sir David is Chairman of the Groups Nomination Committee.
Nonexecutive
David Pusinelli MA Oxon ACA Independent Nonexecutive Director David Pusinelli joined Charles Stanley as a Nonexecutive Director in September 2012.
David has extensive experience within the financial services sector qualifying as an accountant at Coopers and Lybrand before joining Close Brothers Group plc in 1986.
From
2002 to 2008 he served on the main board of Close Brothers as Director of Corporate Development.
He also held directorships in the asset management banking corporate finance and securities divisions.
He is a consultant of Renaissance Asset Finance Limited.
David is the Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Groups Audit Committee.
Andrew Didham BA Hons FCA Independent Nonexecutive Director Andrew Didham joined Charles Stanley as a Nonexecutive Director in September 2015.
Andrew is a member of the board of NM Rothschild and Sons Limited and was Group Finance Director of the worldwide Rothschild group between 1997 and 2012.
Until 2014 he was a member of the Rothschild Group Management Committee.
A partner of KPMG from 1990 to 1997 Andrew is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
Andrew is also a nonexecutive director of Shawbrook Group plc and chairman of its audit committee.
In addition to his broad general management role in Rothschild his past experience includes audit responsibility for a number of global financial institutions assignments on behalf of the Bank of England and of the EU and extensive dealings with regulatory authorities in Europe Asia Australia and the USA as well as the UK.
Andrew is Chairman of the Groups Risk Committee and of CSCs Board and Nomination Committee.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 50 Executive Committee The Executive Committee comprises the Executive Directors listed on page 48 and the following senior managers Christopher Aldous Head of Asset Management and Distribution Christopher Aldous joined Charles Stanley as Managing Director of Pan Asset in 2013 and became Head of Distribution in January 2015 and Head of Asset Management in October 2015.
He was appointed to the Executive Committee in January 2015.
Prior to this he spent over five years as the Chief Executive of Evercore Pan Asset Capital Management which was acquired by Charles Stanley in December 2013.
Michael Bennett Chief Operating Officer Michael Bennett was appointed as Charles Stanleys Chief Operating Officer and to the Executive Committee in January 2015 having joined the Group as IT Director in November 2008.
Previously Michael spent eight years as the IT Director for Direct Wines where he was also a member of the Direct Wines Board.
Peter Kelk Chief Risk Officer Peter Kelk was appointed as Chief Risk Officer of Charles Stanley in November 2014 and was appointed to the Executive Committee in January 2015.
Previously a managing director at Merrill Lynch Wealth Management Peter has a broad experience gained over many years in a variety of key disciplines functions and divisions including Wealth Management Global Markets Finance Sourcing and Procurement Fixed Income Sales and Operations.
Howard Burchett Director of Private Clients Howard Burchett was appointed to the Executive Committee in March 2017.
Howard is an investment manager with over 30 years of city experience including 24 years continuous service initially with Shaw and Co who were acquired by Charles Stanley in 1997.
He manages investments for a wide range of private clients trusts and charities.
Andrew Meigh Managing Director of Financial
Andrew Meigh joined Charles Stanley as Director of Strategic Development in 2012 and was appointed to the Executive Committee in March 2017.
He has been Managing Director of the Financial Planning division since March 2016 in which time he has overseen a major restructuring and repositioning of the business.
Steve Jones Head of Compliance Steve Jones joined Charles Stanley as Group Head of Compliance and Money Laundering Reporting Officer in July 2016.
He was appointed to the Executive Committee in March 2017.
Steve was previously Head of EMEA Compliance for Julius Baer following its acquisition of the nonUS wealth management business of Bank of America where he supported the successful integration process.
Governance site 51 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Dominic Wilson Head of Business Change Dominic Wilson joined Charles Stanley as Head of Business Change in February 2016 and was appointed to the Executive Committee in March 2017.
Dominic was previously the Head of Transformation for Distribution and Digital change at Aviva Investors leading a series of strategic implementations.
Magnus Wheatley Managing Director of Charles Stanley Direct Magnus Wheatley joined Charles Stanley in 2007 as Head of Press and Public Relations and was appointed to the Executive Committee in March 2017.
Having worked closely with the Charles Stanley Direct relaunch from 2013 he was appointed Managing Director of Charles Stanley Direct in May 2016 and has led the restructure of the division with a focus on team engagement cost control and top line growth.
Chris HarrisDeans Director of Investment Management Development Chris HarrisDeans joined Charles Stanley in 2007 when the firm opened a branch in Exeter.
Chris was Exeter branch manager from 2007 until 2014 when he became Director of Regional Development.
Chris was appointed Director of Investment Management Development in 2016 and became a member of the Executive Committee in 2017.
Prior to Charles Stanley Chris was Divisional Director at Gerrard where he worked for 11 years.
Kate GriffithsLambeth Director of Human Resources Kate GriffithsLambeth joined Charles Stanley as the Groups first HR Director in October 2015 and was appointed to the Executive Committee in March 2017.
Prior to joining Charles Stanley Kate was Global Head of HR and an Executive Director of Stonehage Fleming the leading multifamily office.
Before that Kate held senior positions at White and Case RBS and Lloyds Banking Group.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 52 Compliance with the code The Directors recognise the benefits of good corporate governance and this report together with the Directors report pages 89 to 91 and the Strategic report pages 4 to 45 describes how the Group has applied the Main Principles and complied with the Provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2014 the Code.
The Code is available on the FRC website httpswww. rc.
Corporategovernance. spx .
The Directors ensure that the Group keeps up to date with all corporate governance developments and best practice wherever practical.
The Chairmans introduction referred to the governance review undertaken during the year within which a number of the Codes provisions have been addressed.
These are set out in the relevant sections of the governance disclosures.
The Board has carried out a review of its compliance with the relevant provisions of the Code throughout the year and confirms that the Group has complied with all relevant provisions of the Code during the year though the Chairman was not independent on appointment in 1999 A.3.1 of the Code refers.
Leadership
The Board of the Parent Company Charles Stanley Group PLC has provided leadership to and is responsible for the longterm success of the Group.
The Board has determined the Groups strategy and has overseen its implementation and the operations of the Group.
The Executive Committee has managed the daytoday running of the Company.
Those responsibilities were adjusted in the governance review as set out in the Chairmans introduction to this section but the Board continues to retain ultimate responsibility.
The roles of the Chairman and Chief Executive are separate and clearly defined and have been approved by the Board.
Sir David Howard the Groups Nonexecutive Chairman is responsible for the leadership of the Board and for ensuring its effectiveness in all aspects of the role.
The Chief Executive Paul Abberley has responsibility for the daytoday management of the Group.
As at 31 March 2017 the Board comprised seven Directors the Chairman three independent Nonexecutive Directors NEDs and three Executive Directors.
No individual or group of individuals therefore has unfettered powers of decision.
The NEDs provide challenge in respect of all matters before the Board and contribute to the development of strategy at both the annual strategy forum and during the year.
Independence
Andrew Didham Bridget Guerin and David Pusinelli have been determined by the Board to be independent.
The NEDs provide a robust independent element on the Board and they constructively challenge and examine the performance of Management.
They bring wellconsidered and constructive opinions skill and knowledge to Board discussions.
Sir David Howard because of his previous role as Chief Executive and his shareholding in the Company is not considered to be independent.
Board operation and delegation of authority The Board met 16 times during the year to review financial performance and strategy and to follow a schedule of matters reserved for the Board.
The Board held strategy meetings in May 2016 and February 2017 at which members of the Executive Committee presented their proposals for the strategy as set out in the Strategic report on pages 4 to 45.
The Board attendance of the Directors during the year is shown in the table on the next page.
The number of meetings attended is shown first followed by the number of meetings that the Director was eligible to attend as a member of the Board if different to the total.
Typically papers are circulated to the Directors a week in advance of each meeting.
The Company has for many years used a portal system to support the Board and Board committee meetings which is believed to improve the efficacy and security of the supply of information to Directors.
Corporate governance report Governance site 53 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Board initiatives during the year included Revision of the investment managers remuneration arrangements Governance review Establishment of the Innovation Through Inclusion Group to address diversity and inclusion issues Sale of EBS Management PLC.
The following builds on the highlevel statement of the responsibilities of the Board CSC Board and CEO set out in the Chairmans introduction.
Matters reserved to the CSG Board include Setting Group business strategy Approving the Groups financial budget Approving interim dividends and recommending any final dividends to shareholders Setting Group remuneration policy Communications with shareholders Appointments to the Groups Boards and Board committees following recommendation by the Nomination Committee.
Matters delegated to the CSC Board include Setting CSC business strategy Approving CSCs financial budget performance against the agreed risk appetite Regulatory oversight and managing the relationship with the FCA Setting desired customer and conduct outcomes Appointment of the CRO.
Matters delegated to the CEO include Execution of business strategy Daytoday management of the regulated business Managing performance against approved strategy and budgets Allocation of resources Ensuring compliance with statutory and regulatory obligations Embedding appropriate culture behaviours and desired customer and conduct outcomes Leading business development.
Typically these will be discharged through the Executive Committee whose members and biographies are shown on pages 48 and 50.
Board Audit Nomination Remuneration Risk Number of meetings held during the year Paul Abberley 16 Ben MoneyCoutts 16 Gary Teper 15 Sir David Howard 16  2 David Pusinelli Bridget Guerin Andrew Didham Michael Lilwall 811     Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 54
Information regarding the Directors and their experience is given in their biographies on pages 48 and 49 which is offered to shareholders in support of the reelection of all directors at the AGM.
David Pusinelli the Senior Independent Director has decided not to offer himself for reelection as a Nonexecutive Director at the forthcoming AGM.
The Board has established a Nomination Committee to consider the balance of skills experience independence and knowledge available to ensure the Board and Board committees are enabled to discharge their respective duties and responsibilities effectively.
So as to further strengthen the effectiveness of the Board and in view of David Pusinellis decision to step down in the coming year the Board is in advanced stages in seeking additional NEDs with wealth management experience and also a strong understanding of operational matters within the wealth management sector with the hope of making appointments in the near future.
Wealth management industry experience was confirmed as an area for focus for recruitment or development when the Board members assessed their own experience and that of their peers via a skills matrix during the governance review.
As a consequence both the matrix results and the redefined Role Description for a NED were taken into account for the purpose of the recruitment of a new independent NED.
Further details of the responsibilities and activities of the Nomination Committee throughout the year are detailed on page 60 of this report.
None of the Executive Directors have any external directorships.
The NEDs service contracts include an expectation of their time commitment and their allocation of time to the Group is reviewed annually.
Taking into account any previous experience they may already have as directors of a public limited company appropriate training and induction is provided to all new Directors.
The induction process includes meeting with Executive Directors the members of the Executive Committee relevant business heads and other senior executives.
New Directors will also receive information from past meetings.
To assist with continuing professional development needs all Directors are collectively provided with updates on matters relevant to the business and the environment in which it operates.
Following the self and peer scoring of all Executive and Nonexecutive Directors utilising a skills matrix the Chairman reviewed the results and used them to support him when considering the training and development needs of both the Board as a whole and of individual directors.
Appropriate development and training initiatives have been commenced.
During late 2016 and early 2017 with support from external consultants the Group underwent a review of its governance framework this included an evaluation of the performance of the Boards Committees and the Directors.
Changes to enhance performance where appropriate have been approved by the Board and introduced.
The Group is committed to extending the proportion of female employment and representation 14% of the Board is female.
Further details about diversity in the Company are contained in the Corporate social responsibility report on page 40.
Governance site 55 Financial statements Strategic report Governance
This Annual report includes a number of disclosures which set out the Companys position and prospects.
The Statement of Directors responsibilities confirms that the Directors believe those disclosures to be a fair balanced and understandable assessment and it is the Auditors opinion that the financial statements give a true and fair view of the Groups affairs.
The Board has established a Risk Committee to consider the nature and extent of the principal risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives which is closely supported by the CRO and reports to the Board.
Separately the Board considers a report from the CRO at each of its Board meetings.
Disclosures regarding provisions C.2.1 and C.2.3 of the Code are contained in the Risk management and principal risks section on page 34.
Further details of the responsibilities and activities of the Risk Committee throughout the year are detailed on page 86 of this report.
The Board has established an Audit Committee to consider corporate reporting internal controls and to manage the relationship with the external auditor.
Further details of the responsibilities and activities of the Audit Committee throughout the year are detailed on page 56 of this report.
Remuneration
The Board has established a Remuneration Committee to consider and approve the Executive Directors remuneration arrangements and to ensure that those arrangements are designed to promote the longterm success of the Company and that any performancerelated elements are transparent stretching and rigorously applied.
Further details of the responsibilities and activities of the Remuneration Committee are set out on pages 62 to 85 of this report.
Led by the Senior Independent Director David Pusinelli the Nonexecutive Directors also met without the Chairman present to discuss the evaluation of his performance having taken into consideration separate consultation
with the Chief Executive Officer.
The effectiveness of the Chairman was confirmed and feedback on the appraisal was given to the Chairman.
Relationship with shareholders The Company places great importance on communication with shareholders and aims to keep shareholders informed by regular communication.
Directors meet regularly with the Companys institutional investors analysts and financial press.
The Companys website is kept up to date with investor relations material including annual and interim reports and these are also distributed to anyone expressing an interest in the Company.
The channel of communication between the Board and shareholders is open and active.
Executive Directors meet with shareholders and analysts after the annual and halfyearly results are announced.
David Pusinelli as Senior Independent Director contacts the institutional shareholders to arrange a meeting or confirm that the shareholders have no matters to raise.
The Company welcomes all shareholders to its AGM with the opportunity to ask questions formally at the meeting or more informally with all members of the Board afterwards.
The Board is provided with regular feedback following meetings with shareholders which assists in the Directors developing an understanding of the views of the Companys shareholders.
It is the Companys policy to announce at the AGM the number of proxy votes cast on resolutions.
Regulation
As at 31 March 2017 there were three companies within the Group regulated by the FCA.
Sir David Howard
13 June 2017 Governance  Audit Committee report Audit Committee report David Pusinelli Chairman of the Audit Committee The Committee is responsible for reviewing the Groups Annual report and accounts and other statements regarding financial performance oversight of the internal audit function and the relationship with the external auditor.
The Committee met on five occasions during the year.
Details of attendance of these meetings is shown below.
Number of meetings
David Pusinelli 5 4 Andrew Didham 5 5 Bridget Guerin 5 5 Role and responsibilities The Committees responsibilities fall largely into three areas To monitor the integrity of the Groups financial reporting and content of narrative reporting in all published accounts and public statements regarding the Groups financial performance To review the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups risk management framework and internal control systems in conjunction with the Risk Committee.
This includes oversight of the internal audit function To own the relationship with the Groups external auditor including monitoring of their performance and approval of fees.
The role and responsibilities of the Committee are set out in terms of reference which were reviewed as part of the governance review and approved by the Board in February 2017.
For more information and the Committees terms of reference please visit the Groups website site Membership and meetings All members of the Committee are independent Nonexecutive Directors the majority of whom have recent and relevant financial experience.
The Chairman Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer the internal audit partner and the external audit partner attend most meetings by invitation.
The Chief Risk Officer who oversees the Compliance and Risk departments also attends when required and under the Committees new terms will be invited to attend all meetings.
Activities of the Audit Committee during the year The Committee has established an annual cycle of work to ensure all responsibilities are met over a calendar year.
The agenda items covered in the Committees meetings include standing items plus additional agenda items including for example all reports issued by the external and internal auditors since the previous meeting of the Committee.
Audit Committee report pages 56 site 57 Financial statements Strategic report Governance The work we have undertaken within the Committee during the last year principally fell into three main areas Accounting tax and financial reporting Reviewed the 2017 interim and annual financial statements and recommended their approval by the Board together with supporting documents and dividend payments Considered all significant financial reporting judgements in respect of those financial statements see below for further detail and reviewed the related principal disclosures Considered the appropriateness of preparing the 2017 interim and annual financial statements on a going concern basis.
Internal controls Reviewed and agreed the scope of the riskbased audit plan as proposed by internal audit Considered reports from the internal auditor and its assessment of relevant mitigating controls Monitored progress in resolving audit issues raised in audit reports Reviewed the resources of the internal audit function and agreed the costs Reviewed policies relevant to the Committee responsibilities including whistleblowing.
External audit Considered and approved the audit approach and scope of the audit work Reviewed reports on audit findings Reviewed and approved the policy on the independence of the external auditor Considered the independence of the auditor with particular focus on the nature of nonaudit work as well as the mix of audit and nonaudit fees Considered the recommendations of the UK Corporate Governance Code regarding external audit Considered letters of representation given to the external auditor by Management Considered the effectiveness of the external audit.
Internal audit The provision of internal audit activities has been outsourced to Grant Thornton.
Grant Thornton has a deep pool of resources with substantial experience and qualifications in the activity of internal audit within the financial services sector.
This means that they are able to bring in specialists relevant to the areas being reviewed and also that they possess uptodate experience of industry best practice which acts as a useful benchmark for the Group.
The internal audit function reports directly to the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
The audit plan for the upcoming year is approved in advance by the Committee on an annual basis.
A rolling threeyear plan is maintained to ensure all critical areas of the business are covered over this period.
We then overlay a risk assessment to determine the prioritisation of the internal audit plan for the coming year.
The annual budget for internal audit activities is agreed between the Chairman of the Committee and the Chief Financial Officer having regard to the planned scope of work of the internal audit function during the period.
The cost of any ad hoc or additional work required over the course of the year is also reviewed and agreed by the Committee and the Chief Financial Officer as it arises.
The Committee reviews all internal audit reports in order to assess the effectiveness of mitigating controls and proposed actions by management to address any issues found.
The Committee ensures that all management actions arising are tracked to completion on a timely basis.
Exceptionally operational and line management may be required to attend the Committee to report on progress.
During this financial year a total of 19 reviews were undertaken by internal audit and reviewed by the Committee.
Internal
2016 324000.
External auditor Performance and effectiveness of our external auditor During the year we reviewed the effectiveness of KPMG the Groups external auditor.
Perception remained high of both performance and effectiveness of the external audit services received.
Matters pertaining to the Client Assets Sourcebook CASS were the only area of contention differing views of regulatory interpretation have since been resolved.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 58 Governance  Audit Committee report Nonaudit services We have reviewed the independence and the nature of nonaudit services supplied by KPMG and nonaudit fee levels relative to the audit fee.
The Committees prior approval is required where the fee for an individual nonaudit service is expected to exceed 50000 excluding VAT.
Fees for nonaudit services paid to the auditors should not in aggregate exceed 70% or more of the average audit fees paid to the audit firm in the last three consecutive years without the Committees prior written approval.
It is recognised that given their knowledge of the business there are often advantages in using KPMG to provide certain nonaudit services.
Fees other than for audit or assurance payable to the auditors during the year ended 31 March 2017 were 50000 2016 80000.
We have reviewed the safeguards to independence that have been put in place by KPMG in undertaking the nonaudit engagements throughout the year and are satisfied that these are appropriate.
The safeguards and terms of engagement were reviewed and approved by us prior to KPMG commencing their work.
We agreed the external audit fees and reviewed the audit engagement letter.
We also had discussions with the external auditor with no Management present to provide an opportunity for any concerns to be aired.
Audit tender The UK Corporate Governance Code recommends that audits should be subject to tender at least once every ten years.
KPMG was appointed as the Groups auditor for the 2011 yearend following a competitive tender process.
The Committee intends to conduct an audit tender process again before the tenth anniversary of their appointment.
Significant accounting issues considered by the Audit Committee Following discussions with both Management and KPMG the Committee has determined that the following areas form the key areas of judgement in the preparation of the 2017 consolidated financial statements Impairment of goodwill Impairment of other intangible and nonfinancial assets Availableforsale financial assets Corporate transactions Pension scheme deficit Assets held for sale and post balance sheet events.
Impairment of goodwill Goodwill has arisen in prior years principally from the acquisition of subsidiaries and typically represents the difference between the total cost of acquisition and the fair values of the assets of the acquired business.
Goodwill is shown at a value of 14.1 million 31 March 2016 16.0 million on the balance sheet and is detailed in note 14.
We have considered the review of goodwill which is performed by Management at each reporting date or earlier if an erosion of goodwill is suspected.
The review requires that an impairment charge is recognised if the recoverable amount is less than its carrying value.
The approach adopted is first to calculate fair value less costs to sell and to consider value in use only if the carrying value fails this first test.
The majority of the goodwill 8.8 million 31 March 2016 10.7 million relates to the businesses acquired.
Impairment charges in the year related to the departure in summer 2016 of the Southampton investment management team 0.7m.
In addition goodwill of 1.3 million in relation to EBS Management PLC was transferred to held for sale assets.
Charles Stanley Direct represents 5.2 million 31 March 2016 5.2 million of the total goodwill balance.
This business comprises our online executiononly platform and the direct executiononly service Charles Stanley Investment Choices Limited together considered a cash generating unit CGU.
Management assessed the carrying value of goodwill attributable to Charles Stanley Direct by reference to recent market transactions involving similar businesses.
This valuation approach continues to support the carrying value of goodwill and consequently while still regarding it as an area of judgement the Committee concludes that this CGU is not impaired.
Impairment of other intangible and nonfinancial assets The Committee considers that client lists provide the principal area for review for impairment.
These were valued at 4.7 million as at 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 6.3 million.
The hiring of individual or teams of senior investment managers requires a value to be attributed to the client lists that they bring to the Group.
These intangible assets are amortised over their useful life generally a period of ten years which the Committee considers appropriate.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance The Committee has looked for evidence of impairment arising from the loss of any senior investment managers during the year that may indicate the risk of outflow of clients and associated Funds under Management.
The Committee has also reviewed analysis of the underlying rate of loss of clients to look for any other cause of possible outflows.
During the year the closure of client accounts stayed low and the main cause of lost clients remained death which the Committee recognises tends to claim 3% to 4% of the client base each year.
The Committee has not found reason for Management to reflect any impairment in the carrying value of these intangible assets.
Availableforsale financial assets Management has appraised its investment in Euroclear PLC by reference to a recent tender process from Euroclear PLCs share buyback scheme in which the Group participated and was successful in redeeming around 60% of its holding post the balance sheet date.
The Committee has noted the results of the valuation exercise and concludes that its carrying value is appropriate.
During the year the Group converted in full the loan to Runpath Group Limited previously known as Masterlist Limited into 119154 ordinary shares and sold 25% of its enlarged equity holding.
The value of the loan had previously been written down by 50% and that discount was applied to the June 2016 sale price for the remaining shares held.
This Committee considers that this valuation approach is appropriate.
Corporate transactions On 1 April 2016 the Group sold its pensions consultancy business CSFS for 1.5 million in cash and deferred consideration in the form of loan notes totalling 0.5 million.
Consequent to the default by CSFS of its loan repayment obligations an impairment charge of 0.5 million representing the full carrying value of the capital and interest due has been recognised in the Income Statement in 2017.
Agreement in principle has been reached to reschedule the loan repayment and a review will be undertaken at each future reporting date to assess the recoverability of this loan.
Assets held for sale and post balance sheet events On 11 April 2017 the Group announced that it had exchanged contracts for the sale of EBS to Embark Group Limited for up to 4.0m.
As the transaction was completed on 31 May 2017 post the balance sheet date the Committee considers it appropriate for the assets and liabilities attributable to EBS to be presented as held for sale in the Consolidated statement of financial position.
Pension scheme deficit The Groups defined benefit scheme was closed to future service accruals as at 31 March 2016.
The latest full triennial valuation was carried out in May 2014.
Based on the latest International Accounting Standard 19 IAS 19 actuarial valuation the pension fund shows a deficit position of 10.5 million at 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 10.1 million and this is further detailed in note 11.
The next full triennial actuarial valuation as at 13 May 2017 is currently being undertaken.
This is due to be completed in early 2018 and is expected to be reflected in the financial statements for the year ending 31 March 2018.
The Committee has reviewed the actuarial valuation report and noted the conclusions of KPMG on the nature of the assumptions used by the actuaries and is in agreement with the yearend deficit position.
Approval
This report in its entirety has been approved by the Board of Directors following recommendation by the Committee and signed on its behalf by David Pusinelli Audit Committee Chairman 13 June 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 60 Nomination Committee report Sir David Howard Chairman of the Nomination Committee The Committee is responsible for reviewing the composition of the Board and Board committees to ensure they are properly constituted and balanced in terms of skills experience and diversity.
In particular the Committee manages the search process for new Directors recommends suitable candidates to the Board and considers succession planning more widely.
The Nomination Committee met twice during the year.
Details of attendance of these meetings is shown below.
Role and responsibilities The Committee is responsible for reviewing the composition of the Board and Board committees to ensure they are properly constituted and balanced in terms of skills experience and diversity.
The Committee as and when required manages the search process for new Directors and recommends suitable candidates to the Board.
It also considers succession planning for both directors and senior executives.
For more information and the Committees terms of reference please visit the Companys website site Members and meetings The Committee consists of Sir David Howard Chairman of the Board and three independent Nonexecutive Directors Bridget Guerin who is also Chair of the Groups Remuneration Committee David Pusinelli who is Chairman of the Groups Audit Committee and Andrew Didham who chairs the Groups Risk Committee and CSCs Board and Nomination
In addition the Chief Executive Officer attends meetings by invitation and the Group Company Secretary acts as secretary to the Committee.
Main activities during the year As referenced in the introduction to this Governance section the Group has undertaken a governance review during the year.
All the Committees members have been involved with the project.
Matters some of which are ongoing particularly pertinent to this Committees terms of reference include Assessment of the balance of skills and experience required of both the CSG and CSC Boards Development of role profiles for Directors Selecting new Nonexecutive Directors candidates A refresh of the Directors induction programme Establishment of a Directors development programme.
Number of meetings
Sir David Howard 2 2 Andrew Didham 2 2 Bridget Guerin 2 2 David Pusinelli 2 2 Governance site 61 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Those matters were dealt with outside of formal Committee meetings.
Additionally during the year the Committee also Approved the job description for the role of Nonexecutive Chairman Reviewed its terms of reference Discussed succession planning for Executive Directors and other senior executives Considered and recommended to the Board the reelection of directors retiring at the 2017 AGM Considered and recommended various changes to the boards of the subsidiary companies Considered the need for and started to process towards appointment of additional NEDs.
The Nomination Committee supports the Groups aim to have the appropriate level of diversity in the boardroom in order to provide a broader perspective to decisionmaking while remaining committed to ensuring appointments are ultimately made on merit.
The Board comprised 14% female membership at 31 March 2017.
Further details about diversity are included in the Corporate social responsibility report on page 40.
Also as referenced in the introduction to this Governance section CSC has formed a Nomination Committee.
The work of the CSC Nomination Committee is not expected to impact materially the work of this Committee.
Sir David Howard Nomination Committee Chairman 13 June 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 62 Governance  Directors remuneration report Remuneration policy and principles The Remuneration Committee aims to ensure that our Executive Directors remuneration is aligned with the interests of shareholders with a significant proportion of their remuneration being performancerelated.
Executive Directors reward comprises a cashbased salary with benefits including pension an annual bonus scheme and a sharebased Performance Share Plan PSP.
Our Remuneration Policy as approved by shareholders at the AGM on 31 July 2015 directly links the pay of our Executive Directors to the achievement of stretching financial and operating performance targets.
Our remuneration policy aims to Attract retain and motivate highly capable Directors and Senior Management with the skills and experience to manage the business Maintain appropriate levels of fixed pay with a ratio of variable to fixed pay that is relevant and competitive Foster and support conduct and behaviours which are in line with our clientcentric and regulatorycompliant culture Ensure that remuneration does not encourage inappropriate risk taking that would sit outside the Boards risk appetite Set Directors targets linked to reward which demonstrate a clear correlation to the business strategy via the performance metrics for the annual bonus scheme and the longterm incentive plan Achieve consistency with the remuneration philosophy applied to the Groups employees as a whole.
Decisions made during the year The Remuneration Committee has carried out significant work this year to assist the Executive Committee to standardise and amend the compensation of the investment managers with the intention of ensuring that their remuneration promotes good customer outcomes and is in line with shareholders interests.
The Remuneration Committee has had an oversight role during the process of consultation and implementation.
I would like to thank a number of major shareholders and their representatives whose views were sought during the period of negotiations and whose observations have assisted us in our deliberations and in securing a satisfactory conclusion.
Directors remuneration report Bridget Guerin Chair of the Remuneration Committee Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
This report complies with the UK Directors Remuneration Reporting Regulations 2013 and covers the Groups approach towards remuneration the Remuneration Committees principal activities during the year and specific information relating to the treatment of Directors.
Further detailed information as required by the Regulations is set out immediately following this annual statement.
The attendance of the Remuneration Committee was as followssite 63 Financial statements Strategic report Governance The Remuneration Committee undertook a review of Executive Directors salaries during the year noting that no Executive Director had received an increase in their base pay since July 2012 or since being appointed to the Board despite some taking on greater responsibilities.
Market related benchmark data was considered as was the size and complexity of the business in relation to peer organisations.
The current business performance and the achievement of both financial and nonfinancial objectives including adherence to the principles of treating customers fairly conduct risk compliance and regulatory rules were taken into account when determining the revised salaries.
Increases were approved for all Directors and these took effect from 1 April 2017.
The resulting salaries are Paul Abberley 350000 Ben MoneyCoutts 250000 and Gary Teper 250000 representing increases of 16.7% 11.1% and 8.7% respectively.
When determining the increases the Committee took into account that none of the Executives had received an increase since being appointed to the Board.
These increases therefore represent on an annualised basis increases of between 7% and 2%.
While these increases are significant both in absolute terms and when compared to the general workforce increase of 2.3% the Committee determined that the increases were appropriate in light of the above factors.
When approving the revised salaries the Committee was conscious of the fact that bonus and PSP awards are not directly linked to salary and therefore there is no multiplier effect on the overall quantum of remuneration.
The salaries will next be reviewed in October 2017.
Remuneration outcomes You will have read elsewhere in the Annual report that there has been a steady improvement in overall performance over the year as the Group returned to profit.
The size of the annual bonus pool is based on a percentage of adjusted profit which resulted in a total bonus pool of 455000 to be allocated to the Executive Directors.
Despite the improvement in performance there will be no vesting from the January 201 5 PSP award which is based on performance to 31 March 2017 as the performance levels are below the respective earnings per share EPS and margin targets.
Notable events As announced on 24 November 2016 Mike Lilwall decided to step down from the Board after many years as an Executive Director to enable him to focus on private client investment management.
We are grateful to him for his work over the years and continued support and dedication.
Although as notified in the 2016 Annual report and accounts Anthony Scott stepped down from the Board on 18 April 2016 he was a Director at the start of this financial year and hence he has been included and accounted for in this Report.
Activity in the coming year The Remuneration Committee has been involved in the governance review that commenced in 2016 with external support from PwC.
As a consequence of the separation of the PLC and regulated Boards a new position of Chairman of Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited has been created.
Andrew Didham has accepted the role as well as the position of Chairman of the supporting Nomination Committee which he will undertake in addition to his existing responsibilities as a Nonexecutive Director.
His remuneration has been adjusted to reflect these increased responsibilities.
These changes took effect from March 2017.
The regulatory environment remains demanding with the SMCR and MiFID II due to occur during the coming year and we regularly monitor our policy to ensure it remains compliant continues to support the interests of our shareholders and to reward our Executive Directors appropriately.
I trust that the above provides you with a summary of the main events in the past 12 months.
Further detailed information is provided on pages 64 to 77 of the Remuneration policy report.
If you have any questions or comments I would be delighted to hear from you or to discuss matters at the AGM on 27 July 2017.
Bridget Guerin Remuneration Committee Chair 13 June 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 64 Governance  Directors remuneration report We have presented this report to reflect the reporting requirements on remuneration matters for companies particularly Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
The Report also describes how the Board has complied with the provisions set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code relating to remuneration matters.
At our 2017 AGM o n 27 July we will be holding a vote on the Implementation report within this report.
The auditors have reported on certain parts of this report and stated whether in their opinion those parts of the report have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Those sections of the report which have been subject to audit are clearly indicated.
Directors remuneration policy Key features of the policy The Directors remuneration policy as summarised in this section of the report took effect for all payments made to Directors from the date of the 2015 AGM.
For information and ease of reference the remuneration policy for Executive Directors is summarised in the table on pages 66 to 69 along with the policy regarding Nonexecutive Directors fees.
Please note that the section Implementation of policy has been written to reflect current salaries and other relevant changes.
How the Committee takes account of wider pay issues when setting the policy When setting Executive Director remuneration the Committee takes into account Groupwide pay and employment conditions along with market and commercial factors although reflecting prevailing commercial practice the Committee does not consult with employees in preparing the policy or its implementation.
For example when determining any base salary increases for Executive Directors the Committee reviews the average Groupwide increase as well as remuneration within similar organisations with specific note taken of businesses of similar size or complexity using benchmark data provided by professional remuneration experts.
The annual bonus opportunity of the Executive Directors is similar in a number of respects to the discretionary bonus opportunity of a significant number of other Group staff in that both personal performance and overall Group profitability help determine amounts paid out.
Although there are conductrelated sanctions within the approved investment managers scheme and limited share deferrals as part of the variable reward available to certain successful financial planners only the Executive Directors bonuses are subject to individual caps mandatory share deferral and clawback malus.
Executive Directors are eligible to participate in the full range of Group benefits offered to employees.
In addition they are eligible for certain remuneration to which other employees are not eligible.
For example Executive Directors may receive a salary supplement in lieu of pension.
Also Executive Directors are eligible to participate in the PSP participation in which is not intended to be extended widely.
However all employees are eligible to participate in the allemployee share schemes described in the table on pages 68 and 69.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance How shareholders views are taken into account when setting the policy Each year the Committee will take into account the approval levels of remunerationrelated resolutions at the previous AGM when reviewing the current policy.
More generally the Committee will also seek to build an active and productive dialogue with shareholders on developments in the remuneration aspects of corporate governance and any changes to the Groups executive pay arrangements.
In addition in line with the Investment Associations Guidelines on responsible investment disclosure the Committee is comfortable that the incentive structure for Executive Directors does not raise any environmental social or governance risks by inadvertently motivating irresponsible behaviour.
The Policy and the FCA Remuneration Code The Committee regularly reviews its remuneration policies to ensure compliance with the principles of the Remuneration Code of the UK financial services regulator the FCA as applicable to Charles Stanley.
The remuneration policy is designed to be consistent with conservative management of risk to encourage appropriate conduct and to support the sustained longterm performance of the Group.
The Committee believes that the remuneration policies neither encourage nor reward inappropriate risktaking.
Governance  Directors remuneration report Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 66 Element and purpose Policy and operation Opportunity Performance measures Implementation of policy Base salary This is the core element of pay and reflects the individuals role and position within the Group with some adjustment to reflect their capability and contribution.
Base salaries are considered with account taken of levels paid by companies of similar size complexity and challenge.
However the Committee does not strictly follow benchmark data but instead uses it as a reference point in considering in its judgement the appropriate level having regard to other relevant factors including corporate and individual performance and any changes in an individuals role and responsibilities.
Base salary is paid monthly in cash.
Base salary levels will be formally reviewed at such time as the Committee considers appropriate.
If any increases are made except in exceptional circumstances it is expected that they will be in line with general workforce increases save where a higher increase is necessary to reflect a significant change in role andor responsibilities.
Any base salary increases will normally take effect at the time of general workforce amendments this is typically from 1 October. na No increases to base salaries were made in 2016.
However following a formal review uplifts were approved for all Executive Directors to take effect from 1 April 2017.
2017 base salaries for the Executive Directors are as follows
To provide other benefits valued by recipient.
Provide market competitive benefits in kind.
Details of the current benefits provided can be found to the right.
The Committee reserves discretion to introduce new benefits where it concludes that it is in the interests of the Group to do so having regard to the particular circumstances and to market practice.
The Committee will monitor overall benefit costs and will ensure that they do not increase by more than the Committee considers to be appropriate in all circumstances. private health insurance and Death in Service benefits and a mobile andor iPad.
No changes were made to this element of remuneration in 2017 and none are proposed for 2018.
Pension
To aid retention and remain competitive within the market place.
Provide a competitive level of postretirement benefits.
The Executive Directors participate in money purchase arrangements.
Contributions are taken as a salary supplement by all Directors.
Contributions to the pension arrangements may be reviewed when considered appropriate by the Committee. na No changes were made to pension arrangements in 2017 and none are anticipated for 2018.
The Executive Directors receive the following payments Paul Abberley  20% of base salary Ben MoneyCoutts  20% of base salary Gary Teper  20% of base salary Annual bonus To incentivise Executive Directors to deliver against annual performance targets.
Annual bonus levels and the appropriateness of measures are reviewed annually to ensure they continue to support the Groups strategic goals.
Bonus outcomes are paid in one tranche less any deferred share award following the yearend.
Any bonus earned in excess of 50% of salary under the main bonus plan is to be deferred into shares for a period of three years.
During the period until vesting of deferred share awards the numbers of shares awarded are increased by the value of dividends notionally payable in respect of the vesting shares.
Malusclawback provisions apply to amounts deferred which can be reduced in later years in exceptional circumstances such as i material misstatement of accounts ii action that causes material reputational damage to the Group iii in the event of material regulatory censure.
To reflect the Groups strategic objective of driving growth and improved quality of profits the core annual bonus plan is structured as a profit pool under which an agreed percentage of adjusted profit before tax PBT can be distributed to the Executive Directors with a portion of this distribution based on performance against individual targets.
There is a cap of 6% of adjusted PBT that can be allocated to the pool.
In addition no Executive Director may receive a bonus in excess of 100% of their salary under this plan.
Due to the profit pool nature of the bonus there is no prescribed amount of bonus that is payable for any particular level of performance.
Adjusted PBT is defined as PBT adding back bonus pool accrual the Financial Services Compensation Scheme FSCS or similar levy and in exceptional circumstances any other items the Committee consider appropriate to reflect the underlying financial performance of the Group.
The performance measures applied may be financial or nonfinancial and corporate divisional or individual.
The annual bonus remains a discretionary arrangement and the Committee reserves discretion to adjust the outturn should it consider that to be appropriate albeit within the limits set out in this policy table.
2017 Annual Bonus When reviewing the performance of the 2017 financial year the Remuneration Committee determined that the bonus pool under this plan for distribution to the Executive Directors would be approximately 5% of adjusted PBT.
50% of this bonus pool was allocated across all the Executive Directors on an equal basis which in the case of Mike Lilwall was prorata to the time that he served as an Executive Director.
The remaining 50% of the bonus pool was allocated to each Executive Director based upon their performance against preset individual performance objectives.
Paul Abberley was set objectives which included delivering the financial plan ensuring that the Company was managed in a riskaware manner ensuring that all stakeholder interests and outcomes were appropriately managed and providing a Company voice to shareholders and clients.
Ben MoneyCoutts was set objectives which included managing the Finance function with due regard for conduct risk and risk management and for ensuring that all internal audit points were addressed.
He was also responsible for encouraging and supporting the adoption of the Companys budget and for delivering the efficient financial operation of the Investment Management Services divisions new remuneration arrangements.
Gary Teper was set a key objective to deliver new contracts and remuneration arrangements for the investment managers.
He was also mandated to set up effective management structures for the Investment Management Services division and for the HR and Legal teams.
He also had objectives to ensure that the business areas for which he was responsible were managed with due regard for conduct risk and with effective risk management infrastructure.
Each of the Executive Directors were judged to have achieved their key objectives.
The Bonus payments are set out in the table on page 78.
2018 Annual Bonus The bonus will be operated in a similar manner to 2017 that is a profit pool will be created worth up to 6% of adjusted profit which will be distributed based in part on performance against individual objectives.
Given the nature of the individual objectives they are considered commercially sensitive and are accordingly not disclosed in this report although they relate to their contributions to delivering the targeted further improvement in profitability and the delivery of the detailed plans built to guide the implementation of the corporate strategy.
Further information regarding these targets will be included in next years report.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Element and purpose Policy and operation Opportunity Performance measures Implementation of policy Base salary This is the core element of pay and reflects the individuals role and position within the Group with some adjustment to reflect their capability and contribution.
Base salaries are considered with account taken of levels paid by companies of similar size complexity and challenge.
However the Committee does not strictly follow benchmark data but instead uses it as a reference point in considering in its judgement the appropriate level having regard to other relevant factors including corporate and individual performance and any changes in an individuals role and responsibilities.
Base salary is paid monthly in cash.
Base salary levels will be formally reviewed at such time as the Committee considers appropriate.
If any increases are made except in exceptional circumstances it is expected that they will be in line with general workforce increases save where a higher increase is necessary to reflect a significant change in role andor responsibilities.
Any base salary increases will normally take effect at the time of general workforce amendments this is typically from 1 October. na No increases to base salaries were made in 2016.
However following a formal review uplifts were approved for all Executive Directors to take effect from 1 April 2017.
2017 base salaries for the Executive Directors are as follows
To provide other benefits valued by recipient.
Provide market competitive benefits in kind.
Details of the current benefits provided can be found to the right.
The Committee reserves discretion to introduce new benefits where it concludes that it is in the interests of the Group to do so having regard to the particular circumstances and to market practice.
The Committee will monitor overall benefit costs and will ensure that they do not increase by more than the Committee considers to be appropriate in all circumstances. private health insurance and Death in Service benefits and a mobile andor iPad.
No changes were made to this element of remuneration in 2017 and none are proposed for 2018.
Pension
To aid retention and remain competitive within the market place.
Provide a competitive level of postretirement benefits.
The Executive Directors participate in money purchase arrangements.
Contributions are taken as a salary supplement by all Directors.
Contributions to the pension arrangements may be reviewed when considered appropriate by the Committee. na No changes were made to pension arrangements in 2017 and none are anticipated for 2018.
The Executive Directors receive the following payments Paul Abberley  20% of base salary Ben MoneyCoutts  20% of base salary Gary Teper  20% of base salary Annual bonus To incentivise Executive Directors to deliver against annual performance targets.
Annual bonus levels and the appropriateness of measures are reviewed annually to ensure they continue to support the Groups strategic goals.
Bonus outcomes are paid in one tranche less any deferred share award following the yearend.
Any bonus earned in excess of 50% of salary under the main bonus plan is to be deferred into shares for a period of three years.
During the period until vesting of deferred share awards the numbers of shares awarded are increased by the value of dividends notionally payable in respect of the vesting shares.
Malusclawback provisions apply to amounts deferred which can be reduced in later years in exceptional circumstances such as i material misstatement of accounts ii action that causes material reputational damage to the Group iii in the event of material regulatory censure.
To reflect the Groups strategic objective of driving growth and improved quality of profits the core annual bonus plan is structured as a profit pool under which an agreed percentage of adjusted profit before tax PBT can be distributed to the Executive Directors with a portion of this distribution based on performance against individual targets.
There is a cap of 6% of adjusted PBT that can be allocated to the pool.
In addition no Executive Director may receive a bonus in excess of 100% of their salary under this plan.
Due to the profit pool nature of the bonus there is no prescribed amount of bonus that is payable for any particular level of performance.
Adjusted PBT is defined as PBT adding back bonus pool accrual the Financial Services Compensation Scheme FSCS or similar levy and in exceptional circumstances any other items the Committee consider appropriate to reflect the underlying financial performance of the Group.
The performance measures applied may be financial or nonfinancial and corporate divisional or individual.
The annual bonus remains a discretionary arrangement and the Committee reserves discretion to adjust the outturn should it consider that to be appropriate albeit within the limits set out in this policy table.
2017 Annual Bonus When reviewing the performance of the 2017 financial year the Remuneration Committee determined that the bonus pool under this plan for distribution to the Executive Directors would be approximately 5% of adjusted PBT.
50% of this bonus pool was allocated across all the Executive Directors on an equal basis which in the case of Mike Lilwall was prorata to the time that he served as an Executive Director.
The remaining 50% of the bonus pool was allocated to each Executive Director based upon their performance against preset individual performance objectives.
Paul Abberley was set objectives which included delivering the financial plan ensuring that the Company was managed in a riskaware manner ensuring that all stakeholder interests and outcomes were appropriately managed and providing a Company voice to shareholders and clients.
Ben MoneyCoutts was set objectives which included managing the Finance function with due regard for conduct risk and risk management and for ensuring that all internal audit points were addressed.
He was also responsible for encouraging and supporting the adoption of the Companys budget and for delivering the efficient financial operation of the Investment Management Services divisions new remuneration arrangements.
Gary Teper was set a key objective to deliver new contracts and remuneration arrangements for the investment managers.
He was also mandated to set up effective management structures for the Investment Management Services division and for the HR and Legal teams.
He also had objectives to ensure that the business areas for which he was responsible were managed with due regard for conduct risk and with effective risk management infrastructure.
Each of the Executive Directors were judged to have achieved their key objectives.
The Bonus payments are set out in the table on page 78.
2018 Annual Bonus The bonus will be operated in a similar manner to 2017 that is a profit pool will be created worth up to 6% of adjusted profit which will be distributed based in part on performance against individual objectives.
Given the nature of the individual objectives they are considered commercially sensitive and are accordingly not disclosed in this report although they relate to their contributions to delivering the targeted further improvement in profitability and the delivery of the detailed plans built to guide the implementation of the corporate strategy.
Further information regarding these targets will be included in next years report.
Paul Abberley Ben MoneyCoutts Gary Teper 350000 250000 250000 Governance  Directors remuneration report Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 68 Element and purpose Policy and operation Opportunity Performance measures Implementation of policy Longterm incentives To incentivise delivery of sustained performance over the long term the Company operates the Charles Stanley Performance Share Plan PSP.
Awards under the PSP may be in the form of nilcost options conditional awards rights to receive shares for nilcost or cashbased phantom awards.
During the period until vesting of awards the numbers of shares awarded are increased by the value of dividends notionally payable in respect of the vesting shares.
Awards previously granted but not yet vested and shares received following vesting can be reduced reclaimed in exceptional circumstances such as i material misstatement of accounts ii actions that cause material reputational damage to the Group iii in the event of material regulatory censure.
The formal limit under the PSP is 100% of salary and 200% in exceptional cases.
The Committee expressly reserves discretion to make such awards as it considers appropriate within these limits.
Actual grant levels may be determined by reference to individual performance in the prior year with vesting then based upon performance against threeyear targets.
At a threshold level of performance against these threeyear targets 20% of an award is capable of vesting.
The Committee will set performance conditions for each annual PSP award which may relate to financial andor share price performance and which will have the underlying aim of encouraging and rewarding the generation of sustainable returns to shareholders.
July 2016 Awards Awards were made under the PSP in July 2016 over shares worth up to 80% of salary to Paul Abberley and between 64% and 69% of salary to Ben MoneyCoutts and Gary Teper.
50% of each award will vest subject to adjusted EPS targets with 50% subject to operating margin targets each measured over a threeyear period to 31 March 2019.
Further details of the targets that applied to the awards are set out in the Implementation report.
July 2017 Awards The Remuneration Committee has determined that awards be made over 40000 shares to each of the Executive Directors.
Further details of the targets that will apply to the awards are set out in the Implementation report section of this Directors remuneration report.
Shareholding guidelines To encourage share ownership by the Executive Directors and ensure their interests are aligned with investors.
Executive Directors are required to retain 50% of shares net of tax which vest under the PSP or bonus deferral until such time that they hold a specified value of shares as shown in the Opportunity column.
These restrictions do not apply to other Charles Stanley shares that they may own.
Once the shareholding guideline has been met individuals are expected to retain these levels as a minimum.
The Committee will review shareholdings annually in this context.
100% of salary for the Executive Directors.
Allemployee share plans To encourage share ownership by employees thereby allowing them to share in the longterm success of the Group and align their interests with those of the shareholders.
Executive Directors are able to participate in all employee share plans on the same terms as other Group employees.
Sharesave  individuals may save up to a maximum of 250 or such amount permitted by the HMRC approved limit each month for a fixed period of three or five years.
At the end of this period they may use their savings to buy shares in the Company at a discount currently capped at 15% although the rules permit 20% of the market price set at the launch of each scheme.
Share Incentive Plan  individuals may purchase out of their pretax salary shares in the Company up to a value of 150 per month or such amount permitted by the HMRC approved limit.
Free shares worth up to 3000 or such amount permitted by the HMRC approved limit can also be granted each year.
Also the rules of the Plan allow matching shares to be granted based on the number of shares purchased although the Company does not currently operate the free share and matching elements of the Plan.
Consistent with normal practice these awards are not subject to performance conditions.
Nonexecutive
Director fees The fees paid to the Nonexecutive Directors aim to be competitive with other fully listed companies which the Board consider to be of equivalent size and complexity.
Fee levels are periodically reviewed by Board.
However the Company does not adopt a quantitative approach to pay positioning and exercises judgement as to what it considers to be reasonable in all the circumstances as regards quantum.
Additional fees are paid to Nonexecutive Directors who chair a Board committee or who have other additional responsibilities such as being Senior Independent Director.
Nonexecutive Directors do not participate in the annual bonus or share incentive arrangements.
Nonexecutive Directors may also receive benefits within prescribed limits as to value.
Fees are paid monthly in cash.
Fee levels for Nonexecutive Directors are reviewed annually and are only expected to increase in line with market norms and to take account of additional time commitments and responsibilities.
The annual limit on benefits is 25000.
The cap on fees payable to Nonexecutive Directors for their services is 0.45 million per annum.
This will accommodate the appointment of additional Nonexecutive Directors to strengthen the balance of the Board.
Group PLC.
Sir David is Chairman of the Nomination Committee of Charles Stanley Group PLC for which he receives no additional fees.
In 2017 the following fee structure was in place for the other Nonexecutive Directors Base fee was 42500 Additional fee for holding the position of Senior Independent Director was 7500 per annum Additional fee for chairing one of the Board committees Remuneration Audit and Risk was 7500 per annum.
Andrew Didham receives an additional annual fee of 35000 as independent Nonexecutive Chairman of Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited which commenced on 1 March 2017.
No changes are proposed to the above fee arrangements.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Element and purpose Policy and operation Opportunity Performance measures Implementation of policy Longterm incentives To incentivise delivery of sustained performance over the long term the Company operates the Charles Stanley Performance Share Plan PSP.
Awards under the PSP may be in the form of nilcost options conditional awards rights to receive shares for nilcost or cashbased phantom awards.
During the period until vesting of awards the numbers of shares awarded are increased by the value of dividends notionally payable in respect of the vesting shares.
Awards previously granted but not yet vested and shares received following vesting can be reduced reclaimed in exceptional circumstances such as i material misstatement of accounts ii actions that cause material reputational damage to the Group iii in the event of material regulatory censure.
The formal limit under the PSP is 100% of salary and 200% in exceptional cases.
The Committee expressly reserves discretion to make such awards as it considers appropriate within these limits.
Actual grant levels may be determined by reference to individual performance in the prior year with vesting then based upon performance against threeyear targets.
At a threshold level of performance against these threeyear targets 20% of an award is capable of vesting.
The Committee will set performance conditions for each annual PSP award which may relate to financial andor share price performance and which will have the underlying aim of encouraging and rewarding the generation of sustainable returns to shareholders.
July 2016 Awards Awards were made under the PSP in July 2016 over shares worth up to 80% of salary to Paul Abberley and between 64% and 69% of salary to Ben MoneyCoutts and Gary Teper.
50% of each award will vest subject to adjusted EPS targets with 50% subject to operating margin targets each measured over a threeyear period to 31 March 2019.
Further details of the targets that applied to the awards are set out in the Implementation report.
July 2017 Awards The Remuneration Committee has determined that awards be made over 40000 shares to each of the Executive Directors.
Further details of the targets that will apply to the awards are set out in the Implementation report section of this Directors remuneration report.
Shareholding guidelines To encourage share ownership by the Executive Directors and ensure their interests are aligned with investors.
Executive Directors are required to retain 50% of shares net of tax which vest under the PSP or bonus deferral until such time that they hold a specified value of shares as shown in the Opportunity column.
These restrictions do not apply to other Charles Stanley shares that they may own.
Once the shareholding guideline has been met individuals are expected to retain these levels as a minimum.
The Committee will review shareholdings annually in this context.
100% of salary for the Executive Directors.
Allemployee share plans To encourage share ownership by employees thereby allowing them to share in the longterm success of the Group and align their interests with those of the shareholders.
Executive Directors are able to participate in all employee share plans on the same terms as other Group employees.
Sharesave  individuals may save up to a maximum of 250 or such amount permitted by the HMRC approved limit each month for a fixed period of three or five years.
At the end of this period they may use their savings to buy shares in the Company at a discount currently capped at 15% although the rules permit 20% of the market price set at the launch of each scheme.
Share Incentive Plan  individuals may purchase out of their pretax salary shares in the Company up to a value of 150 per month or such amount permitted by the HMRC approved limit.
Free shares worth up to 3000 or such amount permitted by the HMRC approved limit can also be granted each year.
Also the rules of the Plan allow matching shares to be granted based on the number of shares purchased although the Company does not currently operate the free share and matching elements of the Plan.
Consistent with normal practice these awards are not subject to performance conditions.
Nonexecutive
Director fees The fees paid to the Nonexecutive Directors aim to be competitive with other fully listed companies which the Board consider to be of equivalent size and complexity.
Fee levels are periodically reviewed by Board.
However the Company does not adopt a quantitative approach to pay positioning and exercises judgement as to what it considers to be reasonable in all the circumstances as regards quantum.
Additional fees are paid to Nonexecutive Directors who chair a Board committee or who have other additional responsibilities such as being Senior Independent Director.
Nonexecutive Directors do not participate in the annual bonus or share incentive arrangements.
Nonexecutive Directors may also receive benefits within prescribed limits as to value.
Fees are paid monthly in cash.
Fee levels for Nonexecutive Directors are reviewed annually and are only expected to increase in line with market norms and to take account of additional time commitments and responsibilities.
The annual limit on benefits is 25000.
The cap on fees payable to Nonexecutive Directors for their services is 0.45 million per annum.
This will accommodate the appointment of additional Nonexecutive Directors to strengthen the balance of the Board.
Group PLC.
Sir David is Chairman of the Nomination Committee of Charles Stanley Group PLC for which he receives no additional fees.
In 2017 the following fee structure was in place for the other Nonexecutive Directors Base fee was 42500 Additional fee for holding the position of Senior Independent Director was 7500 per annum Additional fee for chairing one of the Board committees Remuneration Audit and Risk was 7500 per annum.
Andrew Didham receives an additional annual fee of 35000 as independent Nonexecutive Chairman of Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited which commenced on 1 March 2017.
No changes are proposed to the above fee arrangements.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 70 Governance  Directors remuneration report How the policy shapes actual Executive Directors pay Our remuneration policy results in a significant portion of the Executive Directors pay being dependent on performance.
The charts below demonstrate this showing how their 2018 pay will vary based on different levels of performance with increases in share price and dividend reinvestment ignored for these purposes Minimum performance  this assumes that performance is such that no annual bonus is warranted due to no profit being generated in a particular year and no PSP awards vest due to the minimum performance threshold not being reached.
Therefore Executive Directors only receive their fixed pay salary benefits and pension On target performance  this assumes a target level of performance resulting in threshold vesting of PSP awards 20% of the proposed 2018 award level.
As the annual bonus is based on a profit pool and therefore has no prescribed on target opportunity to reflect the approach adopted previously we have valued the bonus based on the actual award under the plan for the prior year.
Fixed pay remains unchanged.
Maximum performance  this assumes a very strong level of performance resulting in full vesting of PSP awards at the proposed 2018 level and a maximum bonus payout of 100% of salary.
Fixed pay also remains unchanged.
Minimum
Target
Maximum
Paul Abberley 2tel90telMinimum
Maximum
Gary Teper 31tel25tel25
Target
Maximum
Ben MoneyCoutts 2tel31telBonus Fixed PSP site 71 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Discretions retained by the Committee in operating the incentive plans The Committee will operate the annual bonus plan and PSP according to their respective rules and subject to the limits other provisions set out in the policy table above.
The Committee retains discretion consistent with market practice in a limited number of respects in relation to the operation and administration of these plans.
These discretions include but are not limited to the following The selection of participants The timing of grant of an awardbonus opportunity The size of an awardbonus opportunity subject to the overall plan limits set out in the policy table The setting of PSP and bonus performance targets and the determination of performance against such targets and resultant vestingbonus payouts Discretion required when dealing with a change of control or restructuring of the Group Determination of the treatment of leavers based on the rules of the plans and the appropriate treatment chosen as summarised in the table on page 73 Adjustments required in certain circumstances for example rights issues corporate restructuring events and special dividends.
Under the rules of both the PSP and annual bonus plan and reflecting general market practice the Committee retains the ability to adjust the targets andor set different measures if events occur for example material acquisition share issue and or divestment of a Group business which cause it to determine that the conditions are no longer appropriate and the amendment is required so that the conditions achieve their original purpose and are not materially more or less difficult to satisfy.
Any use of the above discretions would where relevant be explained in the Annual report on remuneration and may as appropriate be the subject of consultation with the Companys major shareholders.
The Directors service contracts Executive Directors Paul Abberley Ben MoneyCoutts and Gary Teper have service contracts containing a notice period of six months and a payment in lieu of notice clause limited to base salary only.
There are no other special provisions in these contracts relating to compensation for loss of office nor are there any clauses in contracts amending employment terms and conditions on a change of control.
In the event of the employment of an Executive Director being terminated the Committee will pay due regard to i best practice ii the circumstances surrounding the termination and iii the Executive Directors duty to mitigate hisher loss while also adhering to the relevant contractual terms.
All Executive Directors are subject to annual reelection.
Executive Directors may take on external appointments subject to prior approval by the Board.
The fees from such appointments where relevant are retained by the Director concerned.
Nonexecutive Directors The Nonexecutive Directors do not have service contracts but instead have detailed job descriptions covering each aspect of their role for example Committee Chairmanships or specific roles or duties and Letters of Appointment for an initial threeyear term subject to annual reelection by the Companys shareholders.
Either party can terminate the Letter of Appointment on giving three months written notice.
There are no special provisions in the Letters of Appointment for compensation in the event of loss of office.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 72 Governance  Directors remuneration report Legacy arrangements For the avoidance of doubt in approving this policy report authority is given to the Company to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Directors.
Details of any payments to former Directors will be set out in the relevant report going forward as required by Regulations.
Travel and hospitality While the Remuneration Committee does not consider these form part of benefits in the normal usage of that term we have been advised that corporate hospitality whether paid for by the Company or another and business travel for Directors and occasionally their families may technically come within the applicable rules and so the Committee expressly reserves the right for the Committee to authorise such activities within its agreed policies.
Our approach to remuneration on recruitment The Groups recruitment remuneration policy aims to give the Committee sufficient flexibility to secure the appointment and promotion of highcalibre executives to strengthen the management team and secure the skill sets required to deliver our strategic aims.
The following represents guidelines considered reasonable by the Committee in relation to securing an appropriate candidate whose appointment would be in shareholders best interests In terms of the principles for setting a package for a new Executive Director the starting point for the Committee will be to look to the general policy for Executive Directors as set out in the policy table on page 66 and structure a package in accordance with that policy Base salaries will be set based on the individuals role and experience with consideration given to internal relativities Benefits will be provided in line with those offered to other employees at the similar level.
In the case of new Executive Directors individuals will be given a choice of either participation in a defined contribution pension or a cash allowance in lieu of pension Ignoring any special recruitment buyout arrangements which may prove to be necessary the annual bonus or longterm incentive arrangements will operate including the maximum award levels as detailed in the policy table in relation to any newly appointed Director For an internal appointment any variable pay element or arrangement that exists in respect of the prior role may either continue on its original terms or be adjusted to reflect the new appointment as appropriate.
For external and internal appointments the Committee may agree that the Company will meet certain relocation expenses as it considers appropriate andor make a contribution towards legal fees in connection with agreeing employment terms A new Executive Director will not save in exceptional circumstances be offered a service contract with a notice period in excess of one year Where it is necessary to make a special recruitmentrelated buyout award to an external candidate the Company will not pay more than is in the view of the Committee necessary and will in all cases seek in the first instance to deliver any such buyout awards under the terms of the existing incentive pay structure as outlined in the policy table.
It may however be necessary in some cases to make such special buyout awards on terms that are more bespoke than the existing incentive plans in order to secure a candidate which may require reliance upon Listing Rule 9.4.2.
All such special buyout awards will be appropriately disclosed and will take account of all relevant factors.
For example the commercial value of the buyout award will reflect the commercial value of the amount forfeited from the previous employer with the performance conditions and the potential timing of vesting also taken into account For the avoidance of doubt the maximum amounts for incentive pay as stated in the policy will not apply to special buyout awards.
The Committee has not placed a maximum limit on any such buyout awards as it is not considered to be in shareholders interests to set any expectations for prospective candidates regarding such awards.
However as stated above the commercial value of the amount forfeited from the previous employer will be reflected in the quantum of such award.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Our policy on Executive Directors leaving Charles Stanley In practice the facts surrounding any termination do not always fit neatly into defined categories for good or bad leavers.
Therefore it is appropriate for the Committee to consider the suitable treatment on a termination having regard to all of the relevant facts and circumstances available at that time.
This policy applies both to any negotiations linked to notice periods on a termination and any treatment which the Committee may choose to apply under the discretions available to it under the terms of any incentive plans.
The potential treatments on termination under these plans are summarised below.
Incentives Good leaver Bad leaver Exceptional events
If a leaver is deemed to be a good leaver such as leaving through redundancy serious ill health or death or otherwise at the discretion of the Committee.
If a leaver is deemed to be a bad leaver typically voluntary resignation or leaving for disciplinary reasons.
Such as a change in control.
Annual bonus Prorated bonus with any deferred shares vesting.
No awards made with deferred shares lapsing unless the Committee determines otherwise.
Prorated bonus with any deferred shares vesting.
PSP
Will receive a prorated award subject to the application of the performance conditions at the normal measurement date or on cessation as determined by the Committee.
Committee discretion to disapply prorating.
Awards can be clawed back for a breach of postcessation obligations.
All awards will normally lapse.
Will receive a prorated award subject to the application of the performance conditions at the date of the event.
Committee discretion to disapply prorating.
The Group has power to enter into settlement agreements with executives and to pay compensation to settle potential legal claims.
In addition and consistent with market practice on termination of an Executive Directors employment the Group may pay a contribution towards the individuals legal fees and fees for outplacement services as part of a negotiated settlement.
Any such fees would be disclosed as part of the detail of termination arrangements.
Should it become necessary to make additional payments in respect of such professional fees that were not ascertained at the time of reporting the Company may do so up to a level of a further 10000.
For the avoidance of doubt the policy does not include an explicit cap on the cost of termination payments.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 74 Governance  Directors remuneration report Implementation report  unaudited information The Remuneration Committees main responsibilities during the year The Committee is a Joint Committee reporting to the Boards of both Charles Stanley Group PLC and Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited.
The Committee comprises three independent Nonexecutive Directors and is governed by formal terms of reference which are reviewed and agreed annually by the Board.
The terms of reference of the Committee are available on the Groups website.
During 2017 the Committees main responsibilities were to Monitor the remuneration arrangements of the Executive Directors Monitor Executive Directors performance and to recommend PSP awards based on this performance to the Board Determine and recommend to the Board the remuneration policy and the approval of all elements of pay for the Chairman of the Board and the other Executive Directors Be responsible for the Charles Stanley Group remuneration policy as documented and proposed by the Executive Committee Prepare this Directors remuneration report.
The Committee meets formally twice a year but more frequently if required.
During 2017 five Committee meetings were held and details on attendance at meetings are set out in the Corporate governance report on page 53.
None of the Committee members has any personal financial interest other than as shareholders conflicts of interests arising from crossdirectorships or daytoday involvement in running the business.
The Committee makes recommendations to both Boards.
No Director plays a part in any discussion about his or her own specific remuneration.
How the Remuneration Committee sought advice The Committee received independent remuneration advice during the year from its appointed advisers FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FIT.
FIT is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group the professional body for such consultants and adheres to its code of conduct.
FIT provided no other services to the Group and accordingly the Committee was satisfied that the advice provided by FIT was objective and independent.
FITs fees in respect of 2017 were 19750 2016 13200.
FITs fees were charged on the basis of the firms standard terms of business for advice provided.
The Committee also considered data provided by recognised benchmarking specialists Compeer and McLagan and consulted with PwC as part of the Groups governance review and with Sir David Howard and Paul Abberley save in respect of matters relating directly to their own remuneration and the Groups HR function.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance How remuneration compares to other payments The table below shows the total pay for all of Charles Stanleys employees compared to other key distributions made by the Company 2017 2016 Change Employee costs 52385276 55267367 5.2%
2534170 1754305 44.5% The dividend figures included in the above table are those paid during the respective financial years.
Review of past performance The graph below shows the value at 31 March 2017 on a total shareholder return basis of 100 invested in the Company on 31 March 2009 compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE SmallCap Index excluding investment trusts.
This Index is considered to be an appropriate comparator for this purpose as it is a broad equity index of which the Company is a constituent.
Total shareholder return % 31 March 2009 31 March 2010 31 March 2011 31 March 2012 31 March 2013 31 March 2014 31 March 2015 31 March 2017 31 March tel35telFTSE SmallCap excluding investment trusts Charles Stanley Note Rebased to 100 as at 31 March 2009.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 76 Governance  Directors remuneration report The table below shows the total remuneration figure for Sir David Howard and Paul Abberley over the same eightyear period.
The total remuneration figure includes the annual bonus paid in each of these years.
The new Regulations require this table to state the proportion of annual bonus paid and longterm incentive vesting in each relevant year as a percentage of the maximum available.
However the Group did not operate with a maximum bonus opportunity until 2015.
Consequently we have simply included the total remuneration in each of the relevant years while also setting out details of the bonus each actually received based on performance in these years.
Financial yearteltel 2011 2010 Sir David Howard single figure of total remuneration 290173 413639 430878 610409 448950 530923 Annual bonus paid   nil 72800 89200 85400 85400 78400 Paul Abberley single figure of total remuneration 552000 372094 165000 Annual bonus paid 180000 nil nil PSP January 2015 0% These amounts are calculated using the same methodology as that used to produce the single figure table.
This includes a value for pensions that is based on the increase in the Directors accrued pension in the year which is a significant cause of the variance across the sixyear period for Sir David Howard.
How any change in pay of the Chief Executive Officer between 2016 and 2017 compared to the wider workforce In accordance with the new regulations we must disclose the percentage change in the certain elements of the Chief Executive Officers pay namely salary taxable benefits and annual bonus compared to the average percentage change in the same pay elements for all employees.
This information is set out below Change in salary Change in benefits Change in annual bonus Paul Abberley 0% 0% 100% Allemployee average 2.6% 3% 152% Paul Abberley the CEO did not receive a bonus in the prior year.
He has been awarded a bonus of 180000 in respect of the 2017 financial year.
Percentage change in respect of the Groups discretionary bonus pool.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance How our shareholders voted Of the 81.23% of the issued share capital votes cast to approve the Implementation report within the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 March 2016 at the 2016 AGM held on 29 July 2016
Against Total votes
No. of
No. of
Approval of the Implementation section of the Directors remuneration report 41173279 99.92 31633 0.08 41204912 16004 Vote to approve Directors remuneration policy at the 2015 AGM held on 31 July 2015
Against Total votes
No. of
No. of
To approve the Directors remuneration policy 43106087 99.29 291728 0.67 43397 815 13284 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 78 Governance  Directors remuneration report Implementation report  audited information What the Directors earned in financial years ending 31 March 2017 and 2016
Benefits
Annual bonus
Pension
Total
Executive Directors Paul Abberley 300 12 180  60 552 Michael Lilwall Ben MoneyCoutts 225 12 120  45 402 Anthony Scott Gary Teper 230 14 120  46 410 Nonexecutive Directors Andrew Didham 50 1    51 Bridget Guerin 50 2    52 Sir David Howard 125 25    150 David Pusinelli 57 1    58 Total 1225 76 455  221 1977 Resigned from the Board on 23 November 2016.
Resigned from the Board on 18 April 2016.
SalaryFees
Benefits
Annual bonus
Pension
Total
Executive Directors Paul Abberley 300 12   60 372 Michael Lilwall 274 13   68 355 Ben MoneyCoutts 225 12   45 282 Anthony Scott 215 13 83  43 354 Gary Teper 230 15   46 291 Nonexecutive Directors Andrew Didham 31     31 Bridget Guerin 56 3    59 Sir David Howard 125 25    150 David Pusinelli 61 2    63 Total 1517 95 83  262 1site 79 Financial statements Strategic report Governance
An explanation of the benefits received by the Executive Directors can be found in the policy table on pages 66 to 67.
In summary the benefits received by Executive Directors comprise a car allowance private medical cover and a mobile andor iPad.
For the Nonexecutive Directors amounts reported relate to expenses such as travel and accommodation expenditure incurred on Group business.
While these payments are the reimbursement of expenses and not benefits per se they are included as being a payment which is subject to tax.
Sir David Howard also received benefits relating to contributions towards the provision of a car for business travel.
This arrangement came to an end as of 31 March 2017.
Annual bonus outcomes for 2017 The return to profit has resulted in bonuses being awarded to the Executive Directors for the 2017 period.
When assessing the performance for the year the Remuneration Committee determined that the overall size of the bonus pool available for distribution to the Executive Directors to be approximately 5% of adjusted PBT compared with a maximum permitted under the policy of 6%.
50% of this bonus pool was allocated across all the Executive Directors on an equal basis with the remaining 50% of the bonus pool being allocated to each Executive Director based upon their performance against preset individual performance objectives.
Further information regarding these targets are specified in the Implementation of policy part of the table on page 67.
The resulting bonus awards are Paul Abberley 180000 Ben MoneyCoutts 120000 Gary Teper 120000 and Michael Lilwall 35000.
These awards will be paid in cash apart from 30000 payable to Paul Abberley 7500 to Ben MoneyCoutts and 5000 to Gary Teper that will be deferred into shares for a period of three years.
No annual bonuses were paid to Executive Directors in 2016 under the main plan as there was no reported profit.
Pensions
The current Executive Directors participate in money purchase arrangements.
Details of the levels of pension arrangements can be found in the summary policy table on page 66.
Sir David Howard is a member of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme which provides for a pension equal to 160th of final salary as defined for each year of pensionable service up to a maximum of 4060ths.
The scheme has a normal retirement age of 65.
Sir David has now passed the age of 65 but is not drawing a pension from it.
Instead his pension entitlement is accumulating by a figure determined according to advice and calculations provided by the schemes actuaries.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 80 Governance  Directors remuneration report More specific detail of the retirement benefits is provided below
Transfer value of increase
Accrued pension
Accrued pension
Accrued pension
Directors benefits Sir David Howard   171 162 3116 3495 379 The accrued pension entitlement shown is that which would have been paid annually on retirement based upon pensionable service to the end of the financial year or date of leaving the pension scheme if earlier excluding any future statutory entitlement to increases prior to retirement which would be due after the financial yearend.
Sir David Howard is over his normal retirement date.
The increase in his accrued pension entitlement over the period is due to the application of late retirement factors.
The reduced cash equivalent transfer value of his deferred pension benefits as at 31 March 2017 was due to the application of the Trustees current transfer value assumption setting process which was updated in September 2016 to the financial market conditions at the yearend.
Share awards Save As You Earn In 2017 the Company operated three Save As You Earn schemes which were open to all employees and Executive Directors once they met the necessary service requirements.
Options were offered at a discount of 15% to the average of the midmarket closing price for the three days prior to the offer and are exercisable for a period of six months commencing three years after the saving contract commencement date.
In common with similar schemes the exercise of options under this scheme is not subject to any performance conditions.
As at 31 March 2017 the following Directors held interests under the Save As You Earn schemes Number of options granted Savings term Options exercisable between Price at grant Exercise price Gary Teper 1500 3 years 1 February 2020 and 31 July telBen MoneyCoutts 1site 81 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Performance Share Plan The third grant of awards under the plan were made on 18 July 2016 for all Executive Directors.
The threeyear performance period for these awards will be measured following the year ended 31 March 2019.
Date of grant Share price on grant As at 31 March 2016 Granted As at 31 March 2017 Exercise period Paul Abberley 9 January 2015 328 91463  91463 January 2018 to January 2021 10 July 2015 375 65000  65000 July 2018 to July 2021 18 July 2016 285  72115 721 15 July 2019 to July 2022 Total 156463 72115 228578 Michael Lilwall 9 January 2015 328 41723  41723 January 2018 to January 2021 10 July 2015 375 30000  30000 July 2018 to July 2021 Total 71723  71723 Ben MoneyCoutts 9 January 2015 328 34299  34299 March 2018 to March 2021 10 July 2015 375 45000  45000 July 2018 to July 2021 18 July 2016 285  50481 50481 July 2019 to July 2022 Total 79299 50481 129780 Anthony Scott 9 January 2015 328 32774  32774 January 2018 to January 2021 10 July 2015 375 38000  38000 July 2018 to July 2021 Total 70774  70774 Gary Teper 9 January 2015 328 35061  35061 January 2018 to January 2021 10 July 2015 375 30000  30000 July 2018 to July 2021 18 July 2016 285  51603 51603 July 2019 to July 2022 Total 65061 51603 116664 The awards granted to the Directors on 9 January 2015 vested on 31 March 2017.
These awards did not meet the minimum performance conditions measured both on an EPS and margin basis.
Accordingly the entire share awards will lapse in the 2018 financial year.
The remaining awards are all unvested.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 the highest midmarket price of the Companys shares was 328.0p on 22 September 2016 and the lowest midmarket price was 251.38p on 4 November 2016.
At 31 March 2017 the share price was 310.0p.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 82 Governance  Directors remuneration report Performance Share Plan performance conditions The tables below set out a summary of the PSP structure and details of the PSP performance measures and conditions.
Performance Share Plan structure summary 2015 to 2017 Performance measures EPS and margin Performance period 3 years Weighting of performance measures 50% EPS Adjusted EPS as measured in third financial year following grant For both the EPS and margin targets the profit figure used will be the Groups reported profit adding back the FSCS or similar levy and in exceptional circumstances adjusted for any other items that the Committee believes are required to ensure that the Groups true underlying financial performance is being measured.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance PSP performance conditions 2015 to 2017 Grant January 2015 July 2015 July 2016 July 2017 Measurement financial year 31 March 2017 31 March 2018 31 March 2019 31 March 2020 EPS 0% vesting threshold Below 19.1p Below 20p Below 20p Below 30p EPS 20% vesting threshold EPS 100% vesting threshold Performance Below 19.1p Element percentage vesting 0% Margin 0% vesting threshold Below 8% Below 10% Below 10% Below 12% Margin 20% vesting threshold 8% 10% 10% 12% Margin 100% vesting threshold 12% 15% 15% 16% Performance Below 8% Element percentage vesting 0% Total percentage vesting 0% The targets were set as annual growth targets with a required growth range of 15%25% per annum.
In order to be consistent with subsequent grants these have now been expressed as the absolute targets.
In cases where the measurement thresholds are between 20% and 100% the vesting of the awards is calculated prorata on a straightline basis.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make appropriate adjustments to some degree with respect to the charge incurred in connection with the share awards made to employed investment managers under the new remuneration arrangements.
The Remuneration Committee will determine all performance condition calculations and specifically has power to adjust the performance conditions to take account of certain circumstances or events.
The minimum performance thresholds for the January 2015 PSP awards have not been met and therefore these awards will lapse in full.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 84 Governance  Directors remuneration report Directors interests As explained in the Directors remuneration policy the Executive Directors are subject to Share Ownership Guidelines and they are required to retain 50% of shares net of tax which vest under the PSP or bonus deferral arrangement until such time as they hold shares worth 100% of salary.
There is no requirement for Nonexecutive Directors to hold shares in the
The shareholdings of each Director together with whether they would have achieved the guideline requirements by 31 March 2017 only including shares beneficially owned that is excluding unvested share awards and shares otherwise held are as follows Beneficially held as at 31 March 2016 or appointment if earlier Beneficially held as at 31 March 2017 or retirement if earlier Share Ownership Guidelines satisfied Paul Abberley 19698 20333 No Andrew Didham   na Bridget Guerin   na Sir David Howard 12810219 12810219 na Ben MoneyCoutts 5732 6373 No David Pusinelli   na Gary Teper 41727 42436 No Each of the Executive Directors acquired 136 additional shares after 31 March 2017.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Payments to former Directors As disclosed in last years Directors remuneration report Anthony Scott resigned as a Director on 18 April 2016 and continued in the Companys employment until 15 October 2016.
The following approach was adopted in relation to Anthony Scotts departure Anthony received salary pension and benefits totalling 174680 until his departure date of 15 October 2016 at which point all such payments ceased Anthony also received the last payment under a legacy profit sharing arrangement relating to his previous role as an active investment manager prior to joining the Board Anthony has not received a bonus under the 2017 Annual Bonus Anthony was provided with outplacement support to the value of 5600 The PSP awards held by Anthony will vest on a prorated basis on the normal vesting dates based on performance against the EPS and margin targets.
Mike Lilwall decided to step down from the Board on 23 November 2016.
He remains an employee of the Group and received no compensation for loss of office.
However as per the treatment agreed for Executive Directors who are deemed good leavers he was awarded 35000 gross being the prorated bonus sum this is to be paid in June 2017.
The Directors are not permitted to hold their shares in hedging arrangements or as collateral for loans without the express permission of the Board.
No Director has entered into any such arrangements.
Approval
This report in its entirety has been approved by the Committee and the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Bridget Guerin Remuneration Committee Chair 13 June 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 86 Governance  Risk Committee report Risk Committee report Andrew Didham Chairman of the Risk Committee The Group has continued to make progress in enhancing the way risks are managed across the organisation with a revised governance structure and further enhancements to the Groups risk management framework and processes.
As part of the renewal of the strategy and modernisation of business practices the Group is committed to embedding a culture of risk awareness into its processes and DNA.
The Committees register of attendance is set out below.
Number of meetings
Andrew Didham 5 5 Bridget Guerin 5 5 David Pusinelli 5 4 Risk Committee membership The Risk Committee is composed of three independent Nonexecutive Directors Bridget Guerin David Pusinelli and Andrew Didham who was appointed a member of the Committee on 18 September 2015 and assumed the role of Risk Committee Chairman at the start of 2016.
Details of the Directors skills and experience can be found on page The meetings are also attended by the Chief Risk Officer the Chief Executive Officer external audit and other members of the Management team as necessary.
Role and responsibilities of the Committee The Board Risk Committee is responsible for ensuring an effective internal control and risk management environment is maintained in respect of the risks impacting the organisation and advising the Boards of Charles Stanley Group PLC CSG and Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited CSC on related risk matters.
The key responsibilities are prescribed in its terms of reference which are reviewed annually and include Providing advice to the Board on the Groups risk appetite tolerance levels and strategy Overseeing and advising the Board on the current risk exposure and emerging risks which could impact on the Groups risk profile Reviewing the Group risk management framework and internal control environment to ensure it is adequate and effective Reviewing the ICAAP Reviewing compliancerelated Group procedures.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Committee activities over the past year Over the course of the year the Committee has undertaken a number of key activities Reviewed and approved risk and compliancerelated policies Reviewed and approved the risk framework including the risk governance structure Reviewed and approved the annual Risk and Compliance plans Reviewed the ICAAP for recommendation to the CSC and CSG Boards Considered the risks arising from the Strategic Plan and associated corporate objectives and the processes in place to manage them Received updates on a number of matters including the Groups cyber security strategy the CASS monitoring programme the activities of the Enterprise Risk and Compliance Committees the regulatory environment and actions taken to ensure the firm meets the requirements.
Risk management framework The Group has undertaken a review of its risk framework to ensure a consistent and effective approach to risk management across the Group.
The key components of the framework are outlined below and we will continue to strengthen the framework and embed it in the fabric of the organisation over the coming year.
Risk governance and culture The arrangement of the Board and the Board committees has been considered as part of the governance review mentioned earlier.
This review has resulted in revisions to the Board and Committee arrangements including the respective responsibilities of the various committees which oversee the different types of risks.
The Board committees are as follows Executive Committee Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Risk Committee.
The Executive Committee is responsible for the daytoday running of the business and is supported by a number of control committees  the Enterprise Risk Committee the Conduct and Culture Committee and the Product and Services Committee  which have contributed to continued enhancements to the Groups risk oversight arrangements.
Charles Stanley has implemented a three lines of defence model to manage risk and provide assurance to Management and the Board with regards to the effectiveness of the Groups control environment Level 1  Business line Management and staff are responsible for the identification ownership and management of risk on a daytoday basis Level 2  The Risk function is responsible for the implementation and oversight of the framework reporting to the Board and Grouplevel Committees and for overseeing and challenging the management of risk.
The Compliance function is responsible for the oversight of regulatory compliance Level 3  Internal Audit provides independent assurance that risks are effectively managed and that there is appropriate oversight.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 88 Governance  Risk Committee report Risk strategy and business plans The Group Chief Risk Officer provides input in the setting and ongoing review of the Groups strategy and business plan.
This includes reporting on the key risks and threats to the strategy and plan as well as the impact on the Group risk profile and appetite.
Future plans to improve the risk and control arrangements and to embed them across the business are defined in the Risk and Compliance annual plans which are approved by the Risk Committee.
Risk appetite The Risk Appetite Statement which is reviewed at least annually by the Board sets out the Groups attitude to risk and the ranges and limits of acceptable risktaking based on the Groups strategy and objectives.
Risk policies The risk policies define the Groups approach to monitoring and controlling risk so as to ensure it is only exposed to risks that are within the Boards risk appetite.
There are two layers to the risk policies The Group Risk Policy  sets out the overarching policy in relation to risk management and the risk governance framework for the Group Group Level Risk Policies  set out the risk management strategy and framework for the management and oversight of specific risk types.
Risk identification and assessment All staff are responsible for identifying and assessing the risks in their respective areas.
There are a number of tools available to aid them in this task including risk event reporting deep dive business reviews and scenario workshops as well as raising issues with the Risk team.
Risk management monitoring and reporting The business and support functions are responsible for managing the risks within their areas as well as developing management information to monitor their exposure to those risks.
The Risk function consolidates management information received from across the Group into reports for the Enterprise Risk Committee the Board Risk Committee and the Charles Stanley Group Board.
Audit findings concerning the risk arrangements are reviewed regularly at the Enterprise Risk Committee which leads to continuous improvements to the Groups control environment.
Risk and capital management The approach to calculating a riskbased capital requirement for the different types of risks that the Group may be exposed to is defined within the Groups ICAAP.
The financial year ended 31 March 2017 has seen considerable progress in putting in place the building blocks for the continued strength of the Charles Stanley risk and governance arrangements.
In the upcoming financial year these will continue to be developed in line with our annual risk strategy and plan.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance Julie Ung Company Secretary The Directors submit their report and financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Principal activities and business review The Company and its Group undertakings provide wealth management services.
The Company is a public limited company listed on the London Stock Exchange.
A review of the business is set out in the Strategic report on pages 4 to 45 which is incorporated by reference into this report.
Post yearend events On 11 April 2017 the Company announced that it had exchanged contracts for the sale of its whollyowned subsidiary EBS Management PLC to Embark Group Limited for up to 4.0 million.
The sale transaction completed on 31 May 2017.
Directors report
The Directors have declared and now recommend the following dividends in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017 Interim dividend paid on 20 January 2017 of 1.5p 2016 1.5p 760 758 Final dividend proposed of 4.5p 2016 3.5p 2281 1774 3041 2532 The final dividend proposed by the Directors will be subject to shareholders approval at the Annual General Meeting on 27 July 2017.
Once approved this will be paid on 31 July 2017 to shareholders on the Companys register at close of business on 30 June 2017.
Change of control The Company does not have agreements with any Director or Officer that would provide compensation for loss of office or employment resulting from a change of control following a takeover bid except that the provisions of the Companys share plans may cause options and awards granted under such schemes to vest on a takeover.
All of the Companys share schemes contain provisions relating to a change of control.
Outstanding options and awards would normally vest and become exercisable for a limited period of time upon change of control following a takeover reconstruction or winding up of the Company not being an internal reorganisation subject to scheme rules including the satisfaction of any performance conditions.
Share capital As at 31 March 2017 50689206 fully paid ordinary shares of 25 pence each were in issue and listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The rights and obligations attaching to the Companys ordinary shares are as follows In terms of voting every member who is present in person or by proxy at a general meeting of the Company should have one vote on a show of hands and one vote for every share held on a poll All shares in issue on the record date rank pari passu for dividends.
Shareholders are entitled to receive dividends following declaration by the Company Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 90 Governance  Directors report Employees are restricted from any transfer of shares of the Company that would result in a change in beneficial holding during the period between the end of the Groups financial yearend each year and the date on which the Group announces its preliminary financial results.
This restriction also applies during the period between the end of the Groups financial halfyear and the announcement of the Groups halfyear results.
Further restrictions may apply under the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules DTR of the FCA in respect of certain employees There are no restrictions on the voting rights attached to the Companys ordinary shares or on the transfer of securities in the Company No person holds securities in the Company carrying special rights with regard to control of the Company.
Insurance and indemnity The Company maintains appropriate insurance cover in respect of litigation against Directors and Officers.
In 2015 the Company granted indemnities to all of its Directors and one director of an associated company on terms consistent with the applicable statutory provisions.
Qualifying third party indemnity provisions for the purposes of section 234 of the Companies Act 2006 were accordingly in force throughout the financial year and remain so at the date of this report.
Controlling shareholder Sir David Howard his family and connected interests are deemed to be a controlling shareholder under the Listing Rules LR 6.1.2A.
The Board confirms that the Company has entered into a Relationship Agreement as required by LR 9.2.2AR 2a the Agreement the Company has complied with the independence provisions included in the Agreement during the period under review ii so far as the Company is aware the independence provisions included in the Agreement have been complied with during the period under review by the controlling shareholder andor any of its associates iii so far as the Company is aware the procurement obligation included in the Agreement has been complied with during the period under review by the controlling shareholder.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
Each of the Companys Executive Directors has options as detailed in the Directors remuneration report on page 62.
With regard to the appointment and replacement of Directors the Company is governed by its Articles of Association the UK Corporate Governance Code the Companies Act 2006 and related legislation.
The Companys Articles of Association may be amended by a special resolution of the Companys shareholders.
Copies of the Articles of Association can be obtained from Companies House or by writing to the Company Secretary.
The Directors propose to renew the authority granted to them at the Annual General Meeting held in 2016 to allot equity securities up to an aggregate nominal value of 4226934 the section 551 authority.
If approved at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting the authority will expire no later than 15 months from the date on which the resolution is passed or at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting to be held in 2018 whichever is the earlier.
The Directors recommend that you vote in favour of maintaining the Companys flexibility in relation to future share issues.
Directors
The Directors of the Company at the yearend were Sir David Howard Chairman Andrew Didham Bridget Guerin and David Pusinelli Nonexecutive Directors and Paul Abberley Ben MoneyCoutts and Gary Teper Executive Directors.
Their biographies are set out on page 48 to 51.
Anthony Scott and Michael Lilwall stood down from the Board on 18 April 2016 and 23 November 2016 respectively.
David Pusinelli has decided not to offer himself for reelection as a Nonexecutive Director at the forthcoming AGM.
The rest of the Directors have agreed to voluntarily retire from the Board at the Annual General Meeting and being eligible will offer themselves for reelection by the members.
All Directors have received continuing professional development training during the year regarding matters pertaining to their roles and responsibilities as Directors.
The content of such training is kept under constant review responding to changing needs as they are identified.
Directors interests in the shares of Charles Stanley Group PLC are disclosed in the Directors remuneration report on page 84.
Financial statements Strategic report Governance From 1 October 2008 a Director has had a statutory duty to avoid a situation in which he or she has or can have an interest that conflicts or possibly may conflict with the interests of the Company.
A Director will not be in breach of that duty if the relevant matter has been authorised in accordance with the Articles of Association by the other
The Articles of Association include the relevant authorisation for Directors to approve such conflicts.
The Directors confirm that there are procedures in place to deal with Directors conflicts and they have operated effectively through the year.
None of the Directors had either during or at the end of the year any material interest in any contract of significance with the Company or its subsidiaries.
Taxation status As far as the Directors are aware the Company is not a close company for taxation purposes.
Political donations and expenditure There were no political donations or expenditure by any Group company 2016 nil.
Report on greenhouse gas emissions Details of the Groups emissions are contained in the Corporate social responsibility report on page 40.
Major shareholdings Disclosures made to the Company under rule 5 of the FCAs DTR are set out below
31 March 2017 % of total voting rights Sir David Howard 10707719 21.12 John L S Howard 4710515 9.29 Aberforth Partners LLP 2608402 5.15 J O Hambro Capital Management 2273787 4.49 Queen Street Securities a company of which Sir David Howard is a Director 2102500 4.15 The Wellcome Trust Limited 1617700 3.19 Blackrock Inc.
2422982 4.78
So far as each of the Directors is aware there is no relevant information that has not been disclosed to the Companys auditors and each of the Directors believes that all steps have been taken that ought to have been taken to make them aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors have been made aware of that information.
Corporate governance statement Rule DTR 7.2.1 requires the Groups disclosures on corporate governance to be included in the Directors report.
This information is presented on page 52 and the information in that section is incorporated by reference into this Directors report and is deemed to form part of this report.
By order of the Board Julie Ung Company Secretary 13 June 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 92 The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual report and the Group and Parent Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and Regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Parent Company financial statements for each financial year.
Under the law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the Parent Company financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Parent Company financial statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and appropriate State whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Parent Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Parent Company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and Regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic report Directors report Directors remuneration report and Corporate governance report that comply with that law and those Regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Each of the Directors whose names and responsibilities are listed in the Corporate governance report confirm that to the best of their knowledge The Group and Parent Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole The annual report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy The Strategic report and financial statements include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
By order of the Board Julie Ung Company Secretary 13 June 2017 Directors responsibilities Governance  Directorssite 93 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Independent auditors report to the members of Charles Stanley Group PLC only Opinions and conclusions arising from our audit Our opinion on the financial statements is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Charles Stanley Group PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017 set out on pages 99 to 154.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Overview
Materiality
Group financial statements as a whole 0.65m 2016 0.7m 0.5% 2016 0.5% of gross Group revenue Coverage 100% 2016 100% of Group profit before tax Risks of material misstatement vs 2016 Recurring risks Carrying amount of goodwill Valuation of actuarial liability Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 94 Our assessment of risks of material misstatement In arriving at our audit opinion above on the financial statements the risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows The risk Our response Recoverability of goodwill 14.1 million 2016 16.0 million Refer to page 58 Audit Committee report page 108 accounting policy and pages 127 to 128 financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation The consolidated statement of financial position includes a significant goodwill balance.
The carrying amount of goodwill could be materially misstated if inappropriate judgements and estimates were used by the Directors in calculating the recoverable amount for each CGU as part of their impairment assessment.
The Charles Stanley Direct CGU represents the most significant singular element of the goodwill balance while goodwill associated with different investment management teams accounts for the majority of the remaining balance.
The Directors have considered the carrying amount of the goodwill of 5.2 million allocated to the Charles Stanley Direct CGU by calculating fair value less costs to sell based on the recent market transactions involving similar businesses and by applying industryspecific valuation techniques.
Charles Stanley Direct is a young business and the inputs to the valuation model are inherently judgemental.
Accordingly there is an increased risk that there could be a material difference between the goodwill carrying value and the fair value.
Our procedures included Benchmarking assumptions Comparing the Groups assumptions to externallyderived data in relation to key inputs such as details of market transactions and ratios of FuM Sensitivity analysis Performing stress testing on the assumptions noted above Comparing valuations Charles Stanley Direct Comparing the sum of the discounted cash flows to the fair value less costs to sell to assess the reasonableness of the carrying amount of the goodwill Assessing transparency Assessing whether the Groups disclosures about the outcome of the impairment assessment to changes in key assumptions reflected the risks inherent in the valuation of goodwill.
Valuation of actuarial liability 32.2 million 2016 36.7 million Refer to page 59 Audit Committee report page 107 accounting policy and pages 121 to 125 financial disclosures.
Subjective estimate Significant estimates are made in determining the Groups defined benefit scheme actuarial valuation and changes in assumptions and estimates used to value the Groups actuarial liability can have a significant effect on the results and financial position of the Group.
Any changes in the obligation of the scheme to its members may also materially impact the amount of the defined benefit scheme liability and therefore the net deficit of the scheme to be recognised on the Group balance sheet.
Our procedures included Benchmarking assumptions Challenging with the support of our own actuarial specialists the key assumptions applied being the discount rate inflation rate and mortalitylife expectancy Assessing transparency Considering the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in respect of the sensitivity of the deficit to these assumptions.
Governance
Independent auditorsite 95 Financial statements Strategic report Governance In the prior year we included within our audit report that we performed procedures over the accrual of transition bonuses which formed part of the Groups remuneration arrangements with its front office investment management professionals.
As part of a transition to revised remuneration and feesharing arrangements it had been agreed with certain investment professionals that feesharing arrangements for the year ended 31 March 2016 would be amended.
The calculation of this oneoff transitional arrangement could have had a significant effect on the results and financial position of the Group for the year ended 31 March 2016.
However as this risk was concerned about the calculation of a oneoff transitional arrangement only for that year it is not one of the risks that had the greatest effect on our audit for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 650000 2016 700000 determined with reference to a benchmark of Group revenue of which it represents approximately 0.5% 2016 0.5%.
As the Group has returned to a profit position we retained our planning materiality at yearend to take account of the overall Group results.
We consider Group revenue to be a more appropriate benchmark as the Group incurred losses in the prior year and revenue is the principal consideration of members of the Company in assessing the financial performance of the Group.
We reported to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 32500 2016 35000 in addition to other audit misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
The Group audit team performed the audit of the Group as if it was a single aggregated set of financial information.
The audit was performed using the materiality levels set out above covered 100% of total Group revenue Group profit before taxation and total Group assets and was all performed at the Groups head office in London.
Total revenue 142.0m 2016 139.0m
650000 2016 700000 Whole financial statements materiality 2016 70000 Total revenue Group materiality Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 35000 Range of materiality at 2 Group subsidiaries 31000 to 645000 2016 35000 to 700000 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 96 Our opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 is unmodified In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the information given in the Strategic report and the Directors report for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements.
Based solely on the work required to be undertaken in the course of the audit of the financial statements and from reading the Strategic report and the Directors report we have not identified material misstatements in those reports in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 in our opinion the Corporate Governance Statement has been prepared in accordance with rules 7.2.2 7.2.3 7.2.5 7.2.6 and 7.2.7 of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority.
We have nothing to report on the disclosures of principal risks Based on the knowledge we acquired during our audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors statement of longerterm viability on page 34 and 35 concerning the principal risks their management and based on that the Directors assessment and expectations of the Companys continuing in operation over the three years to 31 March 2020 or the disclosures in note 2.6 of the financial statements concerning the use of the going concern basis of accounting.
We have nothing to report in respect of the matters on which we are required to report by exception Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if based on the knowledge we acquired during our audit we have identified other information in the Annual report that contains a material inconsistency with either that knowledge or the financial statements a material misstatement of fact or that is otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our audit and the Directors statement that they consider that the Annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the Audit Committee report does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the financial statements and the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or a Corporate Governance Statement has not been prepared by the Company.
Under the Listing rules we are required to review the Directors statements set out on pages 34 and 35 in relation to going concern and longerterm viability the part of the Corporate governance statement on page 52 relating to the Groups compliance with the 11 provisions of the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review.
We have nothing to report in respect of the above responsibilities.
Governance
Independent auditorsite 97 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Scope of report and responsibilities As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement set out on page 92 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. auditscopeukprivate.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body and is subject to important explanations and disclaimers regarding our responsibilities published on our website at site auditscopeukco2014a which are incorporated into this report as if set out in full and should be read to provide an understanding of the purpose of this report the work we have undertaken and the basis of our opinions.
Simon Ryder Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL 13 June 2017 The Groups consolidated financial statements and the Parent Company financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS are set out in the following pages.
Financial statements Financial statements
99 Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Consolidated statement of financial position Consolidated statement of changes in equity Consolidated statement of cash flows Notes to the financial statements Parent Company financial statements Notes to the Parent Company financial statements
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Consolidated income statement Year ended 31 March 2017 Continuing operations Notes Revenue 4 141630 138650 Administrative expenses 4 136122 139163 Impairment of intangible assets 4 650 465 Other income 6 186 153 Operating profitloss 7 5044 825 Gain on surrender of lease 15 5550 Loss on disposal of fixed assets 15 2199 131 Gain on sale of business 148 299 Gain on sale of corporate investments 423 Impairment of corporate loans 18 500 Finance income 8 397 69 Finance costs 8 64 99 Net finance and other nonoperating income 3755 138 Profitloss before tax 8799 687 Tax expensecredit 12 2539 47 Profitloss from continuing operations 6260 640 Discontinued operations Profit from discontinued operations 5  333 Profitloss for the year attributable to owners of the Parent Company 6260 307 Earnings per share From continuing and discontinued operations Basic 9 12.35p 0.61p Diluted 9 12.34p 0.61p From continuing operations Basic 9 12.35p 1.27p Diluted 9 12.34p 1.27p The notes on pages 105 to 145 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 100
Profitloss for the year 6260 307 Other comprehensive income Items that will never be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement of the defined benefit plan obligation 11 1093 2515 Related tax 81 753 1012 1762 Items that are or may be reclassified to profit or loss Availableforsale financial assets  net change in fair value 17 737 183 Availableforsale financial assets  reclassified to profit or Related tax 16 195 90 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 300 1722 Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to owners of the Parent Company 5960 1415 The notes on pages 105 to 145 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Year ended 31 March 2017 Financial statements site 101 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Assets Notes Intangible assets 14 21220 25400 Property plant and equipment 15 9976 10732 Net deferred tax asset 16 1878 2042 Availableforsale financial assets 17 5626 6969 Trade and other receivables 18  250 Noncurrent assets 38700 45393 Trade and other receivables 18 144673 146364 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 19 73 72 Current tax assets  118 Availableforsale financial assets 17 2450 Assets held for sale 13 8965 1722 Cash and cash equivalents 20 52101 48095 Current assets 208262 196371 Total assets 246962 241764
Share capital 21 12672 12669 Share premium 21 4429 4402 Revaluation reserve 3378 2666 Merger relief reserve 21 15167 15167 Retained earnings 53424 50461 Equity attributable to owners of the Parent Company 89070 85365 Noncontrolling interests 24 24 Total equity 89094 85389
Employee benefits 11 10528 10090 Provisions 22 1108 Noncurrent liabilities 11636 10090 Trade and other payables 23 141509 141883 Current tax liabilities 994 Provisions 22 2162 4367 Liabilities held for sale 13 1567 35 Current liabilities 146232 146285 Total liabilities 157868 156375 Total equity and liabilities 246962 241764 Approved by the Board on 13 June 2017 and signed on its behalf by Paul Abberley Director Ben MoneyCoutts Director The notes on pages 105 to 145 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of financial position As at 31 March 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 102 Consolidated statement of changes in equity Year ended 31 March 2017
Share premium
Merger relief reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
1 April 2016 12669 4402 2666 15167 50461 85365 24 85389 Profit for the year     6260 6260  6260 Other comprehensive income Revaluation of availablefor sale financial assets net profit from change in fair values   737   737  737 net profit on disposal transferred to profit or loss   170   170  170 Deferred tax on availablefor sale financial assets   195   195  195 Remeasurement of defined benefit plan liability actuarial loss in the year     1093 1093  1093 deferred tax movement on plan liability     20 20  20 current tax relief     101 101  101 Total other comprehensive income for the year   712  1012 300  300 Total comprehensive income for the year   712  5248 5960  5960 Dividends paid     2534 2534  2534 Sharebased payments value of employee services     249 249  249 issue of shares 3 27    30  30 31 March 2017 12672 4429 3378 15167 53424 89070 24 89094 The notes on pages 105 to 145 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Financial statements site 103 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Share premium
Merger relief reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
1 April 2015 11490 4139 2706  50559 68894 24 68918 Loss for the year     307 307  307 Other comprehensive income Revaluation of availablefor sale financial assets net loss from change in fair values   183   183  183 net profit on disposal transferred to profit or loss   53   53  53 Deferred tax on availablefor sale financial assets   90   90  90 Remeasurement of defined benefit plan liability actuarial gain in the year     2515 2515  2515 deferred tax movement on plan liability     753 753  753 Total other comprehensive income for the year   40  1762 1722  1722 Total comprehensive income for the year   40  1455 1415  1415 Dividends paid     1754 1754  1754 Sharebased payments value of employee services     201 201  201 issue of shares 30 263    293  293 Issues of ordinary shares 1149   15167  16316  16316 31 March 2016 12669 4402 2666 15167 50461 85365 24 85389 The notes on pages 105 to 145 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 104 Consolidated statement of cash flows Year ended 31 March 2017
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operating activities 27 10688 8666 Interest received 195 136 Interest paid 63 36 Tax paid 1367 453 Net cash from operating activities 9453 8313 Cash flows from investing activities Proceeds from surrender of lease 15 5550 Acquisition of intangible assets 14 1089 2545 Purchase of property plant and equipment 2562 479 Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment  7 Purchase of availableforsale financial assets 17 1842 327 Proceeds from sale of availableforsale financial assets 1642 223 Net proceeds from disposal of business 1180 1623 Dividends received 186 152 Net cash generated fromused in investing activities 3065 1346 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of ordinary share capital 21 30 16316 Purchase of ordinary shares for employee share schemes 21  294 Repayment of borrowings  1974 Dividends paid 21 2534 1754 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 2504 12882 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 10014 19849 Cash and cash equivalents at start of year 48415 28566 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 58429 48415 Cash and cash equivalents shown in current assets 20 52101 48095 Cash classified as assets held for sale 13 6328 320 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 58429 48415 The Group has elected to present a consolidated statement of cash flows that analyses total cash flows including both continuing and discontinued operations.
Amounts relating to discontinued operations are disclosed in note 5.
The notes on pages 105 to 145 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Financial statements site 105 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Notes to the financial statements Year ended 31 March 2017 General information Charles Stanley Group PLC the Company is the Parent Company of the Charles Stanley group of companies the Group.
The principal activities of the Group are set out in the Directors report.
The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is domiciled in the United
The Company is registered in England and Wales.
The address of its registered office is 55 Bishopsgate London UK EC2N 3AS.
Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies The principal accounting policies applied in the presentation of these financial statements are set out below.
The policies have been consistently applied to all years presented unless otherwise stated.
2.1 Basis of preparation The consolidated financial statements and the Parent Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union and the Companies Act 2006.
As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 no profit and loss account is presented for the Parent Company.
The notes and information for the Parent Company are presented on pages 146 to 153.
2.2 Functional and presentation currency The Group and Parent Company financial statements are presented in GBP which is the Groups functional currency.
All amounts have been rounded to the nearest thousand unless otherwise indicated.
2.3 Comparative figures Certain comparative figures have been amended to reflect presentational changes in the current year financial statements.
These changes have had no impact on prior year reported earnings or net assets.
2.4 Basis of measurement The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for the following items which are measured on an alternative basis at each reporting date Item Measurement basis Freehold premises Revalued amount Availableforsale financial assets Fair value Assets and liabilities held for sale Lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell Nonderivative financial instruments held at fair value through profit or loss Fair value Liabilities for sharebased payment arrangements Fair value Net defined benefit asset or liability Fair value of plan assets less the present value of the defined benefit obligation 2.5 Basis of consolidation Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Group has the power to govern the financial and operating policies generally accompanying a shareholding of more than one half of the voting rights.
The existence and effect of potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are considered when assessing whether the Group controls another entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 106 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued The purchase method of accounting is used to account for the acquisition of subsidiaries by the Group.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the fair value of the assets acquired equity instruments issued and liabilities assumed at the date of exchange.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date irrespective of the extent of any minority interest.
The excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Any gain on a bargain purchase is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains or losses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed where necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
2.6 Going concern These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Directors assessed the going concern of the Group in light of its current trading performance.
The Directors looked at the forecasts covering the 18month period from 31 March 2017 to 30 September 2018 and applied stress tests for adverse scenarios which were determined as part of the Groups ICAAP.
As a result it was determined that the Group has sufficient liquidity to cover all anticipated payments during that period.
The Directors also considered the regulatory capital of the Group and determined that based on the latest approved forecasts the Group will have sufficient regulatory capital for the same 18month period.
At the time of approving the financial statements the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
2.7 Foreign currency translation Foreign currency transactions are translated into GBP using the exchange rates prevailing on the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement.
2.8 Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker.
The chief operating decisionmaker who is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the Board of the Parent Company.
Segment results that are reported to the chief operating decisionmaker include items directly attributable to a segment as well as those that can be allocated on a reasonable basis.
2.9 Discontinued operations A discontinued operation is a component of the Groups business the operations and cash flows of which can be clearly distinguished from the rest of the Group and which Represents a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations Is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations or Is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Classification as a discontinued operation occurs at the earlier of disposal or when the operation meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale.
When an operation is classified as a discontinued operation the comparative statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income is represented as if the operation had been discontinued from the start of the comparative year.
2.10 Revenue recognition Revenue comprises the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for the provision of services in the ordinary course of the Groups activities.
Revenue is shown net of VAT rebates and discounts and after eliminating sales within the Group.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued The Group recognises revenue when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity and when specific criteria have been met for each of the Groups activities as described below.
The Group bases its estimates on historical results taking into consideration the type of customer the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrangement.
2.10.1 Commission Commission income and expenses are recognised on a trade date basis.
2.10.2 Fees Investment management administration and corporate finance retainer fees are recognised evenly over the period in which the service is provided.
Corporate finance success fees are recognised when earned.
2.10.3 Dividend income Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established.
2.10.4 Interest income Interest income is recognised using the effective interest method.
2.11 Sharebased payments The Group operates various equitysettled sharebased payments schemes under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for equity instruments of the Group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the share options or share awards is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the grant date fair value of the share options or share awards granted Including market performance conditions Excluding the impact of any service and nonmarket performance vesting conditions such as profitability targets sales growth targets or remaining an employee of the entity over a specified time period Including the impact of any nonvesting conditions such as the requirement for employees to save.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of share options or share awards that are ultimately expected to vest.
The total employee expense is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all of the specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied.
At the end of each reporting period the entity revises its estimates of the number of share options or share awards that are expected to vest based on the nonmarket vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of any revision to original estimates in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
When the share options are exercised or share awards made the Parent Company issues new ordinary shares.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium.
2.12 Employee benefits 2.12.1 Pension obligations The Group operates two pension schemes  a defined benefit and a defined contribution scheme.
The defined benefit scheme defines an amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on retirement usually dependent on one or more factors such as age years of service and compensation.
The defined contribution scheme is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions to a separate entity.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient assets to pay employees the benefits relating to employee service in the current and prior periods.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 108 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued The net charge to the income statement in respect of the defined benefit scheme mainly comprises the service cost and the net interest on the net defined benefit asset or liability and is presented in operating expenses.
The liability recognised in the statement of financial position in respect of the defined benefit plan is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the reporting period less the fair value of plan assets.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of AA creditrated corporate bonds that have terms of maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension liability.
Remeasurements of the defined benefit obligation arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
Past service costs are recognised immediately in the income statement.
2.12.2 Shortterm employee benefits Shortterm employee benefit obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the related service is provided.
Payments made in advance of services being provided are treated as prepayments.
2.13 Current and deferred income tax The tax expense for the period comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or in equity.
In this case the associated tax is recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity respectively.
The current income tax charge is calculated on the basis of the tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date in the UK.
Deferred income tax is recognised using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
However the deferred income tax is not accounted for if it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
Deferred income tax is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or the deferred income tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax is not provided on temporary timing differences arising on goodwill as the temporary timing difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
2.14 Noncurrent assets held for sale Noncurrent assets held for sale are classified as assets held for sale when their carrying amount is to be recovered principally through a sale transaction and a sale is considered highly probable.
Noncurrent assets held for sale are stated at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
2.15 Intangible assets 2.15.1 Goodwill Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the net identifiable assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill arising on acquisition of subsidiaries is included under intangible assets and goodwill.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the end of each reporting period and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Impairment losses on goodwill are not reversed.
Gains and losses on disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued Goodwill is allocated to CGUs for the purpose of impairment testing.
The allocation is made to those CGUs or groups of CGUs that are expected to benefit from the business combination in which the goodwill arose identified according to operating segment.
2.15.2 Customer relationships Customer relationships acquired in a business combination are recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Customer relationships acquired outside of a business combination are initially recognised at cost.
The customer relationships have a finite useful life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated using the straightline method over their useful lives estimated at ten years.
2.15.3 Internally generated software Computer software which is not an integral part of the related hardware or has been developed internally by the Group is recognised as an intangible asset when the Group is expected to benefit from future use of the software and the costs are reliably measurable.
Computer software costs recognised as assets are amortised using the straightline method over their useful lives three years.
2.16 Property plant and equipment Freehold premises are measured at fair value based on periodic valuations by external independent valuers less subsequent depreciation for buildings.
Any accumulated depreciation at the date of revaluation is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the asset and the net amount is restated to the revalued amount of the asset.
All other property plant and equipment are stated at historical cost less depreciation.
Historical cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the asset will flow to the Group and the cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
The carrying amount of a replaced part is derecognised.
All other repairs and maintenance costs are charged to the income statement during the financial period in which they are incurred.
Increases in the carrying amount arising on revaluation of freehold premises are credited to other reserves in shareholders equity.
Decreases that offset previous increases of the same asset are charged against other reserves directly in equity all other decreases are charged to the income statement.
Land is not depreciated.
Depreciation on other assets is calculated using the straightline method to allocate their cost or revalued amounts to their residual values over their estimated useful lives as follows Freehold and leasehold properties 3 to 50 years Vehicles 3 years Furniture fittings and equipment 3 to 10 years The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
An assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised in the income statement.
When revalued assets are sold any revaluation amounts included in other reserves are transferred to retained earnings.
2.17 Financial instruments The Group classifies nonderivative financial assets into the following categories financial assets at fair value through profit or loss availableforsale financial assets and loans and receivables.
The Group classifies its nonderivative financial liabilities as other financial liabilities.
2.17.1 Nonderivative financial instruments  recognition and derecognition The Group recognises loans and receivables on the date when they are originated.
All other financial assets and liabilities are recognised when the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 110 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued The Group derecognises a financial asset when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the asset expire.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the associated contractual obligations are discharged or expire.
Financial assets and liabilities are only offset and presented on a net basis if the Group has a legally enforceable right of setoff and intends to settle them on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Financial instruments are recognised initially at fair value plus directly attributable transaction costs if they are not classified as fair value through profit or loss.
Financial instruments classified as fair value through profit or loss are recognised initially at fair value with associated transaction costs being expensed immediately to the income statement.
2.17.2 Nonderivative financial assets  measurement Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are financial assets held for trading.
A financial asset is classified in this category if it was acquired principally for the purpose of selling in the short term.
Assets in this category are classified as current assets.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are carried at fair value.
Gains or losses arising from changes in the fair value of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are presented in the consolidated income statement in the period in which they arise.
Dividend income from financial assets at fair value through profit or loss is recognised in the consolidated income statement when the Groups right to receive payments is established.
Availableforsale financial assets Availableforsale financial assets are nonderivatives that are either designated in this category or not classified in any of the other categories.
They are included in noncurrent assets unless the investment matures or Management intends to dispose of it within 12 months of the end of the reporting period.
Availableforsale financial assets are carried at fair value.
Gains or losses arising from changes in the fair value of availableforsale financial assets are presented in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
When availableforsale financial assets are sold or impaired the accumulated fair value adjustments recognised in other comprehensive income are reclassified to the consolidated income statement.
Interest on availableforsale financial assets is calculated using the effective interest method and recognised in the consolidated income statement as part of finance income.
Dividends on availableforsale equity instruments are recognised in the consolidated income statement when the Groups right to receive payment is established.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than 12 months after the end of the reporting period which are classified as noncurrent assets.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the statement of financial position.
Loans and receivables are carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment.
Interest income is recognised using the effective interest rate except for shortterm receivables where the interest would be immaterial.
2.17.3 Nonderivative financial liabilities  measurement Nonderivative financial liabilities are measured initially at fair value less any directly attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition these liabilities are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
2.18 Impairment 2.18.1 Impairment of nonderivative financial assets The Group assesses all financial assets for indicators of impairment at the end of each reporting period except those held at fair value through profit or loss.
Financial assets are considered to be impaired when there is objective evidence that as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the financial asset the estimated future cash flows of the investment have been affected.
The carrying value of the financial asset is reduced by the impairment loss.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued For listed and unlisted equity investments classified as availableforsale a significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of the security below its cost is considered objective evidence of impairment.
When an availableforsale financial asset is considered to be impaired cumulative gains or losses recognised in other comprehensive income are reclassified to profit or loss in the period.
If the impairment loss reduces in subsequent periods impairment losses previously recognised in profit and loss are not reversed through profit and loss.
Increases in fair value subsequent to the recognition of an impairment loss are recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
2.18.2 Impairment of nonfinancial assets Intangible assets such as goodwill are regarded as having an indefinite useful life when there is no foreseeable limit to the period over which the asset is expected to generate net cash inflows for the Group.
These assets are not amortised and are tested for impairment at each reporting date.
Assets with a determinable useful life are amortised over the useful life and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there are separately identifiable cash flows CGUs.
The Group determines a CGUs recoverable amount initially by estimating fair value less costs to sell based on recent public transactions for similar businesses.
If the carrying amount relating to any CGU exceeds the fair value less costs to sell value in use is also calculated using a discounted cash flow method.
If the carrying amount of the CGU also exceeds the value in use an impairment charge is recognised.
Nonfinancial assets other than goodwill which have previously suffered an impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date.
2.19 Trade receivables Trade receivables are amounts due from clients and other counterparties for services performed in the ordinary course of business.
If collection is expected within one year they are classified as current assets.
Receivables due after one year are presented as noncurrent assets.
Trade receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
2.20 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents includes cash in hand and deposits held on call with banks.
2.21 Segregated funds Segregated funds are held in trust by the Group on behalf of clients in accordance with the FCAs Client Asset Rules.
The corresponding liability to clients is not shown within the Groups statement of financial position.
2.22 Dividends Dividend distributions to the Parent Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Parent Companys shareholders.
2.23 Provisions Provisions are recognised when The Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event The obligation can be measured reliably It is probable that the Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions are measured based on the estimated consideration required to settle the obligation at the date of the consolidated statement of financial position and are discounted to present value where the effect is material.
Where some or all of the economic benefits required to settle a provision are expected to be recovered from a third party a receivable is recognised as an asset if it is virtually certain that the reimbursement will be received and the amount receivable can be measured reliably.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 112 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Basis of preparation and significant accounting policies continued 2.24 Trade payables Trade payables consist of amounts payable to clients and other counterparties and obligations to pay suppliers for goods or services in the ordinary course of business.
Trade payables are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year.
Payables due after one year are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Trade payables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
2.25 Leases Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Leases are classified as finance leases where the Group has substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
Finance leases are capitalised at the leases commencement date at the lower of fair value of the leased asset and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Each lease payment is allocated between the liability and finance charges so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the finance balance outstanding.
The corresponding rental obligation net of finance charges is included as a liability in the statement of financial position.
Property plant and equipment acquired under a finance lease is depreciated over the shorter of the useful life of the asset and the lease term.
2.26 Investments in subsidiaries In the Parent Companys financial statements investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less any provision for impairment.
2.27 Application of new and revised IFRSs and changes in accounting policy The Group has consistently followed the same accounting policies presentation and methods of computation in these consolidated financial statements as applied in the Groups consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2016.
A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are effective for periods beginning on or after 1 April 2017.
The following new standards are not applicable to these financial statements but are expected to have an impact when they become effective.
The Group plans to apply these standards in the reporting period in which they become effective.
2.27.1 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and measurement.
It includes new guidance on the classification measurement and impairment of financial instruments.
IFRS 9 is effective for annual periods commencing on or after 1 January 2018.
2.27.2 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 outlines a single comprehensive model for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes existing revenue recognition guidance including IAS 18 Revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and IFRIC 13 Customer Loyalty
IFRS 15 is effective for periods commencing on or after 1 January 2018.
2.27.3 IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 replaces IAS 17 Leases.
It eliminates the classification of leases as either operating leases or finance leases.
Any leases with more than 12 months term are to be recognised as a lease asset in the Statement of Financial Position and the related future lease obligations shown as a liability.
IFRS 16 is effective for annual periods commencing on or after 1 January 2019.
At the date of publication of these financial statements the Directors were still assessing the impact of each of these new standards on the Group.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Use of judgements and estimates In the application of the Groups accounting policies the Directors are required to make judgements estimates and assumptions to determine the carrying amounts of certain assets and liabilities.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on the Groups historical experience and other relevant factors.
Actual results may differ from the estimates applied.
Estimates and judgements are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
3.1 Critical judgements in applying the Groups accounting policies The following critical judgements have been made by the Directors in applying the Groups accounting policies 3.1.1 Intangible assets and goodwill For the purposes of impairment testing the Parent Company and the Group assess goodwill and client relationships based on the recoverable amount of individual units making up the relevant intangible asset in accordance with the accounting policy set out in note 2.
The recoverable amount is calculated based on assumptions which are set out in more detail in note 14.
Impairment charges in the year were allocated fully to goodwill and included in impairment of intangible assets and investments in the consolidated income statement.
See note 14 for further details on the impairment charge.
It was concluded that no other impairments to the carrying value of goodwill or intangible assets are required.
3.1.2 Retirement benefit obligations In consultation with an independent actuary the Parent Company and the Group make estimates about a number of longterm trends and market conditions to determine the value of the deficit of its defined benefit pension scheme.
These longterm forecasts and estimates are highly judgemental and subject to the risk that actual events may be significantly different from those forecast.
The valuation performed as at 31 March 2017 resulted in an increase in the actuarial deficit of 0.4 million which has been reflected in these financial statements.
3.1.3 Availableforsale assets Unlisted availableforsale financial assets include an investment in Euroclear PLC.
The Directors have estimated the fair value of this investment based on a recent share buyback process undertaken by Euroclear PLC in which the Group sold part of its shareholding.
During the year the value of the investment in Runpath Group Limited was reviewed based on the partial sale of the Groups holding.
Further information on the Groups availableforsale financial assets is included in note 17.
No new information has become available that would require a change in the valuation of any further unlisted investments.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 114 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Operating segments The Group has four operating divisions representing the Core Business which are its reportable segments.
These segments are the basis on which the Group reports its performance to the Board which is the Groups chief operating decisionmaker.
Continued operations
Management
Services
Asset
Management
Financial
Planning
Charles
Stanley Direct
Functions
Subtotal
Discontinued operations
Year ended 31 March 2017
Administration fees 12315 2480 7183 3067  25045  25045 Total fees 77392 5921 7943 3067  94323  94323 Commission 45303 702 25 1277  47307  47307 Total revenue 122695 6623 7968 4344  141630  141630
Impairment of intangible assets     650 650  650 Other income 186     186  186
Allocated costs 48699 2500 3358 3118 57675
9154 491 2755 1846  5044  5044 Segment assets 225909 1179 10455 9122 297 246962  246962 Segment liabilities 156301  1567   157868  157868
The operating profitloss as per the above table is different to that presented in the divisional analysis within the Review of the year as the above table includes adjusting items which are excluded from the Core Business analysis.
As at 31 March 2017 EBS Management PLC was included within the Financial Planning division and its assets and liabilities were classified as held for sale.
The disposal of EBS Management PLC was completed on 31 May 2017.
See note 13 for further information.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Operating segments continued Continued operations
Management
Services
Asset
Management
Financial
Planning
Charles
Stanley Direct
Functions
Subtotal
Discontinued operations
Year ended 31 March 2016
Administration fees 17125 2620 6467 3876  30088 62 30150 Corporate finance       2741 2741 Total fees 75223 5027 7920 3876  92046 2803 94849 Commission 4479tel 46604 177 46781 Total revenue 120015 5548 8303 4784  138650 2980 141630
Impairment of intangible assets   465   465  465 Other income 153     153  153
Allocated costs 46196 430 2757 3357 52090 210 205 5
4532 965 2618 1389 385 825 317 508 Segment assets 144250 1502 6908 7102 81684 241446 318 241764 Segment liabilities 1 27963 156321 54 156375
The operating profitloss as per the above table is different to that presented in the divisional analysis within the Review of the year as the above table includes adjusting items which are excluded from the Core Business analysis.
As at 31 March 2016 Charles Stanley Financial Solutions was included within the Financial Planning division and its assets and liabilities were classified as held for sale.
The disposal of Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited was completed on 1 April 2016.
See note 13 for further information.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 116 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Discontinued operations Results from discontinued operations The Group completed the sale of the Charles Stanley Securities division excluding the equity sales trading business to Panmure Gordon UK Limited on 15 July 2015.
There were no reportable discontinued operations during the current year.
Revenue  2980 Expenses  2663 Results from operating activities  317 Gain on sale of business  99 Profit before tax  416 Tax expense  83 Profit for the year  333 Cash flows used in discontinued operations Net cash used in operating activities  1507 Net cash outflows for the year  1507 Effect of disposal on the financial position of the Group Intangible assets  1524 Trade and other receivables  507 Net assets and liabilities  2031 Consideration received satisfied in cash  1623 Net cash inflows  1623 Other income site 117 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Operating profitloss Operating profitloss for the year has been arrived at after chargingcrediting Depreciation of property plant and equipment 2112 2896 Amortisation and impairment 3975 3707 Gainslosses on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 15 48 Gainslosses on foreign currency exchange 232 11 Operating lease rentals payable 4521 3158 Financial Services Compensation Scheme Levy 817 1632 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for audit services Audit of the Companys annual accounts 52 72 Audit of the Companys subsidiaries 178 200 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for other services Tax compliance services 30 30 Regulatoryrelated assurance services 70 50 Other assurance services 46 50 Net finance incomecosts Interest income 195 36 Gains on availableforsale financial assets 202 33 Finance income 397 69 Interest payable on bank borrowings 63 36 Interest payable on other loans 1 63 Finance costs 64 99 Net finance incomecosts 333 30 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 118 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Earnings per share Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to equity holders of the Parent Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the period.
Basic earnings per share From continuing operations 12.35 1.27 From discontinued operations  0.66 Total basic earnings per share 12.35 0.61 Diluted earnings per share is calculated by adjusting the weighted average number of ordinary shares to assume exercise of all potentially dilutive share options.
Diluted earnings per share From continuing operations 12.34 1.27 From discontinued operations  0.66 Total diluted earnings per share 12.34 0.61 The Directors believe that a truer reflection of the performance of the Groups underlying business is given by the measure of Core Business earnings per share which is presented in the Review of the year.
This measure is also followed by the analyst community as a benchmark of the Groups underlying performance.
The earnings and weighted average number of shares used in the calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share is shown below
Earnings used in the calculation of earnings per share from continuing operations 6260 640 Earnings for the year from discontinued operations used in the calculation of earnings per share from discontinued operations  333 Earnings used in the calculation of basic earnings per share 6260 307site 119 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Earnings per share continuedtel Number of shares Weighted average number of ordinary shares used in the calculation of basic earnings per share 50683 50386 Effect of potentially dilutive share options 41 Weighted average number of ordinary shares used in the calculation of diluted earnings per share 50724 50386 Sharebased payment arrangements 10.1 Description of sharebased payment arrangements The Group had the following sharebased payment arrangements during the year Save As You Earn equitysettled The Save As You Earn scheme is open to all employees.
Options are granted under the scheme at a 15% discount to the midmarket closing price for the three days preceding the grant date and have a threeyear vesting period.
The options are exercisable for a period of six months after vesting and are not subject to any performance conditions.
Performance Share Plan equitysettled The Performance Share Plan is only open to Executive Directors and senior managers.
Options are awarded annually under the plan and vest over a period of three years based on specific performance targets.
The contractual life of the options is five years.
Share Incentive Plan The Share Incentive Plan is open to all employees enabling them to purchase shares in the Parent Company out of their pretax salary.
Further information on the Groups equitysettled sharebased arrangements including details on individual limits and vesting conditions can be found in the Directors remuneration report.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 120 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Sharebased payment arrangements continued 10.2 Measurement of fair values The fair value of the options issued under equitysettled sharebased payment arrangements is calculated using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
Service and nonmarket performance conditions attached to the options are not taken into account in measuring fair value.
Expected volatility is based on the historical share price volatility.
During the year the inputs used in the measurement of fair values at grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payment schemes were as follows 2017 2016 Share price at grant date 2.89 3.30 Exercise price 2.40 2.87 Expected volatility 35.75% 22.19% Expected life 3 years 3 years Expected dividend yield 1.73% 1.51% Riskfree interest rate 0.24% 0.57% Fair value at grant date 0.82 0.64 10.3 Reconciliation of outstanding share options The total number and weighted average exercise prices of share options outstanding were as follows 2017 2016 Number of options Weighted average exercise price Number of options Weighted average exercise price At 1 April 1060016 1.42 630214 1.46 Exercised 11742 2.56 118110 2.87 Forfeited 153785 2.49 79783 2.36 Granted 685318 1.34 627695 1.47 At 31 March 1579807 1.27 1060016 1.42 The options outstanding at 31 March 2017 had an exercise price in the range of nil to 4.11 2016 nil to 4.11 and a weighted average contractual life of 3.1 years 2016 3.4 years.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for share options exercised in 2017 was 3.12 2016 3.09.
The Group recognised total expenses in the year of 0.2 million 2016 0.2 million in relation to equitysettled sharebased payment transactions.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Employee benefits 11.1 Defined contribution scheme The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Group in independentlyadministered funds.
11.2 Defined benefit scheme The Group also sponsors the Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited Retirement Benefits Scheme the Plan which is a funded defined benefit arrangement.
This is a separate trusteeadministered fund holding the Plan assets to meet longterm pension liabilities of its scheme members.
A full actuarial valuation was carried out as at 13 May 2014 in accordance with the scheme funding requirements of the Pensions Act 2004.
The next full actuarial valuation as at 13 May 2017 is currently being undertaken.
This is due to be completed in early 2018 and will be reflected in the financial statements for the year ending 31 March 2018.
The funding of the Plan is agreed between the Group and the trustees in line with those requirements.
There is a particular requirement to calculate the pension surplusdeficit using prudence as opposed to best estimate actuarial assumptions.
For the purposes of IAS 19 the actuarial valuation as at 13 May 2014 which was carried out by a qualified independent actuary has been updated on an approximate basis to 31 March 2017.
Apart from a slight change in the mortality assumptions used the valuation methodology adopted for this years disclosures are the same as those used in the prior year.
Amounts included in the statement of financial position Fair value of plan assets 21667 26561 Present valuation of defined benefit obligation 32195 36651 Deficit in scheme 10528 10090 Liability recognised in statement of financial position 10528 10090 The present value of plan liabilities is measured by discounting the best estimate of future cash flows to be paid out by the Plan using the projected unit credit method.
The value calculated in this way is reflected in the liability in the statement of financial position as shown above.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 122 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Employee benefits continued The Group has reviewed the implications of the guidance provided by IFRIC 14 and has concluded that it is not necessary to make any adjustments to the IAS 19 figures in respect of an asset ceiling or Minimum Funding Requirements as at 31 March 2017.
Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the present value of the defined benefit obligation Defined benefit obligation at 1 April 36651 43865 Current service cost  643 Interest expense 1148 1317 Contributions by plan participants  43 Actuarial lossesgains due to scheme experience 180 486 Actuarial lossesgains due to changes in demographic assumptions 1770 188 Actuarial lossesgains due to changes in financial assumptions 5566 2808 Benefits paid and expenses 560 729 Past service costs  583 Liabilities extinguished on settlements 9020 4799 Defined benefit obligation at 31 March 32195 36651 Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the fair value of plan assets Fair value of assets at 1 April 26561 30778 Interest income 803 913 Return on plan assets 2883 591 Contributions by the Group 507 749 Contributions by plan participants  43 Benefits paid and expenses 560 729 Assets distributed on settlements 8527 4602 Fair value of plan assets at 31 March 21667 26site 123 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Employee benefits continued Defined benefit costs recognised in the income statement Current service cost  643 Past service cost and gain from settlement 493 780 Net interest cost 345 404 Total costs 148 267 Defined benefit costs recognised in statement of comprehensive income Return on plan assets 2883 591 Experience lossgain arising on the scheme liabilities 180 486 Effects of changes in the demographic assumptions underlying the present value of the defined benefit obligation 1770 188 Effects of changes in the financial assumptions underlying the present value of the defined benefit obligation 5566 2808 Adjustment related to previous years Total amount recognised in statement of comprehensive income 1093 2515 Plan assets Equities 13073 15385 Bonds 6086 5320 Property 970 901 Cash 481 361 Alternatives 1057 4594 Total assets 21667 26561 The Plans assets include Charles Stanley Group shares amounting to 0.9 million 2016 0.7 million.
The Plan does not own any other direct investments in Charles Stanley Group or any property occupied by or other assets used by Charles Stanley
Alternatives include hedge funds infrastructure and renewable energy investments.
All of the scheme assets have a quoted market price in an active market with the exception of the trustees bank account balance.
It is the policy of the trustees and the Group to review the investment strategy at the time of each funding valuation.
The trustees investment objectives and the processes undertaken to measure and manage the risks inherent in the planned investment strategy are documented in the Plans Statement of Investment Principles.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 124 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Employee benefits continued During the second half of the year the Plans Trustees changed the investment management strategy of the schemes assets.
The longterm investment objective is now to achieve selfsufficiency which means achieving a funding level whereby scheme assets grow to the same level as their liabilities.
A five stage derisking flight plan has been adopted to reduce risk gradually over life of the Plan as the scheme nears its objective.
Stage 1 of the flight plan which has involved restructuring the underlying portfolio to increase asset class diversification and building an initial liability hedge of 70% of assets is substantially complete.
Further details on the assumptions underpinning the valuation are provided below Significant actuarial assumptions % % % Inflation  Retail Price Index RPI na na 3.10 Inflation  Consumer Price Index CPI 2.40 2.20 na Salary increases na na 2.20 Rate of discount 2.60 3.60 3.20 Allowance for pension in payment increases of RPI or 5% p.
Allowance for pension in payment increases of CPI or 5% p. if less than CPI minimum 3% p.
Allowance for revaluation of deferred pensions of RPI or 5% p.
Allowance for revaluation of deferred pensions of CPI or 5% p.
The mortality assumptions adopted at 31 March 2017 are 100% 2016 85% of the standard tables S2PxA Year of Birth no age rating for males and females projected using CMI2015 converging to 1.00% p.
These imply the following life expectancies 100% Life expectancy at age 65 years 85% Life expectancy at age 65 years Male retiring in current year 22.0 23.2 Female retiring in current year 24.0 25.2 Male retiring in twenty years 23.3 24.5 Female retiring in twenty years 25.5 26.7 Analysis of the sensitivity to the principal assumptions of the present value of the defined benefit obligation Change in assumption Change in liabilities Discount rate Decrease of 0.25% p.
Increase by 4.5% Rate of inflation Increase of 0.25% p.
Increase by 0.6% Rate of mortality Increase in life expectancy of 1 year Increase by 3.5%site 125 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Employee benefits continued The sensitivities shown are approximate.
Each sensitivity considers one change in isolation.
The inflation sensitivity includes the impact of changes to the assumptions for revaluation pension increases and salary growth.
The average duration of the defined benefit obligation at the period ended 31 March 2017 is 18 years.
The Plan typically exposes the Group to actuarial risks such as investment risk interest rate risk mortality risk and longevity risk.
A decrease in corporate bond yields a rise in inflation or an increase in life expectancy would result in an increase to Plan liabilities.
This would detrimentally impact the balance sheet position and may give rise to increased charges in future income statements.
This effect would be partially offset by an increase in the value of the Plans bond holdings and in qualifying death in service insurance policies that cover the mortality risk.
Additionally caps on inflationary increases are in place to protect the Plan against extreme inflation.
The best estimate of contributions to be paid by the Group to the Plan for the year commencing 1 April 2017 is 0.4 million 2016 0.4 million.
11.3 Employee benefit expenses The average number of persons employed including Directors during the year was 810 2016 893.
Continuing operations Discontinued operations Staff costs for the Group during the year Wages and salaries 43038 45262  1193 Social Security costs 5371 5748  101 Sharebased payments 249 199 Pension costs Defined contribution plan 3875 3790  73 Defined benefit plan 148 267 52385 55266  1367 During the prior year the Board agreed revised interim remuneration arrangements with the Groups investment managers in relation to their variable compensation.
Part of the agreement involved changing the bonus calculation to be based on earned revenue rather than billed revenue.
This resulted in the Group bringing forward the recognition of bonuses on revenues that were accrued but not yet billed as at 31 March 2016.
A oneoff additional amount of 1.4 million was included within 2016 wages and salaries from continuing operations in the above table.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 126 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Income taxes Tax recognised in the consolidated income statement Current taxation Current year expensecredit 2283 135 Adjustment in respect of prior years 306 57 2589 192 Deferred taxation Creditexpense for the year 50 145 Total tax expensecredit on continuing operations 2539 47 In addition to amounts charged to the income statement deferred tax of 0.2 million relating to the revaluation of availableforsale financial assets has been charged directly to equity 2016 0.1 million credit.
Current tax of 0.1 million has been credited directly to equity 2016 nil and deferred tax of 0.02 million has also been credited directly to equity 2016 0.8 million charge in respect of the defined benefit plan.
The deferred tax asset at 31 March 2017 has been calculated based on the UK corporation tax rate of 17% as this was substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
The tax charge for the year is higher than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 2016 20%.
The differences are as follows Profitloss before tax from continuing operations 8799 687 Profitloss multiplied by rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 2016 20% 1760 137 Tax effects of Income not subject to tax 37 31 Expenses not allowed for tax 40 89 Sharebased payments 31 71 Adjustments in respect of prior years 306 57 Intangible asset amortisation and impairments 8 6 Fixed assets differences 468 154 Disposal of business 63 Change in tax rate 38 89 Other adjustments 12 25 Total tax expensecredit for the year 2539 47site 127 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Assets and liabilities held for sale The Group announced the sale of EBS Management PLC to Embark Group Limited on 11 April 2017.
Accordingly the assets and liabilities of EBS Management PLC have been presented in the consolidated statement of financial position as held for sale.
Further information on the terms of the disposal are included in note 31.
The Group completed the disposal of Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited on 1 April 2016.
In the previous financial year the assets and liabilities of Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited were presented in the consolidated statement of financial position as held for sale.
The following table sets out the assets and liabilities held for sale in the current and prior year Intangible assets 1294 1145 Trade and other receivables 1343 257 Cash and cash equivalents 6328 320 Assets held for sale 8965 1722 Trade and other payables 1558 35 Current tax liabilities 9 Liabilities held for sale 1567 35 Intangible assets
Goodwill
Customer relationships
Total
At 1 April 2015 21507 22769 4167 48443 Additions  624 1921 2545 At 31 March 2016 21507 23393 6088 50988 Additions  32 1057 1089 Transfer to held for sale 1294   1294 At 31 March 2017 20213 23425 7145 50783
At 1 April 2015 5511 15498 1337 22346 Charge for the year  1635 1607 3242 At 31 March 2016 5511 17133 2944 25588 Charge for the year  1556 1769 3325 Impairment 650   650 At 31 March 2017 6161 18689 4713 29563 Net book value At 31 March 2017 14052 4736 2432 21220 At 31 March 2016 15996 6260 3144 25400 None of the intangible assets have been pledged as security.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 128 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Intangible assets continued Goodwill is allocated to the Groups operating divisions as follows
Investment Management Services 8805 10449 Financial Planning  300 Charles Stanley Direct 5247 5247 14052 15996 14.1 Goodwill The recoverable amount of goodwill allocated to a CGU is determined initially by calculating the CGUs fair value less costs to sell.
If this is lower than the carrying amount or is not determinable a value in use calculation is also prepared.
Fair value less costs to sell is calculated largely based on a percentage of FuMA.
Where this approach is not appropriate a turnover multiple is used.
The rates used in the fair value less costs to sell calculations are those implied by recent transactions in the market or where appropriate based on publicly available information for similar quoted businesses.
When calculating the fair value less costs to sell key assumptions are stress tested to determine whether the calculations are sensitive to reasonable potential changes in these assumptions.
At 31 March 2017 fair value less costs to sell was deemed to be higher than carrying value for each CGU.
Therefore no value in use calculations have been prepared.
14.1.1 Investment Management Services The recoverable amount of goodwill related to Investment Management Services was assessed using fair value less costs to sell for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The fair value was determined based on a percentage of FuMA.
During the year the Group recognised an impairment charge of 0.3 million in respect of goodwill attributable to a regional office which provided investment management services.
In addition goodwill of 1.3 million in respect of EBS Management PLC was transferred to assets held for sale at the reporting date.
Consequently the goodwill balance carried forward was 8.8 million.
14.1.2 Financial Planning The recoverable amount of goodwill relating to Financial Planning was assessed using fair value less costs to sell for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The brought forward balance of 0.3 million was fully impaired during the year as the business activities to which it related are no longer undertaken.
14.1.3 Charles Stanley Direct The recoverable amount of goodwill relating to Charles Stanley Direct was assessed using fair value less costs to sell for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The recoverable amount was determined to be higher than the carrying amount of the CGU and therefore the goodwill carrying value is adequately supported.
14.2 Customer relationships Purchases of customer relationships relate to payments made to investment managers and third parties for the introduction of customer relationships.
14.3 Internally generated software Internally generated software is software designed developed and commercialised by the Group.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Property plant and equipment
Freehold premises
Short leasehold premises
Total
At 1 April 2015 4988 1021 7 899 16862 30770 Additions 25  11 443 479 Disposals   431 93 524 At 31 March 2016 5013 1021 7479 17212 30725 Additions   2563 999 3562 Disposals  1021 4162 454 5637 At 31 March 2017 5013  5880 17757 28650
At 31 April tel4021 12904 17483 Charge for the year 130 73 789 1904 2896 Disposals   306 80 386 At 31 March tel4504 14728 19993 Charge for the year 130 36 554 1392 2112 Disposals  417 2777 237 3431 At 31 March 2017 510  2281 15883 18674 Net book value At 31 March 2017 4503  3599 1874 9976 At 31 March 2016 4633 640 2975 2484 10732 Freehold premises is carried at revalued amount.
The most recent valuations of freehold premises were carried out in March 2014 by independent chartered surveyors.
If freehold premises had been carried under the cost model its carrying value would have been 4.6 million 2016 4.7 million.
During the year the Group moved its Londonbased staff from multiple offices to new leasehold premises at 55 Bishopsgate.
The Group surrendered the remaining lease on one of its former long leasehold premises to the buildings landlord for 5.6 million.
The carrying value of the leasehold premises was negligible therefore a gain of 5.6 million on the lease disposal has been recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Assets with a carrying value of 2.2 million were disposed of in the year due to the Groups head office relocation.
There were no disposal proceeds in respect of these assets therefore a loss on disposal of 2.2 million has been recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Included in the short leasehold additions for the year is an amount of 1.0 million in respect of a dilapidations obligation arising under the lease at 55 Bishopsgate which has been capitalised as part of the fit out costs in accordance with IAS 16.
In the half year results to 30 September 2016 these dilapidation costs had been expensed to the income statement.
The cost and accumulated depreciation of property plant and equipment in the above table includes 13.2 million 2016 11.1 million in respect of fully depreciated assets of which are still in use.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 130 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Net deferred tax asset Deferred tax assets
Sharebased payments
Tax losses forward and other timing differences
At 1 April 2015 2251 Recognised in profit or loss Current year 43 59 291  189 Change in rate 5  62  67 Recognised in other comprehensive income Current year 557    557 Change in rate 196    196 At 31 March 2016 1620 Recognised in profit or loss Current year 8 17 64  73 Change in rate 1  34  33 Recognised in other comprehensive income Current year 86    86 Change in rate 105    105 At 31 March 2017 1site 131 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Net deferred tax asset continued Deferred tax liabilities
Property plant and equipment
Total
At 1 April 2015 114 7 572 693 Recognised in profit or loss Current year 45   45 Change in rate 21   21 Recognised in other comprehensive income Current year  1 37 38 Change in rate   53 53 At 31 March 2016 90 6 482 578 Recognised in profit or loss Current year 15   15 Change in rate 5   5 Recognised in other comprehensive income Current year   234 234 Change in rate   39 39 At 31 March 2017 80 6 677 763 Net deferred tax assets At 31 March 2017 1878 At 31 March 2016 2042 The Finance Bill 2016 gained royal assent on 15 September 2016.
It included provisions for the UK corporation tax rate to be reduced from 19% in April 2017 to 17% in April 2020.
Deferred tax balances have therefore been calculated based on these reduced rates where timing differences are forecast to unwind in future years.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 132 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Availableforsale financial assets Fair value
Unlisted investments
At 1 April 2015 3785 3269 7054 Additions 327  327 Disposals 223 60 283 Revaluation in year 129  129 At 31 March 2016 3760 3209 6969 Additions 1342 500 1842 Disposals 1517 125 1642 Revaluation in year 39 946 907 At 31 March 2017 3546 4530 8076 Availablefor sale financial assets were split between current and noncurrent assets as shown below
Unlisted investments 2450
Listed investments 3546 3760 Unlisted investments 2080 3209 5626 6969 The fair value of listed investments is determined by reference to quoted prices on active markets.
Listed investments include a 2.0 million 2016 2.0 million holding in gilts which is pledged to the Groups clearing house.
Unlisted investments include the Groups holding of 6030 shares in Euroclear PLC.
The board of Euroclear PLC announced a share buyback to its shareholders on 8 March 2017 to be carried out by way of a reverse auction in April 2017.
The Group submitted an offer deed on 5 April 2017 to sell its entire holding at 774 per share.
On 28 April 2017 the Board were notified that the Groups tender had been partially successful with a total of 3672 shares to be bought back by Euroclear PLC.
As such the full holding was revalued to 774 per share as at 31 March 2017 and translated into GBP at the rate of exchange on the balance sheet date.
The value of the shares to be sold after the balance sheet date has been presented within current assets and the value of the unsold shares has been presented in noncurrent assets.
Also within unlisted investments is the Groups investment in a technology company called Runpath Group Limited.
The initial investment was 1.0 million 0.5 million in 119154 ordinary shares and 0.5 million of convertible loan notes.
As at 31 March 2016 the Group held the equity at nil and the loan notes at 0.3 million.
During the year the Group converted the loans into equity and subsequently disposed of 25% of its enlarged holding recognising a gain of 0.4 million.
The remainder of the equity investment is carried at fair value as determined by the Directors.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Trade and other receivables
Trade receivables 137736 135143 Other receivables 3217 8358 Prepayments and accrued income 3720 2863 144673 146364
Convertible loan  250 Included within trade and other receivables is the deferred consideration balance receivable by the Group in relation to the sale of Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited CSFS to CS Financial Solutions Holdings Limited on 1 April 2016 net of provision for impairment.
The deferred consideration of 0.5 million LIBOR plus 2% Secured B Loan Notes 2019 is repayable in three equal instalments on each anniversary following the sale.
At 31 March 2017 the balance of the loan receivable had been impaired in full as Management believes that its recoverability is doubtful.
A breakdown of the deferred consideration and provision for impairment in respect of the sale of CSFS is presented below
Deferred consideration 167 Provision for impairment 167
Deferred consideration 333 Provision for impairment 333 Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss
Listed investments 73 72 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 52101 48095 In addition to the amounts presented above 6.3 million of cash and cash equivalents 2016 0.3 million is also included within assets held for sale.
Total cash and cash equivalents at the reporting date were therefore 58.4 million 2016 48.4 million.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 134 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Capital and reserves
Ordinary
Share premium
Total
Authorised shares with a par value of 25p each 80000 20000   20000 Allotted and fully paid At 1 April 2015 45963 11490 4139  15629 Exercise of share options 118 30 263  293 Issue of ordinary shares 4596 1149  15167 16316 At 31 March 2016 50677 12669 4402 15167 32238 Exercise of share options 12 3 27  30 At 31 March 2017 50689 12672 4429 15167 32268 21.1 Ordinary shares The rights and obligations attached to the Parent Companys ordinary shares are set out in the Directors report page 89.
During the year 12000 ordinary shares were issued fully paid for cash at an average price of 2.56 per share following the exercise of options by employees.
These shares had a nominal value of 3000 and a total consideration was 30000.
21.2 Merger relief reserve The merger relief reserve is used where more than 90% of the share capital in a subsidiary is acquired and the consideration includes the issue of new shares by the Group thereby attracting merger relief under Section 612 of Companies Act 2006.
The merger relief reserve arose on a placing of the Groups shares and forms part of distributable reserves.
21.3 Dividends The following dividends were declared and paid by the Parent Company in the year Final dividend paid for 2016 3.50p per share 2015 2.00p 1774 996 Interim dividend paid for 2017 1.50p per share 2016 1.50p 760 758 2534 1site 135 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Noncurrent
At 1 April Provisions made during the year 1108 At 31 March 1108
At 1 April 4367 2664 Provisions made during the year 237 1703 Provisions used during the year 2442 At 31 March 2162 4367 The Group held provisions as at 31 March 2017 in respect of certain legal claims and leasehold property dilapidations.
The noncurrent additions in the year of 1.1 million are in respect of dilapidations expected to arise in connection with the Groups new leasehold premises at 55 Bishopsgate London.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables 121966 126149 Other taxes and Social Security costs 3263 2860 Other payables 6783 9545 Accruals and deferred income 9497 3329 141509 141883 The Groups exposure to currency and liquidity risk related to trade and other payables is disclosed in note 24.
Fair values and risk management Through its normal operations the Group is exposed to a number of risks.
The most significant financial instrument risks are market risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
Information is presented below regarding the exposure to each of these risks and the procedures for measuring and managing them.
24.1 Market risk This is the risk that the Groups income or value of its financial instruments are impacted by fluctuations in market prices such as equity prices foreign exchange rates and interest rates.
The Group does not undertake any proprietary trading other than in respect of its own equity holdings and positions arising from incidental dealing errors.
All position limits are monitored daily in accordance with policies determined by the Board.
The Group has small currency exposures.
Positions are held in a variety of currencies principally the US dollar to support clients dealing activities.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 136 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Fair values and risk management continued 24.1.1 Equity risk The Group is exposed to equity market risk through its own equity holdings.
These comprise i availableforsale financial investments ii held for trading assets and liabilities.
Equity price movements in respect of the Groups client holdings have a direct impact on investment management fees received.
The Group has performed sensitivity analysis assessing the impact of a 10% increase or decrease in underlying equity prices.
The results shown below are indicative of the impact at the yearend.
24.1.1.1 Availableforsale investments Note 17 summarises the availableforsale investments held at the yearend date and the disposals and fair value movements made in the year.
56% of the Groups availableforsale investments are unlisted.
A 10% increase or decrease in the Groups investments would have an impact on reserves of 0.8 million 2016 0.7 million.
24.1.1.2 Held for trading assets and liabilities The Groups exposure to market risk on its held for trading positions is monitored daily and reported to the appropriate Directors and senior managers.
Positions are monitored against limits determined by the Risk Committee.
Any breaches of the limits are notified immediately to the Head of Compliance.
A 10% increase or decrease in equity prices of trading assets and liabilities would increasereduce profit in the consolidated income statement by 7000 2016 7000.
24.1.1.3 Investment Management Services fees A 10% increase or decrease in equity prices would increasereduce investment management fees in the consolidated income statement by 4.7 million 2016 4.0 million.
24.1.2 Foreign exchange risk The table below summarises the Groups foreign currency exposure arising from unmatched monetary assets or liabilities not denominated in the Groups functional currency Net assets Euros  190 US dollars 29 619 Other currencies The Groups activities are denominated primarily in GBP and it does not enter into forward exchange contracts for hedging anticipated transactions.
The risk of adverse currency movements for settlement of nonGBP trades on behalf of clients is not borne by the Group.
The Group is exposed to currency risk for settlement of nonGBP trade suppliers and miscellaneous income streams.
At 31 March 2017 these totalled 16000 2016 22000.
24.1.3 Interest rate risk The Group holds interestbearing assets principally cash and cash deposits availableforsale financial assets and loan notes accruing interest at fixed rates.
The Group views such exposure to interest rate fluctuations as immaterial.
If interest rates had been 200 basis points higher profit for the year would have been 1.2 million higher 2016 1.1 million.
If interest rates had been 200 basis points lower profit for the year would have been 0.2 million lower 2016 0.1 million.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Fair values and risk management continued 24.2 Credit risk This represents the risk of loss through default by a counterparty.
The most significant risk to the Group is either a client or market counterparty failing to settle a trade.
Given the wide range of retail clients of the Group it is not considered that a material default by connected counterparties would arise.
Other credit risks such as free delivery of stock or cash are not deemed to be significant as the Group has an effective credit control department to recover any monies or stock owed through default.
The Group monitors both the collateral requirements of individual client accounts as well as any debit balances that occur if stock purchases are not settled on due date or that are due to losses that have been incurred during client trading activity on a daily basis.
Shares are only delivered free of payment to a client or their agent once settlement has been achieved and there is no outstanding debit balance on the account.
In the event of an error it will again be made immediately apparent the next day when both the debit balances and collateral requirements of clients accounts are monitored.
On occasion delivery of stock to a recognised professional counterparty may take place free of payment via an electronic settlement system but only on prior confirmation from their custodian that the required funds in settlement will be transferred directly to the Groups bank account.
There have been no historic instances where this has created an irrecoverable loss.
Exposures for trades that are outstanding beyond the contractual settlement date are monitored on a daily basis.
The Group has a Market Exposure Committee MEC which reviews exposures to market counterparties on a daily basis.
The Committee also sets exposure limits in respect of individual market counterparties.
Trade receivables represent monies due from clients and market counterparties.
The Risk department undertakes reviews of new accounts and periodically reviews all counterparties.
Cash and cash equivalents are held with regulated financial institutions with investment grade credit ratings.
The list of approved banks is reviewed at least annually by the Treasury Committee.
The Group has no concerns over the credit quality of these institutions.
An ageing analysis of the Groups financial assets is presented in the following table At 31 March 2017 Past due but not impaired Neither due nor impaired 03 months 36 months 612 months Over 1 year
Trade and other receivables 3720 140953    144673 Cash and cash equivalents 52101     52101 At 31 March 2016 Trade and other receivables 2863 143481 20   146364 Cash and cash equivalents 48095     48095 Excluded from the above table are receivables of 0.2 million 2016 0.3 million for which provision of 0.2 million has been made 2016 0.3 million.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 138 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Fair values and risk management continued 24.3 Liquidity risk This is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Group maintains a mixture of cash and cash equivalents that are designed to meet the Groups operational and trading activities.
The Group does not use the wholesale markets for any funding and is confident that it has sufficient liquidity for the foreseeable future.
At 31 March 2017 the Group had 58.4 million in bank accounts 52.1 million included in cash and cash equivalents and 6.3 million included in assets held for sale and accordingly a high degree of liquidity.
The Groups liquidity risk is overwhelmingly shortterm in nature and arises from the settlement of trades within the stockbroking business.
The Treasury Committee operates within strict policies and procedures approved by the Board which include strict controls on the use of financial instruments in managing the Groups risk.
It is the Groups policy to hold cash resources to meet obligations as and when they fall due.
The Groups financial instruments comprise cash and liquid resources and various items including trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
The Group reviews the credit quality of counterparties and limits its aggregate credit exposures accordingly.
The majority of the shortterm liabilities arise from the settlement of clients trading activities and it is the policy to pay stockbroking creditors on Settlement Day or when the stock is delivered whichever is later.
The Groups policy is also to pay suppliers in accordance with their payment terms.
The Groups financial liabilities comprise trade and other payables and financial liabilities which are all repayable on demand or within three months.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Fair values and risk management continued 24.3.1 Fair value of financial instruments 24.3.1.1 Accounting classifications and fair values The following table shows the carrying amounts and fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities including their levels in the fair value hierarchy Carrying amount Note Held for trading Loans and receivables
Other
Total
At 31 March 2017 Financial assets measured at fair value availableforsale investments 17   8076  8076 Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss  listed investments 19 73    73 Total 73  8076  8149 Financial assets not measured at fair value Trade and other receivables 18  144673   144673 Cash and cash equivalents 20  52101   52101 Total  196774   196774 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Trade and other payables 23    141509 141509 Total    141509 141509 Fair value Note Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
At 31 March 2017 Financial assets measured at fair value availableforsale investments 17 3546  4530 8076 Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss  listed investments 19 73   73 Total 3619  4530 8149 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 140 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Fair values and risk management continued
Held for trading Loans and receivables
Other
Total
At 31 March 2016 Financial assets measured at fair value availableforsale investments 17   6969  6969 Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss  listed investments 19 72    72 Total 72  6969  7041 Financial assets not measured at fair value Trade and other receivables 18  146364   146364 Cash and cash equivalents 20  48095   48095 Total  194459   194459 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Trade and other payables 23    141883 141883 Total    141883 141883 Fair value Note Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
At 31 March 2016 Financial assets measured at fair value availableforsale investments 17 3760  3209 6969 Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss  listed investments 19 72   72 Total 3832  3209 7041 24.3.1.2 Measurement of fair values i Valuation techniques and significant unobservable inputs Financial instruments measured at fair value Fair value measurements are categorised into different levels in the fair value hierarchy based on the inputs to valuation techniques used.
The different levels are defined as follows Level 1  quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Group can access at the measurement date.
Level 2  inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset either directly that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices.
Level 3  inputs for assets that are not based on observable market data that is unobservable inputs.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Fair values and risk management continued The following table shows the valuation techniques used in measuring Level 3 fair values for financial instruments measured at fair value in the statement of financial position as well as the significant unobservable inputs used Financial Instrument Valuation technique Significant unobservable inputs Interrelationship between significant unobservable inputs and fair value Equity Securities Euroclear Fair value is determined using PE and net asset multiples Earnings assumed to remain relatively stable based on historic performance Discount applied to reflect illiquid market for the shares Fair value may be higher if the forecast forward earnings of Euroclear increases and vice versa The value of the shares may increase if the market for the shares becomes more liquid There were no transfers between any of the levels of the fair value hierarchy during the year ended 31 March 2017 or in the prior year.
The following table shows a reconciliation from the opening balances to the closing balances for Level 3 fair values Equity securities availableforsale At 1 April 2016 3209 Reversal of impairment 500 Disposals 125 Total unrealised gains and losses for the year included in consolidated statement of comprehensive income 946 At 31 March 2017 4530 The Group has an established control framework with respect to the measurement of fair values.
If one or more significant inputs are not based on observable market data the instrument is included in Level 3.
Recognised techniques are used to value the financial instruments grouped under Level 3 including discounted future cash flow and dividend yield valuation methods.
All valuations performed are presented to the Group Executive Directors for final approval.
Significant valuation issues are reported to the Group Audit Committee.
24.3.2 Equity securities  availableforsale The Level 3 balance relates to holdings in unlisted investments.
At 31 March 2017 these unlisted investments had a fair value of 4.5 million 31 March 2016 3.2 million.
Included within this balance is the Groups holding of 6030 shares in Euroclear PLC which had a fair value of 4.0 million 31 March 2016 3.1 million.
Fair value was determined using a valuation technique that required significant unobservable inputs.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 142 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements List of subsidiaries Details of the Groups subsidiaries at the reporting date are listed below.
The registered office of all Group companies is 55 Bishopsgate London UK EC2N 3AS.
Name of company Activity Note Country of incorporation
Alpha Trustees Limited Dormant 4 England and Wales 100% Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited Wealth managers 1 2 England and Wales 100% Charles Stanley Pan Asset Capital Management Limited Wealth managers 2 England and Wales 100% EBS Management PLC Pension Fund Administrator 2 4 England and Wales 100% EBS Pensioneer Trustees Limited Pensioneer Trustee Services 4 England and Wales 100% EBS SelfAdministered Personal Pension Plan Trustees Limited Pensioneer Trustee Services 4 England and Wales 100% Exempt Nominees Limited Nominee company 3 England and Wales 100% Charles Stanley Investment Choices Limited formerly Garrison Investment Analysis Limited Financial Intermediary 2 England and Wales 100% Gryphon Investments Limited Investment company England and Wales 98% Jobson James Financial Services Limited Dormant 2 England and Wales 100% Rock Nominees Limited Nominee company 3 England and Wales 100%
1 Member of The London Stock Exchange 2 Regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority 3 Shares held by Charles Stanley and Co.
Strategic report Governance Financial statements Involvement with unconsolidated structured entities The Group holds fund management contracts over various investment funds all openended investment companies acting as an agent on behalf of the Authorised Corporate Director.
These investment funds invest capital received from investors in a portfolio of assets in order to provide returns to those investors from capital appreciation of those assets income from those assets or both.
The investment funds are financed through the issue of units to the investors.
The Groups objective is to generate fees from managing assets on behalf of third parties.
The net assets of each fund are detailed below FP Matterley Regular High Income Fund 62.6 63.4 FP Matterley Equity Fund 10.8 10.1 FP Matterley UK and International Growth Portfolio Fund 116.9 99.4 FP Matterley Undervalued Fund  0.1 PanDYNAMIC Defensive 19.1 5.8 PanDYNAMIC Balanced 9.5 18.8 The MOTIM Fund 13.2 11.3 The Helm Investment Fund 8.3 7.0 Included in the consolidated statement of financial position is accrued income of 0.2 million 2016 0.5 million relating to fees recognised which have not yet been received.
This represents the Groups maximum exposure to loss from the funds.
The following table presents the Groups total income from unconsolidated structured entities in the consolidated income statement FP Matterley Regular High Income Fund 486 585 FP Matterley Equity Fund 79 98 FP Matterley International Growth Fund  54 FP Matterley UK and International Growth Portfolio Fund 1101 1111 FP Matterley Bond Fund  10 The MOTIM Fund 61 60 The Helm Investment Fund 22 26 Total 1749 1944 All the above income relates to the annual management charge.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 144 Financial statements  Notes to the financial statements Reconciliation of net profitloss to cash generated from operations Profitloss before tax 8799 272 Adjustments for Depreciation 2112 2896 Amortisation of intangible assets 3325 3242 Impairment of intangible assets 650 465 Impairment of corporate loans 500 Gain on surrender of longterm lease 5550 Sharebased payments  value of employee services 249 199 Retirement benefit scheme 655 480 Dividend income 186 152 Interest income 195 136 Interest expense 63 36 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment 2199 131 Gain on disposal of business 148 99 Changes in working capital Increasedecrease in financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 1 28 Decrease in receivables 467 103357 Decrease in payables 941 100549 Net cash inflow from operations 10688 8666 Operating leases The Group leases various offices under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have varying terms and renewal rights.
Total commitments under these leases at the reporting date were Not later than one year 3473 4976 Later than one year but not later than five years 11917 14170 Later than five years 4809 6798 20199 25site 145 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Contingent liabilities Following the recent rulings under the European Working Time Directive normal pay for the purposes of calculating statutory holiday pay should include contractual commission in addition to basic salary.
Based on the current available information the advice received to date and the nature of the Groups activities the Working Time Directive is not expected to have a material impact on the Group.
However if the actual impact of these rulings is different to current expectations the Group may be exposed to an additional material liability.
In the normal course of business the Group is exposed to certain legal and tax issues which could in the event of a dispute develop into litigious proceedings and in some cases may result in contingent liabilities.
During the year the Group has not become engaged or involved in or otherwise subject to any litigation which has resulted in liabilities crystallising.
Commitments
At 31 March 2017 capital expenditure authorised and contracted for but not included in the financial statements amounted to nil 2016 nil.
Subsequent events The Group announced the sale of EBS Management PLC to Embark Group Limited on 11 April 2017.
The sale completed on 31 May 2017 for total consideration of up to 4.0 million.
The consideration is to be satisfied by the payment of 2.0 million in cash on completion 1.0 million of fixed deferred consideration and 1.0 million of contingent deferred consideration.
50% of each element of deferred consideration is payable one year after completion with the remaining balance due two years after completion.
On 28 April 2017 the Group was notified that it had been successful in tendering 3672 shares in Euroclear PLC for total consideration of 2.8 million.
At the balance sheet date this holding was presented as availableforsale assets within current assets.
The remaining shares in Euroclear PLC held by the Group were included within noncurrent assets at the reporting date.
Further information on this disposal can be found in note 17.
Related parties Transactions between the Parent Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed.
32.1 Transactions with related parties With the exception of the transactions detailed below the Group did not enter into any transactions with related parties who are not members of the Group during the year.
32.2 Remuneration of Key Management Personnel Key Management Personnel has been determined as being the Directors and Executive Committee members 2016 Directors only.
The compensation paid to Key Management Personnel is detailed below Salaries and shortterm employee benefits 2162 1695 Postemployment benefits 237 262 Sharebased payments 155 Social Security costs 280 246 2834 2203 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 146 Assets Notes Intangible assets 34 10260 12168 Net deferred tax assets 35 42 11 Availableforsale financial assets 36 1515 1451 Investments in subsidiaries 37 38178 39414 Noncurrent assets 49995 53044 Trade and other receivables 39 1304 1531 Current tax assets 503 Assets held for sale 38 1533 716 Cash and cash equivalents 40 1090 355 Current assets 4430 2602 Total assets 54425 55646
Share capital 21 12672 12669 Share premium 21 4429 4402 Revaluation reserve 205 190 Merger relief reserve 21 15167 15167 Retained earnings 5090 8229 Total equity 37563 40657 Trade and other payables 41 16862 14662 Current tax liabilities  327 Current liabilities 16862 14989 Total liabilities 16862 14989 Total equity and liabilities 54425 55646 Approved by the Board on 13 June 2017 and signed on its behalf by Paul Abberley Director Ben MoneyCoutts Director Company registration number 48796 England and Wales The notes on pages 149 to 153 are an integral part of these Parent Company financial statements.
Parent Company statement of financial position As at 31 March 2017 Financial statements site 147 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Share premium
Merger relief reserve
Total
At 1 April 2015 11490 4139 281  11022 26932 Loss for the year     1236 1236 Other comprehensive income Losses on availableforsale financial assets   123   123 Deferred tax on availableforsale financial assets   32   32 Total other comprehensive income for the year   91   91 Total comprehensive income for the year   91  1236 1327 Dividends paid     1754 1754 Sharebased payments value of employee services     197 197 issue of shares 30 263    293 Issue of ordinary shares 1149   15167  16316 At 31 March 2016 12669 4402 190 15167 8229 40657 Loss for the year     854 854 Other comprehensive income Losses on availableforsale financial assets   13   13 Deferred tax on availableforsale financial assets   28   28 Total other comprehensive income for the year   15   15 Total comprehensive income for the year   15  854 839 Dividends paid     2534 2534 Sharebased payments value of employee services     249 249 issue of shares 3 27    30 At 31 March 2017 12672 4429 205 15167 5090 37563 The notes on pages 149 to 153 are an integral part of these Parent Company financial statements.
Parent Company statement of changes in equity Year ended 31 March 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 148
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operating activities 42 1903 14248 Interest received  2 Net cash generated fromused in operating activities 1903 14246 Cash flow from investing activities Acquisition of intangible assets 34 32 664 Proceeds from sale of business 1500 Proceeds from sale of availableforsale financial assets 1436 258 Purchase of availableforsale financial assets 36 1292 246 Investment in subsidiary 350 Dividends received 74 32 Net cash generated fromused in investing activities 1336 620 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of ordinary share capital 30 16609 Dividends paid 21 2534 1754 Net cash generated fromused in financing activities 2504 14855 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 735 11 Cash and cash equivalents at start of year 355 366 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 40 1090 355 The notes on pages 149 to 153 are an integral part of these Parent Company financial statements.
Parent Company statement of cash flows Year ended 31 March 2017 Financial statements site 149 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Loss for the year As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Parent Company has elected not to present its own profit and loss account.
The Parent Company reported a loss for the year of 0.9 million 2016 loss 1.2 million.
Intangible assets
Goodwill
Customer relationships
At 1 April 2015 10027 19113 29140 Additions  664 664 At 31 March 2016 10027 19777 29804 Additions  32 32 At 31 March 2017 10027 19809 29836
At 1 April 2015 2511 13755 16266 Amortisation charge  1370 1370 At 31 March 2016 2511 15125 17636 Amortisation charge  1290 1290 Impairment 650  650 At 31 March 2017 3161 16415 19576 Net book value At 31 March 2017 6866 3394 10260 At 31 March 2016 7516 4652 12168 Details of the annual impairment assessment can be found in note 14.
Notes to the Parent Company financial statements Year ended 31 March 2017 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 150 Deferred tax assets
Total
At 1 April 2015 56 Revaluation of availableforsale financial assets 32 Other timing differences 77 At 31 March 2016 11 Revaluation of availableforsale financial assets 28 Other timing differences 3 At 31 March 2017 42 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated using an effective tax rate of 17% 2016 18%.
Availableforsale financial assets Fair value
Unlisted investments Total At 1 April 2015 1491 59 1550 Additions 246  246 Disposals 163 59 222 Revaluation in year 123  123 At 31 March 2016 1451  1451 Additions 1292  1292 Disposals 1215  1215 Revaluation in year 13  13 At 31 March 2017 1515  1515 The fair value of listed investments is determined by reference to quoted prices on the active markets.
Financial statements site 151 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Investments in subsidiaries
Total
At 1 April 2015 52842 Share options 132 At 31 March 2016 52974 Additions 350 Share options 249 Transfer to held for sale 1533 Disposals 302 At 31 March 2017 51738
At 1 April 2015 13521 Charge for the year 39 At 31 March 2016 13560 Charge for the year At 31 March 2017 13560 Net book value At 31 March 2017 38178 At 31 March 2016 39414 Assets held for sale The Group announced the sale of EBS Management PLC to Embark Group Limited on 11 April 2017.
The investment in EBS Management PLC has been included in the Parent Company statement of financial position as held for sale.
The Group completed the disposal of Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited on 1 April 2016.
In the previous financial year the investment in Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited was presented in the Parent Company statement of financial position as held for sale.
Refer to note 13 for details of the consolidated assets and liabilities held for sale.
Assets held for sale are presented in the table below.
Investment in subsidiaries 1533 716 1533 716 Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 152 Trade and other receivables
Amounts due from Group undertakings 1300 1527 Other debtors 4 4 1304 1531 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 1090 355 Trade and other payables
Amounts due to Group undertakings 16598 14396 Other payables 264 263 Accruals and deferred income  3 16862 14662 Financial statements site 153 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Reconciliation of net loss to net cash generated from operations Loss before tax 1371 1502 Adjustments for Amortisation of intangible assets 1290 1370 Impairment of intangible assets 650 Impairment of corporate loans 500 Dividend income 74 32 Interest income  2 Profit on disposal of availableforsale financial assets 221 36 Profit on disposal of business 1245 Changes in working capital Decrease in receivables 174 467 Increasedecrease in payables 2200 14513 Net cash inflowoutflow from operations 1903 14248 Related party transactions The Parent Company financial statements include amounts attributable to subsidiaries.
These amounts have been disclosed in aggregate in the relevant notes to the financial statements and are analysed below Receivable from related parties Payable to related parties Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited   16142 13835 EBS Management PLC  190 160 EBS Pensioneer Trustees Limited   2 2 Gryphon Investments PLC   294 294 Sutherlands Group Limited    265 Charles Stanley Investment Choices Limited 1300 1337 1300 1527 16598 14396 The principal transactions between the Parent Company and its subsidiaries impacting on the income statement during the year were in respect of recharges for costs and tax amounts payablereceivable under the Group Payment Arrangement.
During the year the Parent Company made a capital contribution of 0.4 million 2016 nil to EBS Management PLC.
The Parent Company received dividends totalling nil 2016 0.2 million from Charles Stanley Investment Choices Limited.
Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 154 Income statement year ended 31 March Continuing operations Revenue 141630 138650 144264 137 894 123108 Administrative expenses 136122 139163 141697 134859 112977 Impairment of intangible assets 650 465 8277  380 Other income 18tel82 Operating profitloss 5044 825 5578 3175 9833 Gain on surrender of lease 5550 Loss on disposal of fixed assets 2199 131 178 3 Gain on sale of business 148 299 1200 Gain on sale of corporate investments 423 Impairment of corporate loans 500 Finance income 397 6telFinance costs 64 99 75 85 44 Net finance and other nonoperating income 3755 138 1132 402 402 Profitloss before tax 8799 687 4446 3577 10235 Tax expensecredit 2539 47 413 784 2601 Profitloss from continuing operations 6260 640 4859 2793 7634 Discontinued operations Profitloss from discontinued operations  333 1287 1965 881 Profitloss for the year attributable to owners of the Parent Company 6260 307 6146 4758 6753 Earnings per share From continuing and discontinued operations From continuing operations Diluted 12.34p 1.27p 10.64p 6.12p 16.81p Five year record 2013site 155 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Abbreviation Definition AGM Annual General Meeting CASS Client Assets Sourcebook CF30 A controlled function regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority applicable to all employees providing advisory services to clients CGU Cash Generating Unit CIPD Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development CISI Chartered Institute for Securities and Investment CMI The Continuous Mortality Investigation that carries out research into mortality and morbidity experience and produces table widely used by actuaries Parent Company Company CSG Charles Stanley Group PLC CPI Consumer Price Index CREST The settlement system used by the London Stock Exchange for settling all its transactions CRO Chief Risk Officer CSC Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited the Groups main operating subsidiary CSFS Charles Stanley Financial Solutions Limited CSR Corporate Social Responsibility DTR Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules EPS Earnings per share EU European Union FCA UK Financial Conduct Authority FIT FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FRC UK Financial Reporting Council FSCS Financial Services Compensation Scheme FuM Funds under Management FuMA Funds under Management and Administration Group Charles Stanley Group PLC and its controlled entities IAS International Accounting Standard ICAAP Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process IFA Independent Financial Adviser IFPRU The FCAs Prudential sourcebook for Investment Firms IFRIC International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRS International Financial Reporting Standard KPI Key performance indicator Charles Stanley Annual report and accounts 2017 156 Abbreviation Definition LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate LIFFE London International Financial Futures Exchange LR Listing Rules MEC Market Exposure Committee MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive II which is legislation for the regulation of investment services within the European Economic Area NED Nonexecutive Director OEIC Openended Investment Company PBT Profit before tax PPS Personal Portfolio Service PRIIPS Packaged Retail Investment and Insurancebased Products PSP Performance Share Plan RAS Risk Appetite Statement RPI Retail Price Index S2PxA Standard table used by actuaries for mortality assumptions SIPP Selfinvested Personal Pension  a pension plan which enables the holder to choose and manage the investments made SMCR Senior Managers and Certification Regime VAT Value Added Tax VCT Venture Capital Trust WMA Wealth Management Association XO Executiononly Glossary Company information Company Secretary Julie Ung Registered of ce 55 Bishopsgate London EC2N 3AS Company registration number 48796 England and Walessite
Capita Registrars Limited Northern House Woodsome Park Fenay Bridge Hudders eld HD8 0GA Principal bankers Bank of Scotland New Uberior House 11 Earl Grey Street Edinburgh EH3 9BN External auditor KPMG LLP Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL
Canaccord Genuity 88 Wood Street London EC2V 7QR Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET 14 June 2017 Results announcement 29 June 2017 Exdividend date for  nal dividend 30 June 2017 Record date for  nal dividend 27 July 2017 Annual General Meeting 31 July 2017 Final dividend paid Financial calendar Where we are We operate in 24 UK locations.
For a list of our of ces visitsite Designed and produced by Frank Bright and Abel We operate in 24 UK locations.
Charles Stanley is one of the UKs leading independentlyowned wealth managers tracing its origins back directly to 1792 and is one of the oldest  rms on the London Stock Exchange.
Charles Stanley provides holistic wealth management services to private clients charities and smaller institutions.
These are delivered by over 400 professionals located in 24 of ces throughout the UK both direct to clients and to intermediaries.
Over the years we have constantly re ned our proposition to meet the changing needs of our clients.
Our services include personalised investment portfolio management pooled solutions  nancial planning advice and an awardwinning executiononly dealing platform Charles Stanley Direct.
Our vision Our vision is to become the UKs leading wealth manager by 2020.
We de ne leading in terms of quality rather than quantity .
Focusing on client satisfaction as well as staff engagement and equity market rating we measure our progress against these targets yearonyear.
Two years into our vision positive transformation across the business sees us on track to achieving this.
Our values Charles Stanleys core values  Caring Fair and Progressive  have provided an overarching framework within which we operate supporting our underlying strategy to always work in our clients best interests and offer a truly personal service.
At a glance
Chairmans statement
Chief Executive Of cers report Strategy and operating principles overview 08 Key performance indicators Our business Our markets Strategy progressing Review of the year
Risk management
Corporate social responsibility report Strategic report
C h a ir m a n  s in tr o d u c ti o n Board of Directors and Executive Committee Co rp o r a t e g o v e rna n c e report 56 Audit Committee report N om i n a t ion C om m i t t e e report 62 Directors remuneration report 86 Risk Committee report 89 Directors report 92 Directors responsibilities I n dep en den t a ud i t o r s report to the Members of Charles Stanley Group PLC only Financial statements 99 Consolidated income statement 100 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 101 Consolidated statement of  nancial position 102 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 104 Consolidated statement of cash  ows Notes to the  nancial statements 146 Parent Company nancial statements Notes to the Parent Company site Annual report and accounts 2017
Charles Stanley and Co.
Limited and Charles Stanley Investment Choices Limited are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and are wholly owned subsidiaries of Charles Stanley Group PLC.
Charles Stanley Group PLC June 2017 .
