Omega Diagnostics Group PLC Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017
Sub title Operational highlights Scottish Enterprise grant funding of 1.8 million secured towards planned expansion of Allersys menu CE mark achieved for 41 allergens to run on IDSiSYS platform Four new Allergodip panels now optimised Recruitment of skilled project managers and leaders into scientific teams Food intolerance division continues its strong performance Formal design freeze attained with our VISITECT CD4 test CE mark achieved for VISITECT Malaria tests to be manufactured at our facility in Pune The Group defines adjusted profit before taxation as statutory profit before tax and amortisation of intangible assets sharebased payment charges and IFRSrelated discount charges.
We believe that this measure of performance eliminates factors which distort periodonperiod comparisons in order to provide a more comparable position year on year.
We believe this information is useful to shareholders and analysts in providing a basis for measuring our financial performance.
Sales m 12% Gross profit m 13% Gross profit % 64.7% 0.9% Financial highlights Adjusted profit before tax m 16% Continuing our progress with accelerated growth October 2015 Opened manufacturing facility in Pune India.
August 2016 Secured a Scottish Enterprise research and development grant of 1.8 million.
November 2016 Accelerated recruitment of skilled project managers and leaders into our scientific team.
November 2015 Initiated business plan to accelerate growth across all three operating segments.
October 2016 CEmarked our allergy launch panel comprising 41 allergens which are now available for sale.
January 2017 Gained ISO accreditation for manufacturing facility in Pune India.
OPERATIONAL AND FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS For more information on the new facility in Pune 3 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 01 Strategic Report March 2017 CE mark achieved for VISITECT range of malaria tests.
April 2017 Attained formal design freeze for VISITECT CD4 test after successfully manufacturing three pilot batches.
Contents
Strategic Report
Operational and Financial Highlights 02 At a Glance
04 Chairmans Statement
06 Our Business Model 07 Our Strategy
08 Chief Executives Review
11 Products and Markets Overview 14 Our People
16 Risks and Risk Management
18 Financial Review
Governance
20 Board of Directors 22 Corporate Governance Report
Directors Remuneration Report
26 Directors Report Statement of Directors Responsibilities Financial Statements
28 Independent Auditors Report
C o ns o li d a t e d S t a t e m e n t of Comprehensive Income 30 Consolidated Balance Sheet C o ns o li d a t e d S t a t e m e n t of Changes in Equity Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 33 Company Balance Sheet C o m p a n y S t a t e m e n t of Changes in Equity 35 Company Cash Flow Statement 36 Notes to the Financial Statements 59 Notice of Annual General Meeting Notes to the Notice of Annual General Meeting 61 Advisers Omega Diagnostics Group PLC Omega Diagnostics Group PLC
Find uptodate information at site Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 02 2575C 255619C 255619C AT A GLANCE 25% 56% 19% A leading company in the fast growing area of immunoassay with a global presence in over 100 countries
Food intolerance Allergy and autoimmune Revenue share Revenue share Revenue share Main products
Allergodip
Allersys
Genesis ELISA Main products
Foodprint
Food Detective CNS laboratory service Main products
Syphilis
Micropath bacterial tests
Malaria
Our range of products Omega Diagnostics Group PLCs subsidiaries provide high quality invitro diagnostics IVD products for use in hospitals blood banks clinics and laboratories in over 100 countries and specialise in the areas of allergy and autoimmune food intolerance and infectious diseases.
The Group develops manufactures and sells allergy tests for over 600 allergens.
It has more than 20 years experience in the development of products for the diagnosis of allergies and a substantial understanding and knowledge in the production and standardisation of allergen extracts.
The autoimmune panel is a range of enzyme immunoassay EIA tests for the detection and quantification of multiple autoimmune diseases.
The Group provides a range of tests and instrumentation associated with food intolerance and gut health.
Based on quantifying total immunoglobulin G IgG reactions to over 220 different foods these tests are designed to support both health practitioners and individuals who wish to make informed decisions when managing their health.
The Group specialises in a range of diagnostic kits for infectious diseases in particular for syphilis febrile antigens and latex serology tests.
Enzyme immunoassays are available for a variety of viral bacterial and fungal infections complemented by a diverse selection of agglutination fluorescence and rapid tests.
Strategic Report Countries where our products are distributed Countries where we have a direct presence Our global presence A global reach allows the Group to benefit from fast growing economies in emerging markets while simultaneously mitigating challenging economic and political instability in certain regions of the world.
Located in Cambridgeshire England are Genesis Diagnostics Limited and its sister company Cambridge Nutritional Sciences Limited which develop and manufacture the Food intolerance product range.
Located in Devon England CoTek South West Limited manufactures and sells a range of tests for diagnosing bacterial infections.
Located in Alva Clackmannanshire Scotland Omega Diagnostics Limited manufactures and sells a range of immunoassay tests predominantly for infectious diseases as well as developing and manufacturing
CD4.
Cambridge Devon Alva Located in Reinbek Germany Omega Diagnostics GmbH manufactures and sells a range of allergen tests as well as developing the Allergodip product range.
Reinbek
Located in Mumbai India Omega Dx Asia Pvt Limited sells completed products manufactured at the other Omega sites in order to gain direct access to the Indian market.
Mumbai
Located in Pune India and part of Omega Dx Asia Pvt Limited the manufacturing facility during the year has successfully undergone an annual inspection from the Indian FDA confirming the facility is compliant with GMP processes for manufacturing testing storage and QA processes and that its manufacturing licence is valid until January 2021.
The Pune facility will now manufacture and sell its CEmarked VISITECT range of malaria tests.
The facility will develop other rapid tests to support the malaria tests.
Pune
For more information on our people For more information see our Products and Markets Overview 11 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 04
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Strategy
Pointofcare POC testing
CD4
We achieved a significant milestone in attaining formal design freeze with our VISITECT CD4 test for monitoring the immune status of people living with HIV following the successful manufacture of three pilot batches.
Devices from these batches were tested at three UK hospital sites on sufficient numbers of patient samples to demonstrate that we now have a method for manufacturing devices which consistently meets our design goal specifications regarding sensitivity and specificity.
We have now moved into the validation and verification phase of the programme which can be summarised across the following activities manufacturing of validation batches to confirm manufacturing robustnessreproducibility utilising validation batches to verify performance external performance evaluation trials and CE mark.
We have selected two sites in the UK and one site in India to undertake evaluation studies.
This is an important phase in the project and we will give ourselves sufficient time to demonstrate that we can transfer the product from development to routine manufacturing.
We continually assess the market landscape for this product and it seems clear that there is an increasing emphasis on the continued need for monitoring CD4 levels in people living with HIV particularly those patients with low CD4 counts who are at significant risk of contracting opportunistic infections.
The Company has built up relationships with a number of key opinion leaders over the years and so we have a voice that enables us to input into key stakeholder meetings.
We have been invited to attend the ninth International AIDS Society Conference on HIV Science IAS 2017 to be held in Paris in late July where VISITECT CD4 will be showcased.
Pune manufacturing facility We made a significant amount of progress during the year with our manufacturing facility in Pune India.
In January we announced that we received certificates of accreditation from BSI confirming our Quality Management System is compliant with ISO 90012008 and ISO 134852003.
In March we confirmed the facility underwent an annual inspection from the Indian FDA confirming that the facility is compliant with GMP processes for manufacturing testing storage and QA and that we were issued with a manufacturing licence which is valid until January 2021.
We also announced that we were successful in CEmarking and launching our VISITECT range of malaria tests comprising
Malaria Pf detection of HRP2 antigen in P.
VISITECT
Malaria PfPan detection of P. nonP.
VISITECT
Malaria PfPv detection and differentiation of P. falciparum and P. vivax.
These products are currently available for general sale through businesstobusiness channels in those countries which do not require individual product registration and we are in the process of being evaluated for additional regulatory approvals to enable the Company to participate in higher volume tender business.
We are also in the process of evaluating additional rapid tests for dengue syphilis leptospirosis brucella and S. typhi.
Allergy automation In October last year we reported that we CEmarked our initial launch panel comprising 41 allergens.
Since October we have optimised a further eleven allergens and these are currently undergoing their claim support work which should enable us to add them to the menu of tests available for sale.
Two initiatives will help support the ongoing work to extend the menu beyond the initial launch panel ensuring we enhance our product offering on a continuous basis.
Firstly in August last year we secured a Scottish Enterprise research and development grant of 1.8 million and this has enabled us to accelerate recruitment of skilled project managers and leaders into the scientific team.
Secondly we have invested in creating our own inhouse protein purification capability which will help in the optimisation programme of certain allergens that require a higher degree of characterisation to match the performance of the market leader.
David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman I am pleased to be able to report progress on a number of activities within our operations which I have outlined below site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 05 Strategic Report Our commercialisation objectives are closely aligned with our partner company IDS which is the manufacturer of the automated instrument over which we have exclusive rights to develop and sell our allergy tests.
We have explored a number of routes in the last year on how best to take the partnership forward.
Whilst IDS previously expressed an interest in acquiring the allergy business we both subsequently concluded that our mutual objectives were better served with an enlarged distribution model.
I believe we have now agreed the main outline terms which should enable the formal contract negotiations to proceed and we thank shareholders for their patience during this process.
Core business Our core business is divided into our three main areas of operation comprising Food intolerance Allergy and autoimmune and Infectious disease.
Our strategic aims are to ensure that we can drive good growth across all three sectors in a way that achieves a balance such that we are not overreliant on any single sector.
I have already outlined initiatives that support growth in Allergy and autoimmune and Infectious disease.
We believe there are further significant opportunities for growth in Food intolerance and have made progress in North America where customers are evaluating our products.
In China we are in advanced discussions with a partner company which could provide access to a large market which is increasingly aware of Food intolerance testing products and services.
In relation to our Food Detective product the Company has been in discussions this year with our notified body Lloyds Register Quality Assurance LRQA regarding use of the selftest version of the kit.
The Company has agreed a timescale to complete some corrective actions to LRQAs satisfaction.
In the event that we are unable to achieve this the CE mark for the selftest kit will be suspended for a period of time which would have a modest impact on revenues and profits.
Financial performance Group revenue grew by 12% to 14.2 million 2016 12.7 million with growth in revenue across all three business sectors.
As a predominantly export business we benefited from a weaker sterling throughout the year which added 1.1 million to reported revenues 2016 0.2 million.
On a constant currency basis revenue would have been ahead of last year by 3%.
Gross profit increased to 9.2 million 2016 8.1 million with an increase in gross profit margin to 64.7% 2016 63.8%.
Adjusted profit before tax statutory profit before tax of 0.7 million with add backs for amortisation of intangible assets sharebased payment charges and IFRSrelated discount charges was 1.1 million 2016 1.3 million and adjusted earnings per share were 1.1 pence 2016 1.2 pence the small reduction reflecting an increase in overhead expenditure compared to the previous year.
Statutory earnings per share were 0.7 pence 2016 0.5 pence.
The Groups cash position at the year end was 0.7 million 2016 1.3 million which represented a neutral cash flow in the second half of the financial year.
We continue to monitor our working capital management in the conversion of adjusted operating profit operating profit excluding sharebased payments and amortisation of intangible assets into operating cash and the conversion factor for the year was 171% 2016 108%.
Corporate governance The size and structure of the Board and its Committees are kept under review to ensure an appropriate level of governance operates throughout the year.
The Board is comprised of two Nonexecutive Directors and four Executive Directors who meet frequently during the year to discuss strategy and to review progress and outcomes against objectives.
Board reports containing KPIs which report on business issues by exception are circulated in advance of each Board meeting which contribute to a more efficient Board process allowing sufficient time to consider businesscritical issues.
The Group is not required to comply with the full requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code as an AIMquoted company but we believe the Board has the skills and the necessary experience to deliver on its plans and objectives in a way that enables Nonexecutive members of the Board to challenge and advise the Executive team as appropriate.
The Audit Committee and the Remuneration Committee are comprised of the two Nonexecutive Directors and the Board believes the current makeup and the number of Committees remain appropriate for a group of our size.
Board and employees There has been no change to the composition of the Board throughout the year.
Employees remain a key part of our Groups success and we have introduced new training programmes for our managers and supervisors to enable them to develop themselves to the best of their ability.
Wherever possible we seek to fill new roles in the organisation with internal candidates and we have been able to promote a number of people in the year.
The Group now has 180 employees around the world and I thank them for their hard work and efforts which have achieved much progress on a number of fronts this year.
Outlook
We are encouraged that trading in the first quarter of the new financial year is in line with our expectations.
We have made a significant amount of progress with a number of key assets that will underpin future growth
VISITECT
CD4 has achieved design freeze manufacturing facility in Pune India is now fully validated and
Malaria has now been CEmarked.
Since December last year the Company has been seeking to agree global distribution terms with its Allersys licensor Immunodiagnostic Systems Holdings plc IDS.
The Company believes that it has made good progress and the Directors believe that once we get beyond the contractual process the sales and marketing teams of both organisations will be capable of making a success of the Companys allergy products.
CD4 testing remains a practical and necessary marker for assessment of the baseline status of HIV infection.
We are confident that we will meet the remaining challenges within the validation programme that will determine our ability to manufacture a product at scale which meets the markets need.
We have also identified a number of organic growth opportunities for all our business segments which augurs well for the future.
David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman 29 June 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 06 OUR BUSINESS MODEL Leveraging our strengths to deliver value Omega Diagnostics Group PLC is focused on selling a wide range of specialist products primarily in the immunoassay invitro diagnostics IVD market within three segments where we see significant niche growth opportunities.
Allergy and autoimmune The Group develops manufactures and sells allergy tests for over 600 allergens and has more than 20 years experience focused on selling in all three market segments lab automation  Allersys midtier  Allergozyme and point of care  Allergodip Food intolerance The Group provides a range of tests and instrumentation associated with food intolerance and gut health.
Infectious disease The Group specialises in a range of diagnostic kits for infectious diseases in particular for syphilis febrile antigens and latex serology tests.
The Group is also establishing a product range within the key global health arena which is built on VISITECT that will operate in rural settings.
Geographic presence A global reach allows the Group to benefit from fast growing economies in emerging markets while simultaneously mitigating challenging economic and political instability in certain regions of the world.
People and knowledge Skilled scientific team with the capability and capacity for development in our three product segments and skilled operational and support staff to manufacture and commercialise opportunities in these segments.
Technology and innovation The Group has built up knowledge in innovative products that will allow Omega to differentiate its products from other offerings in the market.
Strong partnerships Strong alliances with leading research institutions commercial partners and NGOs allow us to access future technologies innovative solutions and improved distribution capabilities.
How we are different How we generate revenue How we create value For customers Improved health and wellbeing Greater access to healthcare For shareholders Longterm investment For Omega Personal growth and development opportunities Attractive employment benefits Continued reinvestment in business
More on Allergy and autoimmune 11 More on Food intolerance 12 For more on our people 14 More on Infectious disease 13 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 07 Strategic Report OUR STRATEGY A clear strategy to further the Groups progress
Accelerated growth Grow all three operating segments  Allergy and autoimmune Food intolerance and Infectious disease
41 allergens CEmarked to run on the IDSiSYS machine with a further eleven optimised Design freeze on VISITECT CD4 and verification and validation work underway Four new Allergodip panels now optimised Pune facility has CEmarked three
Malaria tests Future focus Continued expansion of the allergen menu to run on the IDSiSYS machine CEmarking of the VISITECT CD4 test Launch of the first Allergodip panels with mobile app Securing regulatory approval for the
Malaria range Expansion of the Genarrayt
Expansion of menu offering from Pune facility One company All employees are aligned with the goals of the business and committed to a process of continuous improvement
Group core values launched Company newsletter company meetings and staff briefings introduced Staff survey completed Future focus Continuing to embed and promote core values Continuous improvement culture introduced and promoted Execute and deliver Develop efficient effective and compliant processes across all areas of the business
Project management structure and processes implemented Strategic sourcing strategy being rolled out Group quality plan developed to reflect changing regulatory landscape Progress made on UK site expansion plans to support future growth Future focus Expansion of project management to focus on development process Further work on strategic sourcing to deliver significant improvements Quality plan rolled out across all sites Execution of UK site expansion plans
Provide a framework where all employees can contribute to the business through effective management and leadership
Management training programmes are in place and starting to make a positive difference New staff appraisal and development programmes are being implemented Future focus Continuing to invest in training and development for all staff Develop a talent pipeline to ensure longterm success of the Group Customer focus Maintaining customers at the heart of the organisation
Customer delivery performance improved over the year Customer satisfaction surveys completed Increased customer interaction with a wider set of staff Future focus Setup of key customer boards to help guide our vision and strategy Recruit key opinion leaders to help better understand our markets and support scientific studies Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 08
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
Dear fellow shareholder During the year we have made great progress on our threeyear vision and are now well positioned to deliver the key aim of accelerated growth in all three business divisions.
Food intolerance Expansion of Foodprint in key market segments is going to plan with new accounts expected to start delivering significant revenue streams over the next few years.
Our RandD team in Ely are also making great strides in terms of implementing process improvements to allow us to handle the increasing demand and deliver key improvements to our customers.
Partners in China have been identified and work on the lengthy registration process will commence in this financial year.
Allergy and autoimmune
41 allergens CEmarked and we are making substantial progress with the next phase of development with a further eleven allergens optimised.
We believe we have now agreed the main outline terms which should enable the formal contract negotiations with IDS to proceed.
Allergodip
80 allergens have now been optimised and ongoing work continues with the development of a mobile phone app ahead of the initial launch of panels later this year.
Infectious disease
CD4  Achieved our key milestone of design freeze by the end of March 2017 and it has now entered the validation and verification phase which is currently progressing to plan.
Pune facility has CEmarked three malaria rapid tests and first commercial sales in both India and export have been achieved.
This is a great example of everyone involved in the project  from India South Africa and the UK  all working together to achieve the project goals.
Core business Segmental revenue performance Food intolerance The Food intolerance division has again performed well producing doubledigit growth.
For this year total Food intolerance sales increased by 13% to 8.00 million 2016 7.06 million.
Sales of Food Detective reduced by 10% in the year to 2.06 million 2016 2.29 million.
As noted in the halfyear results we took a conscious decision to reduce pipeline stocking in two of our key markets.
Andrew Shepherd Chief Executive IN SUMMARY Group revenue increased by 12% to 14.2 million Adjusted profit before tax of 1.1 million Significant progress on threeyear growth plan Design freeze achieved on VISITECT
CE mark achieved for 41 allergens to run on IDSiSYS platform We are pleased to announce the launch of the VISITECT range of rapid diagnostic tests.
Andrew Shepherd Chief Executive With the Company moving into an accelerated growth phase we have very exciting times ahead of us site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 09 Strategic Report Sales of Genarrayt
2016 3.47 million with strong performances in Europe North America and the Middle East.
The Group sold a further eight instruments in the year taking the cumulative number of installations to 176 instruments in 40 countries and revenue per instrument excluding Spain increased by 29% to 23442 2016 18175.
The higher percentage growth rate of reagent sales as compared to the overall growth in revenue per instrument reflects the investment that was made into newer North American and Southeast Asian markets in the previous year and these markets are seen as an increasingly important area for longterm growth.
Our CNS laboratory service showed an increase of 7% in sales to 0.62 million 2016 0.58 million.
Sales were still dominated by the markets in the UK and Ireland and we produced and sold 7167 patient reports in the year 2016 7008 maintaining an average price of 86.44 per report 2016 82.73.
Food intolerance will continue to be a key growth driver and contributor to the bottom line.
This has been reflected in the increase in operational and marketing resource to provide high level scientific and technical support for the CNS product range.
The growth trajectory is expected to continue with this core business supported by increasing the range of products and services in the health and wellbeing market which now extends to 80 countries.
Allergy and autoimmune Sales for the Allergy and autoimmune division are comprised of Allergy sales of 3.03 million 2016 2.57 million and sales of Autoimmune products of 0.56 million 2016 0.59 million an overall increase of 14%.
The Allergy sales continue to be derived almost exclusively from our Omega Diagnostics GmbH business in Germany where our domestic sales increase of 3% in euro terms is a positive contrast to a recent history of decline due to reimbursement pressures.
In reported sterling terms the increase was 15% due to the weakening of sterling against the euro throughout the period.
Allergy development Following the CEmarking of 41 allergens in October 2016 we have continued to develop further tests to increase the available menu.
A further eleven allergens have been optimised so we are on target to deliver another 20 allergens this year.
In addition to the Allersys programme four new Allergodip panels have now been optimised.
The introduction of a mobile phone app that allows quantification of the test result will assist in the marketing of the test to resourcepoor countries with limited laboratory facilities.
Infectious disease Infectious disease sales increased by 5% to 2.65 million 2016 2.52 million with the increase due to the weakening of sterling against the euro and dollar throughout the period.
We were pleased to announce the launch of the VISITECT Malaria range of rapid diagnostic tests
Malaria Pf detection of HRP2 antigen in P.
VISITECT
Malaria PfPan detection of P. nonP.
VISITECT
Malaria PfPv detection and differentiation of P. falciparum and P. vivax.
30 years of Omega
This year marks the 30year anniversary since I formed the
It has been a real mix of excitement and challenges and some disappointments of course but over the 30 years it has been an absolute pleasure to experience Omega corporate life and the science that we use on a daily basis and to create and investigate new opportunities and interactions with so many people around the world.
We are now moving into an accelerated growth phase and we have some very exciting times ahead of us.
Food Detective sales 10%
Foodprint sales 34% For more information see our Financial Review 18 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 10
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW continued
Core business continued Segmental revenue performance continued Infectious disease continued In the development of the VISITECT Malaria range we have a defined strategy to provide affordable but high quality tests that are designed with the user in mind.
The devices are easy to use and come equipped with all the necessary components to run the tests effectively at the point of care.
The range is generating good interest via businesstobusiness channels and at the same time we continue to work on incountry product registrations and successfully achieving global regulatory standards that will enable us to include the range in high volume public sector tender exercises.
In addition to the malaria rapid tests we are also evaluating additional rapid tests for dengue syphilis leptospira brucella and S. typhi.
Global health update The past year has seen significant progress in the development of
CD4 the worlds first semiquantitative instrumentfree rapid test for assessing CD4 baseline status in people living with HIV.
Having achieved design freeze we have moved the test into validation and verification to ensure we can manufacture the device in a robust and satisfactory manner.
This work will be supported by external evaluation testing at HIV laboratories in Glasgow and London that if successful will allow us to commercialise the product.
The landscape for CD4 testing has changed over the past six months amongst key opinion leaders and policy makers there has been a shift in the strategy for utilising CD4 testing in the care of people living with HIV.
This has resulted in a series of regional workshops being held across the African continent that Omega Diagnostics has been invited to attend and participate in.
The resulting output from these activities will see an increasing emphasis being placed on CD4 testing to help those people who present for care in the advanced stages of the disease with very low CD4 cell counts.
This group of patients represents more than 30% of the overall HIV epidemic.
In the advanced stages of HIV patients are increasingly at risk of developing opportunistic infections that can dramatically reduce life expectancy.
We are evaluating opportunities to bring other rapid tests to the market that will complement VISITECT CD4 in helping public health practitioners combat HIV in low and middleincome countries.
In our efforts to make Omega Diagnostics a key supplier in the global health arena we have worked hard over the past year to redefine our marketing materials with this audience in mind.
In addition we continue to develop simple but effective training tools that will benefit our customers who use our products in remote settings.
Outlook
Food intolerance continues to keep up its good performance and we expect to see this continuing in the year ahead with the strategic marketing initiatives being planned and executed as part of our accelerated growth strategy.
With renewed effort with regards to our ongoing relationship with IDS we are looking forward to the eventual launch of the initial range of CEmarked Allersys tests.
Expanding the test menu as currently envisaged will only help to increase sales of these products in the new financial year and beyond.
We are looking forward to reporting good sales progress over the coming year together with our continuing goal of delivering
CD4 to the market by the end of this calendar year.
I would like to thank all the Group employees who have made great efforts throughout the year in delivering progress in our core areas of activity.
We are all looking forward to a year of growth and further progress.
Andrew Shepherd Chief Executive 29 June 2017 We are evaluating opportunities to bring other rapid tests to the market that will complement
CD4 in helping public health practitioners combat HIV in low and middleincome countries.
Andrew Shepherd Chief Executive site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 11 Strategic Report PRODUCTS AND MARKETS OVERVIEW Providing a range of tests for allergy diagnostics We have successfully optimised 50 Allersys allergens for use on the IDSiSYS system that are ready for commercial launch.
Our foundations In 2010 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC acquired the IVD division of allergy and specific immunotherapy specialist Allergopharma Joachim Ganzer KG giving access to a range of allergy tests for over 600 allergens.
This gave the Group a position in allergy testing that could be exploited in two ways.
First by driving international sales of current products through its existing global distribution network and second by delivering automated allergy tests in conjunction with Immunodiagnostic Systems IDSiSYS system.
Our markets Allergy is defined as a hypersensitivity response by the immune system.
In the majority of cases allergic reactions are caused by IgE antibodies.
IgE mediated allergies are defined by their rapid onset and can cause a variety of symptoms ranging from mild rhinitis to severe anaphylaxis.
The World Allergy Organisation WAO estimates that between 30% and 40% of the global population is affected by one or more allergic diseases e. rhinitis urticaria food allergy or drug allergy.
The allergy diagnostic market is forecast to grow steadily at a compound annual growth rate CAGR of 12.67% for the period 20152019.
Our products The current product range is well established and addresses the enzymelinked immunoassay ELISA and strippanel test segments of the markets.
Allergozyme is a paper discbased ELISA that quantifies the amount of circulating Specific IgE in a patient sample for over 600 different allergens.
This product is largely sold into the German domestic market.
Allergodip is an enzyme immunoassay EIA dipstick test for the semiquantitative determination of Specific IgE in serumplasma.
Eight panels are available that address regional allergen sensitisation patterns.
Allersys is a chemiluminescent immunoassay CLIA for the quantitative determination of Total IgE and Specific IgE in serum.
These reagent kits will operate on Immunodiagnostic Systems IDSiSYS automated instrument in the laboratory segment of the market.
Our strategy The goal is to build a portfolio of products that enables Omega to compete across the automated strip testing and POC segments of the allergy market.
To address the automated segment Allersys will launch in 2017.
To date 50 of the most commonly tested allergens have been optimised with a plan to increase this to over 100 allergens over the next four years.
To further penetrate the strippanel test segment the Group has been developing Allergodip in order to increase the number of allergens and allow quantification via a mobile phone app.
The
Group has built up extensive experience in allergy assay development and mobile technology quantification that will allow Omega to differentiate its products from other offerings in the market.
1  MarketsandMarkets Allergy Diagnostics Market 2014.
Allergy diagnostics revenues For more on Allergy diagnostics 8 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 12 PRODUCTS AND MARKETS OVERVIEW continued Providing a range of tests for food intolerance Another year of significant growth with success in North America and focus on adding complementary health and wellbeing tests to our portfolio.
Our foundations Located in Cambridgeshire England Genesis Diagnostics Limited and its sister company Cambridge Nutritional Sciences Limited are subsidiaries of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC.
The Company specialises in the development and manufacture of kits to aid the detection of immune reactions to food often described as food intolerance or food sensitivity.
With a core competency in arraybased technologies for laboratory and POC markets GenesisCNS has built a reputation for quality innovation and delivery in its 20 years of experience in the invitro diagnostics IVD industry.
Our markets Food intolerancesensitivity testing is a growing market with the public being much more aware of the role their diet plays in their health and wellbeing.
The overall market is expected to grow steadily at a CAGR of 6% for the period 20152019.
From a medical perspective the role of gut health and its impact on general health and wellbeing is increasingly understood.
Gut health is a complex area and a multitude of factors including gut permeability giving rise to immune reactions to food microbiome and oxidative stress often give rise to health conditions that need to be treated through diet and supplementation.
Our products Food intolerancesensitivity is defined as a slow or gradual response to a food with milder symptoms than an allergy including bloating stomach and digestive issues skin reactions etc.
It is believed that food sensitivity reactions are related to the antibody IgG.
Foodprint
Genarrayt is a laboratorybased system for the testing of IgG immune response related food sensitivity.
Developed and manufactured by the Company it is an innovative colorimetric microarraybased ELISA technology which utilises stateoftheart microarrays that can detect the presence of IgG foodspecific antibodies to over 220 commonly eaten foods.
Food Detective is a quick and easy POC test for immune food sensitivity that can be used in the privacy of a home at the users convenience.
The test assesses reactions to 59 commonly eaten foods.
Our strategy The Company has a unique position in the market offering a distinctive range of food intolerancesensitivity tests that cover a selection of applications.
On the back of these products the brand has developed an excellent reputation with patients and laboratories around the world.
In addition the Company has built an impressive and stable network of distribution serving over 75 countries with a specific skill set within the health and wellbeing market.
This positions the Group well for further growth opportunities within this testing segment.
1  Just Food Global Health and Wellness Food Market 20152019.
Food intolerance revenues For more on Food intolerance 8 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 13 Strategic Report Providing a range of tests for infectious disease We have achieved a significant milestone of attaining formal design freeze with our VISITECT CD4 test.
We also now have a fully ISOaccredited and Indian FDA GMPcompliant manufacturing facility in Pune that has manufactured and sold its first CEmarked malaria rapid tests.
Our foundations Located in Alva Scotland Omega Diagnostics Limited is a subsidiary of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC and manufactures and sells a range of immunoassay tests predominantly for infectious diseases.
Its main product line includes a range of screening and confirmatory tests for syphilis.
In recent times the subsidiary has built up a capability and capacity for the development and manufacturing of rapid diagnostic tests RDTs for use in resourcepoor settings in developing countries.
Our markets Global health is defined as the health of populations in a global context or the area of study research and practice that places a priority on improving health and achieving equity in health for all people worldwide.
Its core focus is to save lives reduce or eliminate disease and have an impact on public health.
Essentially the route to market is through a mix of policy makers aid agencies and financial stakeholders with interactive development strategies that aim to achieve aggressive targets set by the United
Known as the Sustainable Development Goals the targets for improvements in health and wellbeing are to a diagnose those people at risk b provide treatment to people living with disease and end the epidemics of those diseases that place the heaviest burden on people in the poorest regions of the world.
Our products The current portfolio of products includes amongst others a range of serological tests for both the screening and confirmation of syphilis a range of latex serology tests and a range of stained bacterial suspensions to detect identify and quantify suspected salmonella brucella or rickettsial infections.
In addition there is an existing range of rapid diagnostic tests under the VISITECT brand designed to detect malaria syphilis leptospirosis and dengue fever.
The VISITECT range will be extended by the successful commercialisation of VISITECT CD4 as well as transferring the manufacture of the existing range to our facility in Pune.
Our strategy Since its inception Omega Diagnostics Limited has manufactured invitro diagnostics IVD which have been successfully exported for nearly 30 years.
However these products are coming under threat from advances in technology and competitive activity.
The formation of Omegas Global health division has allowed us to formulate a strategy aimed at delivering innovative diagnostic solutions that address significant unmet diagnostic needs and establish a profitable and growing business with mid to longterm outlook.
Omegas partnership with the Burnet Institute has focused efforts in expanding rapid test manufacturing capabilities and providing a means to diversify routes to market via the nongovernmental organisation NGO arena and associated funding.
To achieve our objectives we utilise strong alliances with leading research institutions and mutually beneficial thirdparty commercial partnerships enabling access to the most relevant technologies for POC testing.
We will focus on lateral flow as the preferred platform which will allow us to exploit Omegas high quality manufacturing facilities in Alva UK and Pune India.
Infectious disease revenues For more on Infectious diseases 8 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 14 OUR PEOPLE Motivating developing and recognising our people We are committed to attracting and retaining the right people and have a strong and dedicated team.
Our employees We have a committed and engaged workforce with 72% of the staff having five years service and over.
This includes 21% with over ten years service and 8% with over 20 years service.
In addition to their proven loyalty we have a highly educated workforce of which 66% are degree qualified including 28% qualified to Masters or PhD level.
To allow us to develop and retain this strong culture we have developed an HR strategy that has clear aims and goals.
Staff can clearly identify how their performance links to the business goals and everyone recognises they have a part to play in helping Omega grow to the next level.
The HR strategy includes the following processes development review induction and talent management.
It also identifies developing our staff as a key business goal.
We have also just completed a key part of this strategy to define our core values.
These values will help to guide the culture during this high growth phase we are entering as a business.
Total number of employees 15% Staff who are degree qualified 66% Staff with five years service and over 72% Our core values Customer focus Customer satisfaction is not a department everyone is responsible.
Listening to customers drives improvement.
Accountability
Ask what more I can do.
Take ownership.
Collaboration
Actively support your colleagues.
Be clear in communication.
Celebrate success and have fun together.
Honesty
Aspire to be open and transparent.
Take pride in building trust between ourselves and others.
Respect
Treat others as we would wish to be treated.
Respect the environment we work and live in.
Stock image to be approved purchased site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 15 Strategic Report A day in the life of global health During the summer months in South Africa Omega Diagnostics donates seedlings and compost to a small HIV clinic in a local Cape Town township.
It has been an ongoing activity over the past few years and a collaborative effort of us giving the funds and lending a hand to a passionate and committed community health worker who has the desire to feed patients visiting the clinic.
Her name is Vutomi and she has been our inspiration to support getting the vegetable garden started.
Vutomi has a background in HIV counselling and works tirelessly on a daily basis to educate communities on HIV transmission and infection risks counselling on antiretroviral therapy and tuberculosis medication and offering support to those in need.
This year has been difficult for the vegetable garden.
The Western Cape was hit by an extreme summer drought and watering of gardens was prohibited.
This meant that the usually busy summer season in the vegetable garden was halted.
Just as the drought ended Cape Town was hit by a storm resulting in major flooding and damage to infrastructure.
We hope to be able to share more about our community involvement and the vegetable garden soon.
In the run up to the International AIDS Conference in Paris in July 2017 and following a very successful AIDS Conference in Durban in 2016 we have decided to continue to support a wonderful womens empowerment programme in the Valley of a Thousand Hills KwaZuluNatal South Africa called Woza Moya Hillcrest AIDS Centre Trust.
Zulu women are renowned bead workers and this project focuses on providing opportunities for women often gogos grannies to earn an income to support their families.
The HIV epidemic continues to heavily affect young people in KwaZuluNatal and gogos are often left to raise their grandchildren when their own children die due to HIVrelated complications.
We have just ordered another box of beautiful AIDS ribbons that we will be handing out at the International AIDS Conference in Paris in July 2017 and look forward to spreading the word of the work to support local communities being done by this great organisation.
We continue to provide malaria and syphilis kits to our friends at Comfort Rwanda and Comfort Congo who support Rusayo Clinic in the Democratic Republic of Congo DRC.
The area that Rusayo is based in is home to a diverse range of people including the internally displaced refugees rape survivors exchild soldiers and communities of ethnic Baka Pygmies.
Comfort Congo has made it its mission to offer support wherever it can and we are proud to support this initiative supporting healthcare strengthening where it is most needed at the point of care.
We have also been busy developing a range of training tools to be utilised in training community health workers to use VISITECT CD4 and our VISITECT Malaria range.
Much time has been spent on illustrating and designing training booklets using adult learning and education principles.
This has encouraged different team members involvement with lots of discussion planning and feedback.
We are committed to providing training and support materials to all who will be using our tests.
Elizabeth Hobbs with Vutomi in South Africa.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 16
RISKS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
The longterm success of the Group depends on the continual review assessment and control of the key business risks it faces.
The Groups current principal risks and uncertainties are briefly outlined below.
Principal risks and uncertainties Risk and description Mitigating actions Change General economic and political conditions The Group may be faced with changes in the general economic climate in each territory in which it operates that may adversely affect the financial performance of the Group.
Factors which may contribute include the level of direct and indirect competition against the Group industrial disruption rate of growth of the Groups product segments and interest rates.
The Group seeks to mitigate this risk by conducting operations on a broad geographic basis and by introducing new technologies to remain innovative.
The current general economic climate has been dominated by a number of political changes over the last twelve months.
Brexit
The vote by the UK to leave the EU has created increased uncertainty for the future.
The Group anticipates that the process of withdrawing from the EU will be complex and take time.
There can be no certainty regarding the terms of withdrawal at this stage.
The Group earns a significant proportion of its revenues in currencies other than sterling which can help to mitigate the impact of withdrawal.
The climate of uncertainty has increased following the recent UK general election.
Regulatory risk The manufacturing marketing and use of the Groups products are subject to regulation by government and regulatory agencies in many countries.
Of particular importance is the requirement to obtain and maintain approval for a product from the applicable regulatory agencies to enable the Groups products to be marketed.
Approvals can require clinical evaluation of data relating to safety quality and efficacy of a product.
Failure to comply with the various regulatory laws can have adverse consequences including increased costs restrictions recalls or product suspensions.
The Group has increased its resource in this area during the year and conducts its operations within recognised quality assurance systems and undergoes external assessment to ensure compliance with these systems.
The risk is unchanged in the year in that known changes to the IVD regulations are already being planned for by the Group.
The Group also uses external consultancies to assess and strengthen its quality management system.
Operating a system of internal control and risk management
Increase in risk No change in risk Decrease in risk Risk management process The Groups senior management team meets on a regular basis and ensures that time is dedicated to review the Group risk register on a detailed basis.
Identify risk Assess risk D e v e l o p p l a n to mitigate risk R e a s s e s s r i s k after mitigation R e p o r t t o management site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 17 Strategic Report Risk and description Mitigating actions Change Funding risk The success of growing the business can sometimes depend on the ability of the Directors to access external funding of which there can be no guarantee beyond the level of existing internal cash generation.
The Group seeks to mitigate this risk by maintaining good relationships with a number of funding sources including shareholders and banks that could provide additional debt facilities.
The Group has just renewed its overdraft at an increased level of 2.0 million 2016 1.7 million which is expected to revert to 1.7 million at the end of the first half of the new financial year.
Equity funding markets may experience volatility with the latest UK general election delivering a hung parliament.
Eurozone risk The euro area combines 19 countries with multiple domestic policies all having to operate under common monetary conditions.
The legacy of the financial crisis and differing policy choices will continue to lead to uncertainty and may lead to disruption in investment choices.
The Group monitors those countries under pressure and mitigates the risk in those countries where it has trading relationships with tighter credit control procedures and credit limits where necessary.
Political uncertainty and the rise of populism in France Italy and the Netherlands could maintain higher uncertainty for longer in turn continuing to hamper investment.
Development risk The Group has undertaken a similar level of development compared to the prior year with the aim of launching new products in the future.
There is no guarantee that development activity will lead to the future launch of products.
Such development activity can meet technical hurdles that are unable to be overcome and market and competition activity can render the output from development activities obsolete.
Poor product evaluations could lead to delays in approvals and product launches.
The Group seeks to mitigate the risk around development activities by ensuring that new product candidates undergo a rigorous screening programme.
Development programmes are planned in accordance with recognised industry quality standards managed by people with the requisite skills.
The Group has now completed the optimisation of 52 Allersys allergens which meet design goal parameters and we believe we have made good progress in agreeing global distribution terms with IDS.
VISITECT
CD4 has achieved design freeze and three product variants of VISITECT Malaria have now been CEmarked and launched.
Technology risk Competition introduces new technology that competes with the Groups current portfolio which is disruptive in nature.
The Group closely monitors the market on a continual basis.
The Group continues to invest in development and innovation to maintain market share.
Pricing environment Competition offering lower prices for similar products to those of the Group.
The Group has implemented strategic sourcing to drive down the cost of goods.
The Group regularly reviews manufacturing processes and production batch sizes.
The Group is aware of increased price competition for some of its products and has recruited a strategic sourcing manager to implement its strategy.
Key employees The Group operates in an industry where the recruitment training and retention of talented people is critical to the Group being able to deliver successfully on its strategies and objectives.
The Group aims to offer competitive salary and benefits packages which align the interests of employees with shareholders.
The Group also recognises and places importance on training and personal development.
The Group monitors trends in the industry and undertook a UKwide salary benchmarking exercise in the year which led to a number of people receiving a higher level of remuneration.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 18
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Financial performance Our core business recorded headline growth in revenue across all three divisions.
Total revenue increased by 11.8% to 14.2 million 2016 12.7 million with both the Food intolerance division and the Allergy and autoimmune division recording doubledigit revenue growth of 13.3% and 13.6% respectively.
Food intolerance was supported by a strong growth in Foodprint sales to 4.7 million 2016 3.5 million more than offsetting a reduction in sales of Food Detective to 2.1 million 2016 2.3 million as some customers reduced stock levels.
The Allergy and autoimmune division benefited from a growth in allergy sales in Germany to 3.6 million 2016 3.4 million offsetting a small reduction in autoimmune sales to 0.56 million 2016 0.59 million.
The Infectious disease division also recorded growth of 5.6% in revenue to 2.7 million 2016 2.5 million.
Revenue across all three divisions benefited by a combined 1.1 million 2016 0.2 million due to weaker sterling exchange rates following the countrys decision in the EU referendum.
Gross profit increased by 13.3% to 9.2 million 2016 8.1 million helped by an increase in gross margin percentage to 64.7% 2016 63.8%.
Overheads increased by 0.8 million to 8.5 million 2016 7 .7 million.
Administration costs have increased by 0.5 million principally due to higher costs in the UK relating to undertaking a salary benchmarking exercise and implementing a more formal management training programme.
Selling and marketing costs have increased by 0.3 million with a modest increase in costs in India and with the higher proportion occurring in Germany where there has been a need to upskill in sales management.
Other operating income reduced by 0.3 million on the prior year because that year included the final amortisation of a grant received from Unitaid in 2014.
Adjusted profit before tax statutory profit before tax of 0.7 million with add backs for amortisation of intangibles sharebased payment charges and IFRSrelated discount charges was 1.1 million compared to 1.3 million the year before as the size of the add backs referred to above were lower by 0.2 million than in the previous year.
Segmental performance as presented in the notes to the financial statements still shows that the Food intolerance division is the only profitable segment right now but our plans to address the shortfall remain the same with opportunities for Allersys and VISITECT CD4 as outlined throughout this Strategic Report.
Taxation
Our UK companies continue to benefit from government policies on tax that encourage investment in research and development activities.
In the year adjusted tax losses of 0.6 million for the year to 31 March 2016 were surrendered for cash at a rate of 14.5% generating a cash rebate of 0.1 million.
We still have cumulative tax losses of 2.9 million for years ended up to 31 March 2014 that are carried forward for future offset.
The currentyear tax credit of 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million tax charge reflects a lower level of losses surrendered in the year versus the prior year.
Earnings per share Adjusted earnings per share were 1.1 pence versus 1.2 pence in the prior year.
The difference is due mainly to the small reduction in adjusted profit before tax as described above leading to adjusted profit after tax of 1.19 million versus 1.26 million in the prior year calculated on a fully diluted 109.8 million 2016 109.5 million shares in issue.
Research and development As key development programmes continued to make progress we increased investment in research and development to a total of 2.37 million 2016 1.74 million representing 16.6% of Group turnover.
Expenditure on our Allersys project increased to just under 1.1 million 2016 0.95 million as we completed the claim support work and compiled the technical file leading to CEmarking 41 allergens in October.
Expenditure on VISITECT CD4 also increased to 0.62 million 2016 0.49 million as we achieved design freeze of the product following the successful manufacture of three pilot batches.
Kieron Harbinson Group Finance Director IN SUMMARY Total Group revenue increased by 12% to 14.2 million Bank overdraft facility increased to 2.0 million Conversion rate of operating profit into operating cash of 171% Our core business recorded headline growth in revenue across all three divisions site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 19 Strategic Report We also incurred 0.3 million 2016 0.1 million on further developing our POC allergy dipstick test Allergodip for use in doctors offices.
Other minor areas of expenditure included smaller projects covering food extract optimisation and completion of the malaria technology transfer into Pune India.
Of the total expenditure 2.2 million 2016 1.5 million has been capitalised on the balance sheet in accordance with IAS 38  Development Costs whilst earlier stage RandD expenditure of 0.2 million 2016 0.26 million has been expensed through the income statement.
Intangible assets Intangible assets have increased to a total of 15.6 million 2016 13.5 million comprising goodwill of 4.7 million separately identifiable intangible assets from previous acquisitions totalling 3.0 million and capitalised development costs of 7.9 million.
Goodwill
There has been no impairment of goodwill on any of the acquisitions to date.
Goodwill of 4.7 million 2016 4.6 million has increased by 0.1 million relating to the retranslation of goodwill to 1.3 million 2016 1.2 million in acquiring the Allergy IVD business in Germany in 2010.
0.4 million arose on acquiring CoTek in 2009 and 3.0 million arose on acquiring GenesisCNS in 2007.
Intangible assets Separately identifiable intangible assets have been recognised in connection with past acquisitions 2.0 million on GenesisCNS of which 1.0 million has been amortised to date 0.1 million on CoTek which has been fully amortised and 1.7 million on Omega Diagnostics GmbH of which 1.3 million has been amortised to date.
A purchased licence of 1.5 million relates to the exclusive global access rights to the IDSiSYS platform for allergy testing which to date has not been amortised.
Minor capitalised software costs amount to 0.1 million.
Capitalised development costs Capitalised development costs of 2.2 million have been incurred in the year and as described above bring the cumulative spend to date on all projects to 7.9 million.
A breakdown of the project expenditure is as follows 2017 2016
5069499 3995021
CD4 2221480 1597367
339650 74908
Malaria 109431 Other 132191 Total 7872251 5667296 There has been no amortisation of these capitalised development costs in the years up to 31 March 2017 but the amortisation of these costs along with the purchased licence referred to above will only start after commercialisation of these assets.
As stated on previous occasions this particular subset of amortisation charges will not be added back in the computation of the Groups routinely reported adjusted profit before tax.
Property plant and equipment The Group maintained its expenditure on fixed assets at a similar level to last year at 0.6 million 2016 0.6 million.
The largest element included 0.3 million 2016 0.1 million invested in Alva to ensure continued compliance with overseas country regulatory audits and to equip the laboratory with the means to undertake protein purification and separation techniques in support of the Allersys development programme.
0.2 million 2016 0.2 million was spent on GenesisCNS to alleviate certain space constraints with the facility and 0.1 million 2016 Nil was spent in Germany on laboratory equipment and instruments supplied on loan to the customer base.
Financing
The Group has a longstanding relationship with Bank of Scotland as principal bankers to the Group and in May of this year we agreed an overdraft renewal for an increased facility of 2.0 million 2016 1.7 million which is expected to revert to 1.7 million at the end of the first half of the new financial year.
In addition to the overdraft the bank provided an asset finance facility in the year of up to 1.0 million to fund the purchase of new plant and machinery.
0.2 million of this facility was drawn down in the year repayable over five years and the Company expects to roll over the balance for another year from the end of July 2017.
Operating cash flow The Group monitors its cash requirement carefully and it is a key priority to manage working capital efficiently and to be effective in converting operating income into cash.
Cash inflow from operating activities during the year was 2.01 million 2016 1.45 million.
The Group has achieved a conversion rate of adjusted operating profit operating profit plus amortisation of intangible assets plus sharebased payments to operating cash of 171% 2016 108%.
We ended the year with cash reserves of 0.7 million 2016 1.30 million which means we were cash neutral in the second half of the financial year.
Foreign exchange The Group has investments in overseas operations and conducts trading transactions in currencies other than sterling.
The principal currencies used and the average foreign exchange rates in the year were as follows 2017 2016 SterlingUS dollar 1.30 1.50 Sterlingeuro 1.189 1.368 SterlingIndian rupee 87.18 98.22 Profit and loss account The Group has foreigndenominated bank accounts to allow for the receipt and settlement of amounts in connection with its normal trading operations.
These transactions are subject to timing differences between when they are transacted and when they are settled which can give rise to foreign exchange differences.
Foreigndenominated receivables payables and bank balances are restated into sterling at closing balance sheet dates which also gives rise to foreign exchange differences.
During the year the Group benefited from an exchange gain of 64000 2016 6000 on these transactions which has been credited through the income statement.
The increase in the gain reflects the weakening of sterling generally following the EU referendum result as noted above.
Other comprehensive income The Group has net assets in Germany and India held in fully owned subsidiaries.
The original investments in these subsidiaries are held at historic exchange rates.
The difference between these historic balances and their restated amounts at the most recent closing balance sheet rates gives rise to movements which are recorded through other comprehensive income and carried as a balance sheet reserve.
During the year there has been a gain of 423000 2016 261000 on the retranslation of foreign operations of 315000 in Germany and 108000 in India.
Kieron Harbinson Finance Director 29 June 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 20 BOARD OF DIRECTORS David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman Appointed August 2000 David joined Omega in 2000 as Nonexecutive Chairman.
He has considerable experience within the diagnostics industry.
As Financial Director he was a key member of the team that floated Shield Diagnostics Limited in 1993.
He became Chief Executive Officer responsible for the merger of Shield Diagnostics Group plc with Axis Biochemicals ASA of Norway in 1999 to create AxisShield plc.
In addition to his role as Nonexecutive Chairman of Omega he holds Nonexecutive Directorships in a number of other companies.
Chairman of the Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee.
Andrew Shepherd Chief Executive
Andrew is the Founder and Chief Executive of Omega.
He has worked in the medical diagnostics industry for 43 years.
In 1986 he moved to Scotland to join Bioscot Limited and shortly afterwards established Omega.
He has used his technical experience and knowledge of exporting to oversee the significant growth of the export of Omega products.
He is an active member of a number of relevant trade associations and was a member of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundations BMGF Global Health Diagnostics Forum which provided guidance to BMGF in advising on technology and future investments in worldwide diagnostics programmes for developing countries.
Andrew is responsible for corporate strategy general management technical direction and global health development opportunities.
Kieron Harbinson Finance Director Appointed August 2002 Kieron joined Omega in August 2002 as Finance Director.
He has broad experience in technology and related businesses.
He started his career with Scotia Holdings PLC in 1984 and remained with the company for 14 years occupying various senior finance roles.
These roles enabled him to acquire experience in corporate acquisitions disposals and intellectual property matters.
In addition he gained experience in various debt and equity transactions and was involved in raising over 100 million for the company.
He then joined Kymata Limited a startup optoelectronics company as Finance Director.
Over a period of 18 months he was involved in raising approximately US85 million of venture capital funding.
Kieron is responsible for finance information technology human resources and investor relations.
The right team to deliver growth site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 21
Colin King Chief Operating Officer Appointed 3 August 2015 Colin joined Omega in August 2015 as Chief Operating Officer.
He has worked in the medical diagnostics industry for 21 years previously working for AxisShield.
He joined them in 1995 and held a number of positions encompassing planning supply chain project management operations and ultimately from 2007 was Managing Director of the Laboratory division.
During his time as Managing Director he was responsible for leading its diversification strategy which was successful in maintaining revenues despite retiring two key product revenue lines.
Colin is responsible for directing and coordinating Group operational activities and achieving operational performance in accordance with policies and objectives established by the Board.
Jag Grewal Sales and Marketing Director Appointed 30 June 2011 Jag joined Omega in June 2011 as Group Sales and Marketing Director.
He has worked in the medical diagnostics industry for 22 years having started out as a Clinical Biochemist in the NHS.
In 1995 he joined Beckman Instruments where he developed a career spanning 15 years in sales and marketing holding a variety of positions in sales product management and marketing management.
In 2009 he left his position of Northern Europe Marketing Manager to join Serco Health where he helped create the first joint venture within UK pathology between Serco and Guys and St Thomas
He is also past Chairman and current Treasurer of the British In Vitro Diagnostics Association BIVDA.
Jag is responsible for the commercial strategy and the development of the Group driven through sales and marketing product management business development and customer service to drive business growth and market share.
William Rhodes Nonexecutive Director Appointed 1 May 2013 During his 14year career with Becton Dickinson and Co.
Bill held a number of senior leadership positions and until the end of 2012 was BDs Senior Vice President Corporate Strategy and Development being responsible for BDs worldwide mergers and acquisitions and corporate strategies.
Previously he was Worldwide President of BD Biosciences a business segment with turnover of over US1.0 billion including the provision of flow cytometry instruments and their associated reagents for CD4 testing used in a wide range of laboratory settings.
Prior to working for BD Bill held senior business development positions with Pfizer Inc. and Johnson and Johnson.
Member of the Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 22 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT As an AIMquoted company the Group is not required to produce a Corporate Governance Report and does not comply fully with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
However the Directors are committed to providing information on an open basis and present their Corporate Governance Report as follows The Board of Directors The Board currently comprises one Nonexecutive Chairman one Nonexecutive Director and four Executive Directors who are the Chief Executive the Chief Operating Officer the Finance Director and the Sales and Marketing Director.
David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman and William Rhodes Nonexecutive Director are considered by the Board to be independent in character and judgement.
The
Board is provided with appropriate information in advance of Board meetings to enable it to discharge its duties effectively.
During the financial year the Board met on nine occasions and all of the Directors attended each meeting.
The Chairman has additional Nonexecutive Directorships of the following companies Lochglen Whisky Limited Fine Art of Golf Limited Integrated Magnetic Systems Limited and Collagen Solutions plc.
Responsibilities of the Board Setting corporate strategy.
Approving the annual budget.
Reviewing financial performance.
Agreeing the renewal of and any new bankingtreasury facilities.
Approving major items of capital expenditure.
Reviewing and approving acquisitions.
The Board is provided with appropriate information in advance of Board meetings to enable it to discharge its duties effectively.
Board attendance throughout the year Audit Remuneration Board Committee Committee David Evans 99 33 33 Andrew Shepherd 99 Kieron Harbinson 99 Jag Grewal 99 William Rhodes 99 33 33 Colin King 99 The Audit Committee The Audit Committee has met on two occasions during the year and once since the year end.
The Committee is comprised of David Evans as Chairman and William Rhodes and has primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls ensuring that the financial performance of the Group is properly measured and reported on and reviewing reports from the Groups auditors relating to the Groups accounting and financial reporting in all cases having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
The Committee shall also review preliminary results announcements summary financial statements significant financial returns to regulators and any financial information contained in certain other documents such as announcements of a pricesensitive nature.
The Committee considers and makes recommendations to the Board to be put to shareholders for approval at the Annual General Meeting in relation to the appointment reappointment and removal of the Groups external auditors.
The Committee also oversees the relationship with the external auditors including approval of remuneration levels approval of terms of engagement and assessment of their independence and objectivity.
In so doing they take into account relevant UK professional and regulatory requirements and the relationship with the auditors as a whole including the provision of any nonaudit services.
Ernst and Young LLP have been auditors to Omega Diagnostics Limited ODL since 2000 and were appointed as auditors to the Group following completion of the reverse takeover of ODL in September 2006.
The Committee has reviewed the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls and has considered the need for an internal audit function.
At this stage of the Groups size and development the Committee has decided that an internal audit function is not required as the Groups internal control system in place is appropriate for its size.
The Committee will review this position on an annual basis.
The Committee also reviews the Groups arrangements for its employees to raise concerns in confidence about possible wrongdoing in financial reporting or other matters.
The Committee ensures that such arrangements allow for independent investigation and followup action.
The Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee has met on three occasions during the year.
The Committee is comprised of David Evans as Chairman and William Rhodes and has primary responsibility for determining and agreeing with the Board the remuneration of the Companys Chief Executive Chairman Executive Directors Company Secretary and such other members of the Executive management as it is designated to consider.
The remuneration of the Nonexecutive Directors shall be a matter for the Chairman and the Executive Directors of the Board.
No Director or manager shall be involved in any decisions regarding their own remuneration.
Internal control The Board is responsible for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness throughout the year.
Such a system can only provide reasonable assurance against misstatement or loss.
The Board monitors financial controls through the setting and approval of an annual budget and the regular review of monthly management accounts.
Management accounts contain a number of indicators that are designed to reduce the possibility of misstatement in financial statements.
Governance
Board meeting attendance 161668 C 100% Committee meeting attendance 161668 C 100% Where the management of operational risk requires outside advice this is sought from expert consultants and the Group receives this in the areas of employment law and health and safety management.
The Group is compliant with industry standard quality assurance measures and undergoes regular external audits to ensure that accreditation is maintained.
Communication with shareholders The Board recognises the importance of communication with its shareholders.
The Group maintains informative websites for Omega Diagnostics Limited Cambridge Nutritional Sciences Limited and Omega Diagnostics GmbH containing information likely to be of interest to existing and new investors.
In addition the Group retains the services of financial PR consultants providing an additional contact point for investors.
The Board encourages shareholder participation at its Annual General Meeting where shareholders can be updated on the Groups activities and plans.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic Report which runs from pages 2 to 19.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review on pages 18 and 19.
In addition Note 21 to the financial statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for its financial risk management objectives and details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Group has recently secured a 2.0 million overdraft facility for the period through to 30 September 2017 and firm indication of support from the bank that they will renew the facility at 30 September 2017 for the period through to the end of June 2018 at a level of 1.7 million.
This together with a cashgenerative core business and the application of working capital discipline means that the Group maintains cash levels within its business to meet its short and longerterm objectives.
As a consequence the Directors believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully and fully capitalise on the new product opportunities despite continued uncertainties with the macroeconomic outlook.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual financial statements.
By order of the Board Kieron Harbinson Company Secretary 29 June 2017 ExecutiveNonexecutive Board membership
Nonexecutive Chairman 1 Nonexecutive Director 1 Executive Director 4 16 1668C 1 4 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 24
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
As an AIMquoted company the Group is not required to produce a Remuneration Report that satisfies all the requirements of the Companies Act.
However the Directors are committed to providing information on an open basis and present their Remuneration Report as follows Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is comprised of David Evans and William Rhodes.
The Committee meets as and when required to determine and agree with the Board the policy for the remuneration of the Groups Chief Executive Chairman and Executive Directors.
The objective of this policy shall be to ensure that members of the Executive management of the Group are provided with appropriate incentives to encourage enhanced performance and are in a fair and reasonable manner rewarded for their individual contributions to the success of the Group.
No Director or manager shall be involved in any decisions as to their own remuneration.
Remuneration policy The Groups policy is that the remuneration arrangements including pensions for subsequent financial years should be sufficiently competitive to attract retain and motivate high quality Executives capable of achieving the Groups objectives thereby enhancing shareholder value.
Incentive schemesshare option schemes During the prior year Colin King was issued with an option over 1200000 ordinary shares of the Group.
All of the options were granted on 29 September 2015 and were under the Companys EMI Option Scheme.
Directors service contracts Andrew Shepherd entered into a service contract with the Group on 23 August 2006 under which he was appointed as Chief Executive on an annual salary of 85000.
His salary was increased to 131250 per annum from 1 April 2009 then increased to 145000 per annum from 1 April 2011 and then further increased to 190000 per annum from 1 August 2015.
The agreement will continue until terminated by either party giving to the other not less than twelve months notice in writing.
Kieron Harbinson entered into a service contract with the Group on 23 August 2006 under which he was appointed as Finance Director and Company Secretary on an annual salary of 72500.
His salary was increased to 94500 per annum from 1 April 2009 then increased to 115000 per annum from 1 April 2011 and then further increased to 150000 per annum on 1 August 2015.
The agreement will continue until terminated by either party giving to the other not less than six months notice in writing.
David Evans was appointed as a Nonexecutive Director of the Group on 19 September 2006 and was entitled to an annual fee of 25000 from 1 April 2008.
The agreement will continue until terminated by either party giving to the other not less than one months notice in writing.
Jag Grewal entered into a service contract with the Group on 30 June 2011 under which he was appointed as an Executive Director on an annual salary of 110000.
His salary was increased to 140000 per annum on 1 August 2015.
The agreement will continue until terminated by either party giving to the other not less than three months notice in writing.
William Rhodes was appointed as a Nonexecutive Director of the Group on 1 May 2013 and is entitled to an annual fee of 40000.
The agreement will continue until terminated by either party giving to the other not less than one months notice in writing.
Colin King entered into a service contract with the Group on 3 August 2015 under which he was appointed as Chief Operating Officer on an annual salary of 177500.
Directors emoluments Feesbasic Benefits Total Total salary Bonuses in kind 2017 2016
Andrew Shepherd 190000  3353 193353 175000 Kieron Harbinson 150000  1461 151461 139818 Jag Grewal 140000  3653 143653 134121 Colin King 177500  1314 178814 136986
David Evans 25000   25000 25000 William Rhodes 40000   40000 40000 722500  9781 732281 650925 The amounts paid in the year towards Directors pension contributions were as follows Directors pension contributions 2017 2016 Andrew Shepherd 9500 8750 Kieron Harbinson 7500 6917 Jag Grewal 7000 6500 Colin King 8875 5917 32875 28084 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 25
Directors interests in ordinary shares Directors interests in the 4 pence ordinary shares of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC are as follows 31 March 31 March 2017 2016 David Evans 3043634 3043634 Kieron Harbinson 426062 426062 Andrew Shepherd 2708180 2708180 Jag Grewal 99913 99913 Colin King William Rhodes The Directors have no interests in the shares of subsidiary companies.
Directors share options At Granted Lapsed Exercised At Earliest 1 April during during during 31 March Option Date of exercise Expiry 2016 the year the year the year 2017 price grant date date David Evans 390822    390822 19.0p 101208 101209 101218 William Rhodes 2130406    2130406 15.25p 040713 040716 040723 Andrew Shepherd 703480    703480 19.0p 101208 101209 101218 600000    600000 14.5p 050712 050715 050722 800000    800000 30.5p 250214 250217 250224 Kieron Harbinson 468987    468987 19.0p 101208 101209 101218 300000    300000 14.5p 050712 050715 050722 640000    640000 30.5p 250214 250217 250224 Jag Grewal 100000    100000 13.25p 120811 120812 120821 200000    200000 14.5p 050712 050715 050722 610000    610000 30.5p 250214 250217 250224 Colin King 1200000    1200000 13.0p 290915 290918 290925 During the prior year Colin King was issued with options under the Companys EMI Option Scheme.
The share price at 31 March 2017 was 23.13 pence.
The highest and lowest share prices during the year were 23.25 pence and 14.38 pence respectively.
Approved by the Board David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman 29 June 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 26 DIRECTORS REPORT The Directors present their Annual Report and Group Financial Statements for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Principal activities The principal activity of the Company is as a holding company.
The principal activities of the Group are the manufacture development and distribution of medical diagnostics products.
Results and dividends The result for the year is a profit of 713261 2016 571912 which has been taken to reserves.
The Directors do not propose to pay a dividend.
The results are disclosed in more detail in the Strategic Report on pages 2 to 19.
The Company has taken advantage of the exemption allowed under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 and has not presented its own income statement in these financial statements.
The Company profit for the year ended 31 March 2017 is 159686 2016 loss of 50757.
Business review and future development A review of business and future development is discussed in more detail in the Strategic Report.
Research and development Details of research and development activity are contained in the Financial Review on pages 18 and 19.
Costs in the year amounted to 2367655 2016 1743354.
Costs of 199906 in relation to research activities 2016 258306 were expensed through the statement of comprehensive income and costs of 2167749 in relation to product development 2016 1485048 were capitalised and included within intangible assets as detailed in Note 8.
Directors
The names of the Directors who have served the Group throughout the year are David Evans Kieron Harbinson Andrew Shepherd Jag Grewal William Rhodes and Colin King.
Biographies of all Directors serving at the year end are on pages 20 and 21.
Directors interests The beneficial interests of Directors who have served throughout the year are listed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 24 and 25.
There are no nonbeneficial interests held by Directors.
There have been no changes to any Directors interests in the shares of the Group between 31 March 2017 and the date of this report.
Employees
The Group encourages communication with its employees and favours an environment where staff can put forward their ideas suggestions and concerns on any matter that involves them.
The
Group gives full and fair consideration to applications for employment made by disabled people having regard to their particular aptitudes and abilities.
Where an employee becomes disabled in the course of their employment where possible arrangements will be made for appropriate retraining to match their abilities with their duties.
Principal risks and uncertainties The Board meets regularly to review operations and to discuss risk areas.
Pages 16 and 17 of the Strategic Report contain details of the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
Note 21 to the financial statements contains details of financial risks faced by the Group.
Auditors
The auditors Ernst and Young LLP have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution for their reappointment will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Directors statement as to disclosure of information to auditors The Directors who were members of the Board at the time of approving the Directors Report are listed on pages 20 and 21.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors and of the Companys auditors each of these Directors confirms that to the best of each Directors knowledge and belief there is no information that is information needed by the Groups auditors in connection with preparing their report of which the Groups auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps a Director might reasonably be expected to have taken to be aware of relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of that information.
By order of the Board Kieron Harbinson Company Secretary 29 June 2017 Major interests in shares As at 12 June 2017 the following shareholders held more than 3% of the Groups issued ordinary share capital Number of 4 pence ordinary shares Percentage Richard Sneller 14186935 13.05% Legal and General Investment Management 14010498 12.88% Liontrust Asset Management 8711494 8.01% Octopus Investments Limited 6682730 6.15% Hargreaves Lansdown Stockbrokers 6328227 5.82% Unicorn Asset Management 4266750 3.92% SG Private Banking 4264281 3.92% Mobeus Equity Partners LLP 3999950 3.68% Charles Stanley Stockbrokers 3682127 3.39% site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 27
STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Group Financial Statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and those International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The Directors are required to prepare Group and Company financial statements for each financial year end.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they present fairly the financial position of the Group and Company financial performance of the Group and cash flows of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the Group and Company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8  Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups financial position and financial performance state that the Group and Company has complied with IFRSs subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and make judgements and estimates that are reasonable.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the Group and Company financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 28
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
We have audited the financial statements of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income consolidated balance sheet consolidated statement of changes in equity consolidated cash flow statement Company balance sheet Company statement of changes in equity Company cash flow statement and the related Notes 1 to 21.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities on page 27 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the parent Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report and Group Financial Statements to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Opinion on financial statements In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Opinion on other matter prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have identified no material misstatements in the Strategic Report or Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Annie Graham Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
29 June 2017 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 29 Financial Statements ADJUSTED PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION for the year ended 31 Marchtel Profit before taxation 656226 661832 IFRSrelated discount charges 5990 17793 Amortisation of intangible assets 225660 309163 Sharebased payment charges 254834 362327 Adjusted profit before taxation 1130730 1351115 Earnings per share EPS Adjusted EPS on profit for the year 1.1p 1.2p Adjusted profit before taxation is derived by taking statutory profit before taxation and adding back IFRSrelated discount charges amortisation of intangible assets and sharebased payment charges.
This is not a primary statement.
2017 2016
Continuing operations Revenue 7 14246930 12743896 Cost of sales 5025376 4608383 Gross profit 9221554 8135513 Administration costs 6434227 5917453 Selling and marketing costs 2124203 1821068 Other income 31636 272769 Operating profit 7 694760 669761 Finance costs 5 39984 24154 Finance income  interest receivable 7 1450 16225 Profit before taxation 656226 661832 Tax creditcharge 6 57035 89920 Profit for the year 713261 571912 Other comprehensive income to be reclassified to profit and loss in subsequent periods Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 423478 260960 Tax charge 33258 29098 Other comprehensive income that will not be reclassified to profit and loss in subsequent periods Actuarial lossgain on defined benefit pensions 107948 255459 Tax creditcharge 20392 47533 Other comprehensive income for the year 302664 439788 Total comprehensive income for the year 1015925 1011700 Earnings per share EPS Basic and diluted EPS on profit for the year 20 0.7p 0.5p CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME for the year ended 31 March 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 30 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET as at 31 Marchtel
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Intangibles 8 15588076 13462355 Property plant and equipment 9 2943312 2691722 Deferred taxation 14 1651945 1426205 Retirement benefit surplus 18  44759 Total noncurrent assets 20183333 17625041 Current assets Inventories 10 2377575 2011495 Trade and other receivables 11 2460416 2838269 Cash and cash equivalents 737331 1302257 Total current assets 5575322 6152021 Total assets 25758655 23777062 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Issued capital 16727516 16727516 Retained earnings 4753190 3905909 Other reserves 22770 446248 Total equity 21457936 20187177
Noncurrent liabilities Longterm borrowings 12 275890 282914 Deferred taxation 14 1811110 1537560 Deferred income 13 238067 Retirement benefit deficit 18 57199 Total noncurrent liabilities 2382266 1820474 Current liabilities Shortterm borrowings 12 155494 127783 Trade and other payables 13 1762959 1641628 Total current liabilities 1918453 1769411 Total liabilities 4300719 3589885 Total equity and liabilities 25758655 23777062 David Evans Kieron Harbinson Nonexecutive Chairman Finance Director 29 June 2017 29 June 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC Registered number  site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 31 Financial Statements Share Share Retained Translation capital premium earnings reserve Total Balance at 31 March 2015 5086756 11640760 2792842 707208 18813150 Profit for the year ended 31 March 2017   571912  571912 Other comprehensive income  net exchange adjustments    260960 260960 Other comprehensive income  actuarial gain on defined benefit pensions   255459  255459 Other comprehensive income  tax charge   76631  76631 Total comprehensive income for the year   750740 260960 1011700 Sharebased payments   362327  362327 Balance at 31 March 2016 5086756 11640760 3905909 446248 20187177 Profit for the year ended 31 March 2017   713261  713261 Other comprehensive income  net exchange adjustments    423478 423478 Other comprehensive income  actuarial loss on defined benefit pensions   107948  107948 Other comprehensive income  tax charge   12866  12866 Total comprehensive income for the year   592447 423478 1015925 Sharebased payments   254834  254834 Balance at 31 March 2017 5086756 11640760 4753190 22770 21457936 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended 31 March 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLCtel
Cash flows generated from operations Profit for the year 713261 571912 Adjustments for Taxation 57035 89920 Finance costs 39984 24154 Finance income 1450 16225 Operating profit before working capital movement 694760 669761 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 377853 298418 Increasedecrease in inventories 366080 50600 Increase in trade and other payables 121331 99569 Loss on sale of property plant and equipment 813 Depreciation 7 372103 322576 Amortisation of intangible assets 8 225660 309163 Movement in grants 238067 271269 Sharebased payments 254834 362327 Taxation received 91983 209367 Cash flow from operating activities 2011324 1453676 Investing activities Finance income 1450 16225 Purchase of property plant and equipment 9 591377 620652 Purchase of intangible assets 2068960 1418536 Net cash used in investing activities 2658887 2022963 Financing activities Finance costs 39984 24154 New asset backed finance 163000 104566 Loan repayments  120353 Finance lease repayments 142313 126734 Net cash used in financing activities 19297 166675 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 666860 735962 Effects of exchange rate movements 101934 66082 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 1302257 1972137 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 737331 1302257 CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT for the year ended 31 March 2017 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 33 Financial Statements 2017 2016
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Investments 19 12745159 12193076 Intangibles 8 1531786 1531786 Total noncurrent assets 14276945 13724862 Current assets Trade and other receivables 11 6082862 4290361 Cash and cash equivalents 292404 597557 Total current assets 6375266 4887918 Total assets 20652211 18612780 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Issued capital 17717191 17717191 Retained earnings 1142262 727741 Total equity 18859453 18444932
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 13 1792758 167848 Total current liabilities 1792758 167848 Total liabilities 1792758 167848 Total equity and liabilities 20652211 18612780 David Evans Kieron Harbinson Nonexecutive Chairman Finance Director 29 June 2017 29 June 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC Registered number COMPANY BALANCE SHEET as at 31 March 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 34 Share Share Retained capital premium earnings Total Balance at 31 March 2015 5459038 12258153 416171 18133362 Loss for the year ended 31 March 2016   50757 50757 Total comprehensive income for the year   50757 50757 Sharebased payments   362327 362327 Balance at 31 March 2016 5459038 12258153 727741 18444932 Profit for the year ended 31 March 2017   159687 159687 Total comprehensive income for the year   159687 159687 Sharebased payments   254834 254834 Balance at 31 March 2017 5459038 12258153 1142262 18859453 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended 31 March 2017 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 35 Financial Statements 2017 2016 Cash flows generated from operations Profitloss for the year 159686 50757 Adjustments for Taxation  3349 Finance costs 18846 Finance income 66053 74117 Operating profitloss before working capital movement 112479 121525 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 1792501 150737 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 1624910 19964 Sharebased payments 254834 362327 Cash flow from operating activities 199722 371575 Investing activities Finance income 66053 74117 Investment in subsidiaries 552082 659710 Net cash used in investing activities 486029 585593 Financing activities Finance costs 18846 Loan repayments  120353 Net cash used in financing activities 18846 120353 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 305153 334371 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 597557 931928 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 292404 597557 COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT for the year ended 31 March 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 36 1 Authorisation of financial statements The financial statements of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 29 June 2017 and the balance sheets were signed on the Boards behalf by David Evans and Kieron Harbinson.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC is a public limited company incorporated in England.
The Companys ordinary shares are traded on AIM.
2 Accounting policies Basis of preparation The accounting policies which follow set out those policies which have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these financial statements.
These financial statements are presented in sterling and have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In relation to IFRS 8  Operating Segments the Group has identified the Executive Board as the chief operating decision maker with responsibility for decisions over the allocation of resources to operating segments and for the monitoring of their performance.
The Group reports performance of the following three segments Allergy and autoimmune Food intolerance and Infectious disease and Other.
Basis of consolidation The Group financial statements consolidate the financial statements of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC and the entities it controls its subsidiaries.
Control is achieved when the Group is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date of acquisition being the date on which the Group obtains control and continue to be consolidated until the date that such control ceases.
The financial statements of the subsidiaries used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are based on consistent accounting policies.
All intercompany balances and transactions including unrealised profits arising from them are eliminated.
Going concern The Group has a committed overdraft facility of 2 million provided by Bank of Scotland on 30 May 2017 for the period through to 30 September 2017 and firm indication of support from the bank that they will renew the facility at 30 September 2017 for the period through to the end of June 2018 at a level of 1.7 million.
It is this firm indication of support from the bank that supports the Directors conclusion to present the accounts on a going concern basis.
Intangible assets
Business combinations are accounted for under IFRS 3 using the acquisition method.
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of the business combination over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities.
Goodwill is not amortised but is subject to an annual impairment review and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired a charge is made to the income statement.
After initial recognition goodwill is stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to the related cashgenerating units monitored by management usually at business segment level or statutory Company level as the case may be.
Where the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is less than its carrying amount including goodwill an impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
Other intangible assets Intangible assets acquired as part of a business combination are recognised outside goodwill if the asset is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights and its fair value can be measured reliably.
Following initial recognition at fair value at the acquisition date the historic cost model is applied with intangible assets being carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Intangible assets with a finite life have no residual value and are amortised on a straight line basis over the expected useful lives with charges included in administration costs as follows Technology assets 520 years Customer relationships  510 years Supply agreements 5 years
520 years The carrying value of intangible assets is reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Research and development costs Expenditure on research and initial feasibility work is written off through the income statement as incurred.
Thereafter expenditure on product development which meets certain criteria is capitalised and amortised over its useful life.
The stage at which it is probable that the product will generate future economic benefits is when the following criteria have been met technical feasibility intention and ability to sell the product availability of resources to complete the development of the product and the ability to measure the expenditure attributable to the product.
The useful life of the intangible asset is determined on a productbyproduct basis taking into consideration a number of factors.
Development costs previously recognised as an expense are not recognised as an asset in a subsequent period.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended 31 March 2017 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 37 Financial Statements 2 Accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the cost of assets to their estimated residual values over their estimated useful lives on a straight line basis as follows Land and property 33 years straight line with no residual value Leasehold improvements  ten years straight line with no residual value Plant and machinery  three to ten years straight line with no residual value Motor vehicles five years straight line with no residual value The carrying values of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable and are written down immediately to their recoverable amount.
Useful lives are reviewed annually and where adjustments are required these are made prospectively.
Impairment of assets The Group and Company assess at each reporting date whether there is an indication that an asset may be impaired.
If any such indication exists the Group and Company make an estimate of the assets recoverable amount.
An assets recoverable amount is the higher of an assets or cashgenerating units fair value less costs to sell and its value in use and is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered to be impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their net present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to that asset.
Impairment losses on continuing operations are recognised in the income statement in those expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is defined as standard cost or purchase price and includes all direct costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less any further costs expected to be incurred prior to completion and disposal.
Trade receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at the lower of original invoice amount and recoverable amount.
A provision for doubtful amounts is made when there is objective evidence that collection of the full amount is no longer probable.
Significant financial difficulty or significantly extended settlement periods are considered to be indicators of impairment.
Normal average payment terms vary from payment in advance to 90 days.
Balances are written off when the probability of recovery is assessed as remote.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet comprise cash at banks and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
Financial instruments Under IAS 39 financial assets liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
Financial assets held by the Company are trade and other receivables and cash.
Trade and other receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Financial liabilities held by the Company are trade and other payables and bank borrowings.
Trade payables are not interest bearing and are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Bank borrowings are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
For longterm bank borrowings stated at amortised cost transaction costs that are directly attributable to the borrowing instrument are recognised as an interest expense over the life of the instrument.
A financial asset or liability is generally derecognised when the contract that gives rise to it is settled sold cancelled or expires.
Where an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and a recognition of the new liability such that the difference in the respective carrying amounts together with any costs or fees incurred are recognised.
Companys investments in subsidiaries The Company recognises its investments in subsidiaries at cost.
The carrying value of investments is reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 38 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 2 Accounting policies continued Presentation currency The financial statements are presented in UK pounds sterling.
Transactions in currencies other than sterling are recorded at the prevailing rate of exchange at the date of the transaction.
At each balance sheet date monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing on the balance sheet date.
Foreign currencies Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Gains and losses arising on retranslation are included in the net profit or loss for the year.
The trading results of the overseas subsidiaries are translated at the average exchange rate ruling during the year with the exchange difference between the average rates and the rates ruling at the balance sheet date being taken to reserves.
Any differences arising on the translation of the opening net investment in the overseas subsidiaries and of applicable foreign currency loans are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the translation reserve.
Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and net of discounts and salesrelated taxes.
Sales of goods are recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the customer.
This will be when goods have been dispatched and the collection of the related receivable is reasonably assured.
Revenue relates to the sale of medical diagnostic kits.
Grants
Grants are recognised when it is reasonable to expect that the grants will be received and that all related conditions will be met usually on submission of a valid claim for payment.
Grants in respect of capital expenditure are credited to a deferred income account and are released to the income statement over the expected useful lives of the relevant assets by equal annual instalments.
Revenue grants are credited to the income statement as and when the relevant expenditure is incurred.
Leasing and hire purchase commitments Assets held under finance leases and hire purchase contracts are capitalised in the balance sheet and are depreciated over the shorter of their lease period and useful life.
The corresponding lease or hire purchase obligation is capitalised in the balance sheet as a liability.
The interest element of the rental obligation is charged to the income statement over the period of the lease and represents a constant proportion of the balance of capital repayments outstanding.
Rentals applicable to operating leases where substantially all the benefits and risks remain with the lessor are charged against profits on a straight line basis over the period of the lease.
Sharebased payments Equitysettled transactions For equitysettled transactions the Group measures the award by reference to the fair value at the date at which they are granted and it is recognised as an expense over the vesting period which ends on the date on which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award.
Fair value is determined using an appropriate pricing model.
In valuing equitysettled transactions no account is taken of any service and performance vesting conditions other than conditions linked to the price of the shares of the Company market conditions.
Any other conditions which are required to be met in order for an employee to become fully entitled to an award are considered to be nonvesting conditions.
Like market performance conditions nonvesting conditions are taken into account in determining grant date fair value.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market or nonvesting condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market or nonvesting condition is satisfied provided that all other performance conditions are satisfied.
At each balance sheet date before vesting the cumulative expense is calculated representing the extent to which the vesting period has expired and managements best estimate of the achievement or otherwise of vesting conditions and of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest or in the case of an instrument subject to a market or nonvesting condition be treated as vesting as described above.
This includes any award where nonvesting conditions within the control of the Group or the employee are not met.
The movement in cumulative expense since the previous balance sheet date is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding entry in equity.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified or a new award is designated as replacing a cancelled or settled award the cost based on the original award terms continues to be recognised over the original vesting period.
In addition an expense is recognised over the remainder of the new vesting period for the incremental fair value of any modification based on the difference between the fair value of the original award and the fair value of the modified award both as measured on the date of the modification.
No reduction is recognised if this difference is negative.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any cost not yet recognised in the income statement for the award is expensed immediately.
Any compensation paid up to the fair value of the award at the cancellation or settlement date is deducted from equity with any excess over fair value being treated as an expense in the income statement.
Financial Statements 2 Accounting policies continued
Contributions to personal pension plans of employees on a defined contribution basis are charged to the income statement in the year in which they are payable.
The Group also operates two defined benefit plans in Germany which are closed to new members.
Obligations under defined benefit plans are measured at discounted present values by actuaries while plan assets are recorded at fair value.
The operating and financing costs of pensions are charged to the income statement in the period in which they arise and are recognised separately.
The difference between actual and expected returns on assets during the year including changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in other comprehensive income.
Income taxes Current tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities based on tax rates and laws that are enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax is recognised on all temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements with the following exceptions where the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future and deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences carried forward tax credits or tax losses can be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured on an undiscounted basis at the tax rates that are expected to apply when the related asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Income tax and deferred tax are charged or credited in other comprehensive income or directly to equity if they relate to items that are credited or charged in other comprehensive income or directly to equity.
Otherwise income tax and deferred tax are recognised in profit or loss.
Use of estimates and judgements The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised and in any future periods affected.
The significant areas of estimation uncertainty and critical judgements in applying the accounting policies that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial information are as follows Carrying value of intangible assets Management judgement is required to estimate the useful lives of intangible assets having reference to future economic benefits expected to be derived from use of the asset.
Economic benefits are based on the fair values of estimated future cash flows.
Further analysis of the estimates and judgements is disclosed in Note 8.
Carrying value of goodwill Goodwill is tested annually for impairment.
The test considers future cash flow projections of cashgenerating units that give rise to the goodwill.
Where the discounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of goodwill an impairment charge is recognised for the difference.
Further analysis of the estimates and judgements is disclosed in Note 8.
Deferred tax assets Management judgement is required to determine the amount of deferred tax assets that can be recognised based upon the likely timing and level of future taxable profits together with an assessment of the effect of future tax planning strategies and having regard to their strategic planning processes when making these judgements.
Prospective products undergo an internal screening process before significant resources are committed to development increasing the chances of successful commercialisation and the ability to generate future profits.
The balance at 31 March 2017 which will be offset against future profits expected to be generated from the prospects for
VISITECT
CD4 Allergodip and anticipated output from the Pune facility in India leads management to conclude to carry the deferred tax asset in full.
The carrying value of the deferred tax asset at 31 March 2017 is 1651945 2016 1426205.
Further details are contained in Note 14.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 40 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 2 Accounting policies continued Use of estimates and judgements continued New standards and interpretations not applied IASB and IFRIC have issued the following standards and interpretations which are considered relevant to the Group with an effective date after the date of these financial statements.
Effective date for periods International Accounting Standards IASIFRSs commencing Amendments to IAS 12  Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses 1 January 2017 Amendments to IAS 7  Disclosure Initiative 1 January 2017 IFRS 15  Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 Clarification to IFRS 15  Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 9  Financial Instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS 16  Leases 1 January 2019 Amendments to IFRS 2  Classifications and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions 1 January 2018 IFRIC Interpretation 22  Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration 1 January 2018 Annual Improvements to IFRSs  20142016 Cycle 1 January 20172018 Not yet adopted for use in the European Union.
The above standards and interpretations will be adopted in accordance with their effective dates and have not been adopted in these financial statements.
The Directors do not currently expect IFRS 15 or IFRS 16 to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements however our detailed assessment of IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 is ongoing.
The Directors have reviewed the requirements of the remaining standards and interpretations listed above and they are not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements in the period of initial application.
3 Adoption of new International Financial Reporting Standards The accounting policies adopted are consistent with those of the previous financial year.
4 Segment information For management purposes the Group is organised into three operating divisions Allergy and autoimmune Food intolerance and Infectious disease and Other.
The Allergy and autoimmune division specialises in the research development production and marketing of invitro allergy and autoimmune tests used by doctors to diagnose patients with allergies and autoimmune diseases.
The Food intolerance division specialises in the research development and production of kits to aid the detection of immune reactions to food.
It also provides clinical analysis to the general public clinics and health professionals as well as supplying the consumer Food Detective test.
The Infectious disease division specialises in the research development production and marketing of kits to aid the diagnosis of infectious diseases.
Corporate consists of centralised corporate costs which are not allocated across the three business divisions.
Intersegment transfers or transactions are entered into under the normal commercial conditions that would be available to unrelated third parties.
Business segment information
Allergy and Food disease and autoimmune intolerance Other Corporate Group Statutory presentation Revenue 3679068 9439233 2827986  15946287 Intersegment revenue 87692 1438510 173155  1699357 Total revenue 3591376 8000723 2654831  14246930 Operating costs 3980988 4946712 3252893 1371577 13552170 Operating lossprofit 389612 3054011 598062 1371577 694760 Net finance costsincome 65268 3678 16796 47208 38534 Lossprofit before taxation 454880 3050333 614858 1324369 656226 Adjusted lossprofit before taxation Lossprofit before taxation 454880 3050333 614858 1324369 656226 IFRSrelated discount charges 5990    5990 Amortisation of intangible assets 114215 98960 12485  225660 Sharebased payment charges    254834 254834 Adjusted lossprofit before taxation 346655 3149293 602373 1069535 1130730 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 41 Financial Statements 4 Segment information continued Business segment information continued
Allergy and Food disease and autoimmune intolerance Other Corporate Group Statutory presentation Revenue 3254725 8681553 2698113  14634391 Intersegment revenue 95693 1621862 172940  1890495 Total revenue 3159032 7059691 2525173  12743896 Operating costs 3479086 4572482 2768799 1253768 12074135 Operating lossprofit 320054 2487209 243626 1253768 669761 Net finance costsincome 58283 2137 21625 74116 7929 Lossprofit before taxation 378337 2485072 265251 1179652 661832 Adjusted lossprofit before taxation Lossprofit before taxation 378337 2485072 265251 1179652 661832 IFRSrelated discount charges    17793 17793 Amortisation of intangible assets 200335 98907 9921  309163 Sharebased payment charges    362327 362327 Adjusted lossprofit before taxation 178002 2583979 255330 799532 1351115 The segment assets and liabilities are as follows
Allergy and Food disease and autoimmune intolerance Other Corporate Group Segment assets 11281036 6098504 5977642 12197 23369379 Unallocated assets     2389276 Total assets 11281036 6098504 5977642 12197 25758655 Segment liabilities 493387 418334 1000362 146141 2058224 Unallocated liabilities     2242495 Total liabilities 493387 418334 1000362 146141 4300719
Allergy and Food disease and autoimmune intolerance Other Corporate Group Segment assets 9914928 6548151 4573779 11742 21048600 Unallocated assets     2728462 Total assets 9914928 6548151 4573779 11742 23777062 Segment liabilities 255625 583732 634423 167848 1641628 Unallocated liabilities     1948257 Total liabilities 255625 583732 634423 167848 3589885 Unallocated assets comprise cash and deferred taxation.
Unallocated liabilities comprise borrowings other financial liabilities and deferred taxation.
Information about major customers No single customer accounts for 10% or more of Group revenues.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 42 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 4 Segment information continued Geographical information The Groups geographical information is based on the location of its markets and customers.
Sales to external customers disclosed in the geographical information are based on the geographical location of its customers.
The analysis of segment assets and capital expenditure is based on the geographical location of the assets.
2017 2016
UK 978154 939635 Germany 2989268 2667102 Rest of Europe 3557085 3513511 North America 1653797 1098320 SouthCentral America 1005505 874151 India 616070 548837 Asia and Far East 1496692 1480638 Africa and the Middle East 1950359 1621702 14246930 12743896 Property Retirement Trade plant and benefit and other Intangibles equipment surplus Inventories receivables Total
UK 12984342 1649504  1513542 1827818 17975206 Germany 2530631 810797  666355 360621 4368404 India 73103 483011  197678 271977 1025769 Unallocated assets      2389276 Total assets 15588076 2943312  2377575 2460416 25758655 Property Retirement Trade plant and benefit and other Intangibles equipment surplus Inventories receivables Total
UK 11276612 1533967  1278959 2353170 16442708 Germany 2180987 767738 44759 652105 270544 3916133 India 4756 390017  80431 214555 689759 Unallocated assets      2728462 Total assets 13462355 2691722 44759 2011495 2838269 23777tel
UK 1334733 1320827 Germany including retirement benefit liability of 57199 443392 186412 India 280099 134389 Unallocated liabilities 2242495 1948257 Total liabilities 4300719 3589885 Capital expenditure UK 496923 297416 Germany 61334 26289 India 33120 296947 Total capital expenditure 591377 620652 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 43 Financial Statements 5 Finance costs 2017 2016
Interest payable on loans and bank overdrafts 20039 3104 Finance leases 19945 21050 39984 24154 6 Taxation 2017 2016
Current tax  current year Current tax  prior year adjustment 91980 209368 Deferred tax  current year 49223 132794 Deferred tax  prior year adjustment 84168 432082 57035 89920 b Tax relating to items charged or credited to other comprehensive income Deferred tax on actuarial lossgain on retirement benefit obligations 20392 47533 Deferred tax on net exchange adjustments 33258 29098 Total tax charge 12866 76631 2017 2016
Factors affecting the tax creditcharge for the year Profit before tax 656226 661832 Effective rate of taxation 20% 20% Profit before tax multiplied by the effective rate of tax 131245 132366 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes and permanent differences 66377 76734 Research and development and deferred tax credits 111354 250622 Tax repayment on surrender of tax losses in prior year at 14.5% 91980 209368 Tax losses surrendered in prior year at 20% 126869 288783 Tax overprovidedunderprovided in prior years 42703 143299 Adjustment due to different overseas tax rate 70690 59975 Impact of UK rate change on deferred tax 64799 31297 Tax creditcharge for the year 57035 89920 The standard rate of UK corporation tax reduced from 21% to 20% on 1 April 2015.
During the year to 31 March 2016 the Finance Act No.2 2015 was substantively enacted.
The Finance Act No.2 2015 includes legislation which will further reduce the corporation tax rate to 19% from 1 April 2017 and to 18% from 1 April 2020.
The Chancellor then announced in his budget on 16 March 2016 that there would be a further 1% reduction in the rate of corporation tax to 17% on 1 April 2020.
This further rate reduction was included in the Finance Bill 2016 which received Royal Assent on 15 September 2016.
As all reductions in tax rates were enacted at the balance sheet date the deferred tax balances as at 31 March 2017 have been recognised at a rate of 17% as this is the rate at which the majority of the timing differences are expected to reverse.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 44 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 7 Revenue and expenses 2017 2016
Revenue and other income Revenue  sales of goods 14246930 12743896 Other income 31636 272769 Finance income 1450 16225 Total revenue and other income 14280016 13032890 Other income is explained in the Financial Review.
2017 2016
Operating profit is stated after chargingcrediting Material costs 3499957 3359723 Depreciation 474118 415119 Capitalised depreciation 102015 92546 Amortisation of intangibles 225660 309163 Net foreign exchange gains 64102 6481 Grant income 31636 272769 Research costs 199906 258306 Operating lease rentals 286585 277623 Sharebased payments 254834 362327 Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the annual accounts 20000 20000 Local statutory audit of subsidiaries 53000 53000 Local statutory audit of the parent Company 5000 5000 Fees payable to the Companys auditors for other services Taxation compliance 12500 12500 Taxation advisory 5000 5000 All research costs noted above were charged directly to administration costs in the income statement.
Staff costs The average monthly number of employees including Directors was 2017 2016 Consolidated number number Operations 111 100 Management and administration 69 57 Employee numbers 180 157 Their aggregate remuneration comprised 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 5806881 4775216 Social security costs 706146 586317 Pension costs 178440 227281 Sharebased payments 254834 362327 6946301 5951141 Equitysettled sharebased payments Consolidated and Company The sharebased payment plans are described below.
EMI Option Scheme and Unapproved Option Scheme The plans are equitysettled plans and the fair value is measured at the grant date.
Under the above plans share options are granted to Directors and employees of the Company.
The exercise price of the option is equal to the market price of the shares on the date of grant.
The options vest one year after the date of grant and do not require to be the subject of any performance criteria.
The scheme rules allow for performance criteria to be applied in appropriate cases.
The fair value of the options is estimated at the grant date using the BlackScholes pricing model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the instruments were granted.
The contractual life of each option granted is ten years and there is no cash settlement alternative.
Financial Statements 7 Revenue and expenses continued Equitysettled sharebased payments continued Consolidated and Company continued Second Unapproved Option Scheme SUOS The plan is an equitysettled plan and the fair value is measured at the grant date.
Under the above plan share options may be granted to third parties for provision of services to the Company.
The exercise price of the option is equal to the market price of the shares on the date of grant.
The options vest three years after the date of grant and are not subject to any performance criteria.
The fair value of the options is estimated at the grant date using the BlackScholes pricing model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the instruments were granted.
The contractual life of each option granted is ten years and there is no cash settlement alternative.
Third Unapproved Option Scheme TUOS The plan is an equitysettled plan and the fair value is measured at the grant date.
Under the above plan share options may be granted to Directors of the Company.
The exercise price of the option is equal to the market price of the shares on the date of grant.
The options vest three years after the date of grant and are subject to performance criteria.
The fair value of the options is estimated at the grant date using the BlackScholes pricing model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the instruments were granted.
The contractual life of each option granted is ten years and there is no cash settlement alternative.
Under the EMI Option Scheme no options lapsed during the year and a further 40000 were granted.
Under the TUOS during the year no options were granted.
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices WAEP of and movements in share options during the yeartel 2016 number WAEP number WAEP Outstanding 1 April 10983695 20p 8998695 20.96p Granted during the year under the EMI Option Scheme 40000 19p 1985000 16p Granted during the year under the TUOS Exercised during the year Lapsed during the year under the EMI Option Scheme Outstanding at 31 March 2017 11023695 20p 10983695 20p Exercisable at 31 March 2017 6388695  3753289 The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 EMI Option Scheme and Unapproved Option Schemes 2017 2016 Dividend yield Expected volatility 34% 64% Riskfree interest rate 5% 5% Weighted average remaining contractual life 6.3 years 6.3 years Weighted average share price 19p 16p Exercise price 19p 16p Model used BlackScholes BlackScholes The expected life of the options is based on managements assumption of the options life due to the lack of any historical data on the exercise period of these options.
The assumption takes into account the experience of employees and Directors and is not necessarily indicative of exercise patterns that may occur.
The expected volatility reflects the assumption that historical volatility over a period similar to the life of the option is indicative of future trends which may not necessarily be the actual outcome.
Directors remuneration 2017 2016
Fees 65000 65000 Emoluments 667281 585925 732281 650925 Contributions to personal pension 32875 28084 765156 679009 Members of a defined contribution pension scheme at the year end 4 4 Information in respect of individual Directors emoluments is provided in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 24 and 25.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 46 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 8 Intangibles Licences Supply Technology Customer Development Goodwill software arrangements assets relationships costs Total
At 31 March 2015 4507052 1711083 456475 2125265 1079517 4155455 14034847 Additions  26034     26034 Additions internally generated      1485048 1485048 Currency translation 93108 11423 36729 12090 78817 26794 258961 At 31 March 2016 4600160 1748540 493204 2137355 1158334 5667297 15804890 Additions  3226     3226 Additions internally generated      2167749 2167749 Currency translation 103005 13987 40632 13376 87190 37204 295394 At 31 March 2017 4703165 1765753 533836 2150731 1245524 7872250 18271259 Accumulated amortisation At 31 March 2015  154442 388004 870739 516939  1930124 Amortisation charge in the year  24010 67291 119887 97975  309163 Currency translation  12029 37909 11908 41402  103248 At 31 March 2016  190481 493204 1002534 656316  2342535 Amortisation charge in the year  14540  98748 112372  225660 Currency translation  13583 40632 12764 48009  114988 At 31 March 2017  218604 533836 1114046 816697  2683183 Net book value 31 March 2017 4703165 1547149  1036685 428827 7872250 15588076 31 March 2016 4600160 1558059  1134821 502018 5667297 13462355 31 March 2015 4507052 1556641 68471 1254526 562578 4155455 12104723 Of the development costs balance above of 7 872250 2016 5667 297 costs of 2221481 2016 1597 368 relate to the VISITECT
Malaria project and costs of 132189 relate to Food intolerance projects.
Of the licencessoftware balance above 1531786 2016 1531786 is held on the balance sheet of the Company and relates to the IDS and CD4 licences.
102015 2016 92546 of the additions internally generated in the year relates to capitalised depreciation on assets utilised for development activities.
Impairment testing of goodwill and intangibles The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indicators of impairment.
The carrying amount of goodwill is indicated in the table above.
The net book value of goodwill above for GenesisCNS amounts to 3016892 2016 3016892 for CoTek amounts to 332986 2016 332986 and for Omega Diagnostics GmbH amounts to 1353287 2016 1250282.
The recoverable amount of GenesisCNS and CoTek has been determined based on a value in use calculation using cash flow projections based on the actual results for the year ended 31 March 2017 and the financial budget approved by the Board covering the period to 31 March 2020 with projected cash flows for the year ending 31 March 2021 based on a growth rate of 3% per annum.
The key assumptions used in the budget for GenesisCNS are the sales projections which are predicated on the continued success of
The key assumption used in the budget for CoTek is the growth in sales of the Companys Micropath range of products.
The recoverable amount of Omega Diagnostics GmbH has been determined based on a value in use calculation using cash flow projections based on the actual results for the year ended 31 March 2017 and the financial budget approved by the Board covering the period to 31 March 2020 with projected cash flows for the year ending 31 March 2021 based on a growth rate of 3% per annum.
The budget for Omega Diagnostics GmbH assumes continued sales in the German market and increasing export sales from an extension to the allergens on the Allergodip test.
Given the level of the development spend detailed in Note 8 a value in use calculation has been prepared to support both the VISITECT CD4 and Allersys project costs.
The recoverable amount for VISITECT CD4 has been determined based on projections through to March 2021 assuming an increased number of unit sales each year as the product achieves market acceptance.
The projections used assume that management will overcome the final challenges and bring the product to market.
The VISITECT CD4 test represents a unique opportunity to meet a large unmet global health need.
The outcome to the development project is likely to lead to a recoverable amount which is either significantly higher or significantly lower than the current carrying amount of the asset depending on the respective success or otherwise of the development programme.
Financial Statements 8 Intangibles continued Impairment testing of goodwill and intangibles continued The recoverable amount for the Allersys project has been determined based on projections through to March 2021 as well as the inclusion of a terminal value again assuming an increasing number of tests sold each year as the product increases market acceptance and penetration.
We note that the carrying value of development costs relating to Allersys are underpinned by our ability to agree global distribution terms with our Allersys licensor IDS.
The Directors believe that they have made good progress to secure this deal and are confident that once the contractual process is completed this will give more certainty to the future cash flows underpinning the carrying value of 7907450 relating to the Allersys project being capitalised development costs of 5069500 licence fee of 1484663 and goodwill of 1353287.
In all cases the Company also makes assumptions in regard to having sufficient production personnel to cope with increased volumes.
The discount rate applied to cash flows is 12.94% 2016 12.94% for the Group which takes account of other risks specific to each segment such as currency risk geography and price risk.
The discount rate is the weighted average cost of the pretax cost of debt financing and the pretax cost of equity financing.
As a result of our impairment review there has been no impairment to the carrying value of goodwill or intangibles.
Sensitivity analysis The Group has conducted a sensitivity analysis on each of the impairment tests.
The Directors believe that any reasonably possible further change in the key assumptions on which the recoverable amount is based would not cause any of the carrying amounts to exceed the relevant recoverable amount.
9 Property plant and equipment Land and Leasehold Plant and Motor property improvements machinery vehicles Total
Cost
At 31 March 2015 601572 401989 3606219 7636 4617416 Additions  396107 224545  620652 Disposals  9186   9186 Currency translation 48403 10310 53225 615 112553 At 31 March 2016 649975 799220 3883989 8251 5341435 Additions  192116 399261  591377 Disposals   2828  2828 Currency translation 53549 68884 70290  192723 At 31 March 2017 703524 1060220 4350712 8251 6122707 Accumulated depreciation At 31 March 2015 69895 183546 1929096 5646 2188183 Charge in the year 16466 24020 372643 1990 415119
Currency translation 6944 269 38583 615 46411 At 31 March 2016 93305 207835 2340322 8251 2649713 Charge in the year 18886 79728 375504  474118 Disposals   2015  2015 Currency translation 8053 1645 47881  57579 At 31 March 2017 120244 289208 2761692 8251 3179395 Net book value 31 March 2017 583280 771012 1589020  2943312 31 March 2016 556670 591385 1543667  2691722 31 March 2015 531677 218443 1677123 1990 2429233 102015 2016 92546 of the annual depreciation charge relates to assets utilised for development activities therefore this depreciation has been capitalised and included within intangible assets.
The net book value of plant and machinery held under finance leases at 31 March 2017 is 488870 2016 569886.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 48 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 10 Inventories 2017 2016 Raw materials 1499900 1314167 Work in progress 225968 186850 Finished goods and goods for resale 651707 510478 2377575 2011495 11 Trade and other receivables 2017 2016
Trade receivables 1814219 2436065 Less provision for impairment of receivables 14117 14117 Trade receivables  net 1800102 2421948 Prepayments and other receivables 660314 416321 2460416 2838269 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade receivables and other receivables approximates their fair value.
2017 2016
Prepayments and other receivables 12196 11742 Due from subsidiary companies 6070666 4278619 6082862 4290361 Analysis of trade receivables 2017 2016
Neither impaired nor past due 1646583 2224198 Past due but not impaired 153519 197tel
Neither impaired nor past due 6070666 4278619 Ageing of past due but not impaired trade receivables 2017 2016 Up to three months 139503 185574 Between three and six months 24851 10340 More than six months 3281 1836 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade receivables and other receivables approximates their fair value.
The credit quality of trade receivables that are neither past due nor impaired is assessed internally with reference to historical information relating to counterparty default rates.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the fair value of each class of receivable and no collateral is held as security.
12 Interestbearing loans and borrowings and financial instruments 2017 2016
Current
Obligations under finance leases 155494 127783 155494 127783
Obligations under finance leases 275890 282914 275890 282914 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of other loans and finance obligations approximates their fair values.
Financial Statements 12 Interestbearing loans and borrowings and financial instruments continued The Group uses finance leases and hire purchase contracts to acquire plant and machinery.
These leases have terms of renewal but no purchase options and escalation clauses.
Renewals are at the option of the lessee.
Future minimum payments under finance leases and hire purchase contracts are as follows 2017 2016 Future minimum payments due Not later than one year 170168 144548 After one year but not more than five years 296816 300440 466984 444988 Less finance charges allocated to future periods 35600 34291 Present value of minimum lease payments 431384 410697 The present value of minimum lease payments is analysed as follows Not later than one year 155494 127783 After one year but not more than five years 275890 282914 431384 410697 13 Trade and other payables 2017 2016
Trade payables 943120 1070258 Social security costs 214112 193780 Accruals and other payables 605727 377590 1762959 1641628 In the current year Scottish Enterprise grant funding totalling 238067 was included as deferred income on the consolidated balance sheet.
Trade payables and other payables comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade payables approximates their fair value.
2017 2016
Trade payables 3110 46738 Accruals and other payables 143032 121110 Due to subsidiary companies 1646616 1792758 167848 Trade payables and other payables comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade payables approximates their fair value.
14 Deferred taxation The deferred tax asset is made up as follows 2017 2016
Temporary differences 69118 50211 Tax losses carried forward 1582827 1375994 1651945 1426205 A deferred tax asset has been recognised for the carry forward of unused tax losses to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the unused tax losses can be utilised.
The deferred tax liability is made up as follows 2017 2016
Fair value adjustments on acquisition 213211 278451 Accelerated capital allowances 186692 189099 Capitalised research and development 986999 812873 Accelerated tax amortisation on intangibles 367266 256448 Other timing differences 56942 689 1811110 1537560 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 50 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 15 Share capital 2017 2016 Company number number Authorised share capital Ordinary shares of 4.0 pence each 184769736 184769736 Deferred shares of 0.9 pence each 123245615 123245615 Issued and fully paid ordinary share capital At the beginning and end of the year 108745669 108745669 During the year ended 31 March 2017 the Company granted options over 40000 ordinary shares at an average exercise price of 19 pence per share.
The options will expire if not exercised within ten years of the date of grant.
16 Commitments and contingencies Operating lease commitments Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 2017 2016
Land and buildings Within one year 457972 425190 Within two to five years 722849 929658 After five years  21727
Within one year 98476 61285 Within two to five years 239997 112080 After five years 165 Land and buildings leases in force for Omega Diagnostics Limited premises extend to 30 June 2021.
The land and buildings leases in force for the premises of Genesis Diagnostics Limited and Cambridge Nutritional Sciences extend to December 2018.
The land and buildings leases in force for the Omega Dx Asia facility in Pune extend to May 2019.
Other leases are in force for office equipment items and extend to time periods ranging from April 2017 to October 2019.
The leases may be extended at the expiry of their term.
Performance bonds The Group has performance bonds and guarantees in place amounting to 267039 at 31 March 2017 2016 235306.
17 Related party transactions Remuneration of key personnel The remuneration of the key management personnel of Omega Diagnostics Group PLC is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories specified in IAS 24  Related Party Disclosures 2017 2016 Shortterm employee benefits 1606727 1187677 Sharebased payments 228468 280797 Postemployment benefits 71295 51952 1906490 1520426 Four staff have been added to the Group senior management team during the year ended 31 March 2017.
Included within shortterm employee benefits are amounts paid to MBA Consultancy of 25000 2016 25000 a company controlled by David Evans and 40000 2016 40000 paid to Third Day Advisors a company controlled by William Rhodes.
Financial Statements 17 Related party transactions continued Other related party transactions During the year there have been transactions between the parent Company Omega Diagnostics Limited ODL Genesis Diagnostics Limited Genesis Cambridge Nutritional Sciences CNS CoTek South West Limited CoTek Omega Diagnostics GmbH and Omega Dx Asia largely relating to payment of management fees.
The amounts outstanding at the year end are as follows ODG ODL Genesis CNS CoTek GmbH Dx Asia At 31 March 2017 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC  2281560 1435889 1646616  2353217 Omega Diagnostics Limited 2281560  1905486 3487424 20189  47219 Genesis Diagnostics Limited 1435889 1905486  584334 166373  42079 Cambridge Nutritional Sciences Limited 1646616 3487424 584334  181231  5924 CoTek South West Limited  20189 166373 181231 Omega Diagnostics GmbH 2353217 Omega Dx Asia  47219 42079 5924 ODG ODL Genesis CNS CoTek GmbH Dx Asia At 31 March 2016 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC  923484 1177136 142748  2035251 Omega Diagnostics Limited 923484  2055523 2828184 28891  29214 Genesis Diagnostics Limited 1177136 2055523  393419 100171 7244 39066 Cambridge Nutritional Sciences Limited 142748 2828184 393419  180000  1357 CoTek South West Limited  28891 100171 180000 Omega Diagnostics GmbH 2035251  7244    786 Omega Dx Asia  29214 39066 1357  786 During the year there were transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries as follows 2017 2016 Balance at 1 April 2016 4278619 4390114 Charges to subsidiary companies 2093765 968959 Transfers of cash from subsidiary companies 1948334 1080454 Balance at 31 March 2017 4424050 4278619 18 Retirement benefit obligations The Group operates pension schemes for the benefit of its UK and overseas employees.
Details of the defined contribution schemes for the Groups employees are given below in Note a.
Details of the defined benefit schemes for the Groups German employees and details relating to these schemes are given below in Note b.
During the year the Group accounted for these pension schemes under IAS 19  Employee Benefits.
The Group makes contributions to personal plans of employees on a defined contribution basis.
The Group does not have ownership of the schemes with individual plans being arrangements between the employee and pension provider.
For new hires in Germany after 1 January 2011 the support fund LV 1871 Untersttzungskasse e. is the defined contribution scheme used.
The total Group contributions for the year amounted to 151214 2016 114827.
The Deutscher Pensionsfonds AG and the LV 1871 Untersttzungskasse e. schemes give the rights to defined future benefits.
Of these benefits the past service component is based on years of service and salary as of 1 January 2011 and is provided by the Deutscher Pensionsfonds AG.
The remaining benefits based on years of service after 1 January 2011 as well as salary increases are provided by the LV 1871 Untersttzungskasse e. scheme.
These are mainly dependent on the number of earning years and salary level at pension age.
The commitments are covered through an insurance company and are compliant with the requirements of German insurance laws.
Pension costs relating to each scheme operating in Germany are charged in accordance with IAS 19  Employee Benefits.
Formal valuations of each scheme have been carried out by Towers Watson Reutlingen GmbH who are independent professionally qualified actuaries on 5 May 2017 using the following assumptions 2017 2016 Discount rate 2.00% 2.00% Future salary increases 2.50% 2.50% Future pension increases 1.75% 1.75% Price inflation 1.75% 1.75% Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 52 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 18 Retirement benefit obligations continued b Defined benefit schemes continued i The amounts recognised in the balance sheet are as follows 2017 2016 Defined benefit obligation 2505629 2152951 Fair value of plan assets 2448430 2197710 Net liabilityasset 57199 44759 ii The amounts chargedcredited to operating profit 2017 2016 Current service costs 112462 123105 Interest cost on the defined benefit obligation 46133 35225 Interest income on plan assets 48436 32953 Total included in employee benefits expense 110159 125377 The current service costs for the year 112462 2016 123105 have been included in administration costs.
2017 2016 Actuarial lossgain arising during the period 49411 351581 Return on plan assets 58537 96122 Total actuarial gain on pensions 9126 255459 iv Changes in the defined obligation during the year 2017 2016 Opening defined benefit obligation 2152951 2194832 Current service cost 112462 123105 Interest cost 46133 35225 Actuarial lossgain due to Changes in demographic assumptions 49141 127780 Changes in financial assumptions  223801 Exchange differences on foreign plans 177642 176598 Benefits paid 32700 25228 Closing defined benefit obligation 2505629 2152951 The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation is 19.4 years.
2017 2016 Opening fair value of plan assets 2197710 2001925 Interest income 48436 32953 Return on plan assets 58537 96122 Contributions by employer 112462 123105 Exchange differences on foreign plans 181059 161077 Benefits paid 32700 25228 Closing fair value of plan assets 2448430 2197710 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 53 Financial Statements 18 Retirement benefit obligations continued b Defined benefit schemes continued Fair value of plan assets 2017 2016 Quoted Unquoted Total Quoted Unquoted Total Equities 343560  343560 352232  352232 Bondsdebt instruments 1374240  1374240 1248823  1248823 Cashother 730630  730630 596655  596655 Total value of plan assets 2448430  2448430 2197710  2197710 vi The major categories of plan assets as a percentage of total plan assets 2017 2016 Equities 14% 16% Bondsdebt instruments 56% 57% Cashother 30% 27% The asset figures above are now weighted with the underlying assets.
The Group expects to contribute 115000 to its defined benefit pension plans in the year ending 31 March 2018.
Assumptions regarding future mortality experience are set based on advice in accordance with published statistics and experience in Germany.
In the calculations the mortality rate used is in accordance with Heubeck Richttafelns basis of calculation for group pension insurance 2005G.
Other assumptions have been set in accordance with Heubeck Richttafelns basis of calculation for group pension insurance as set out in schedule 2005G.
Changes in assumptions compared with March 2017 actuarial assumptions Effect on Effect on defined defined benefit benefit obligation obligation 2017 2016 Discount rate Increase by 1% 419024 365948 Decrease by 1% 549486 481509 Inflation rate Increase by 0.5% 233734 205067 Decrease by 0.5% 273755 240579 Salary increase Increase by 0.5% 52711 47401 Decrease by 0.5% 120939 107891 19 Investments
The Companys investments in subsidiaries which are all 100% owned are comprised of the following Country of 2017 2016 incorporation Investment in Omega Diagnostics Limited UK 1752884 1752884 Investment in Genesis Diagnostics Limited UK 1845066 1845066 Investment in Cambridge Nutritional Sciences Limited UK 4034110 4034110 Investment in CoTek South West Limited UK 480978 480978 Investment in Bealaw 692 Limited UK 1 1 Investment in Bealaw 693 Limited UK 1 1 Investment in Omega Diagnostics GmbH Germany 2542321 2542321 Investment in Omega Dx Asia India 2089798 1537715 12745159 12193076 The further investment in the year relates to continued funding of Omega Dx Asia.
Bealaw 692 Limited and Bealaw 693 Limited are both dormant companies that have never traded.
CoTek South West Limited is exempt from audit under section 479A of the Companies Act 2006.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 54 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 20 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing net profit for the year attributable to ordinary equity holders of the Group by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to ordinary equity holders of the Group by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year plus the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all the dilutive potential ordinary shares into ordinary shares.
Diluting events are excluded from the calculation when the average market price of ordinary shares is lower than the exercise price.
2017 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Group 713261 571tel number number Basic average number of shares 108745669 108745669 Share options 1013126 780017 Diluted weighted average number of shares 109758795 109525686 Adjusted earnings per share on profit for the year The Group presents adjusted earnings per share which are calculated by taking adjusted profit before taxation and adding the tax credit or deducting the tax charge in order to allow shareholders to understand better the elements of financial performance in the year so as to facilitate comparison with prior periods and to better assess trends in financial performance.
2017 2016 Adjusted profit before taxation 1130730 1351115 Tax creditcharge 57035 89920 Adjusted profit attributable to equity holders of the Group 1187765 1261195 21 Financial instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise finance leases a bank overdraft and cash.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to manage the Groups funding and liquidity requirements.
The Group has other financial instruments such as trade receivables and trade payables which arise directly from its operations.
The categories of financial instruments are summarised in the following tables Loans and receivables Total Assets as per the consolidated balance sheet Trade receivables 1800102 1800102 Cash and cash equivalents 737331 737331 2537433 2537433 Loans and receivables Total Assets as per the consolidated balance sheet Trade receivables 2421948 2421948 Cash and cash equivalents 1302257 1302257 3724205 3724205 Loans and receivables Total Assets as per the Company balance sheet Due from subsidiary companies 6070666 6070666 Cash and cash equivalents 292404 292404 6363070 6363070 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 55 Financial Statements 21 Financial instruments continued Loans and receivables Total Assets as per the Company balance sheet Due from subsidiary companies 4278619 4278619 Cash and cash equivalents 597557 597557 4876176 4876176 Liabilities at fair value through profit and Amortised loss cost Total Liabilities as per the consolidated balance sheet Trade payables  943120 943120 Obligations under finance leases  431384 431384 1374504 1374504 Liabilities at fair value through profit and Amortised loss cost Total Liabilities as per the consolidated balance sheet Trade payables  1070258 1070258 Obligations under finance leases  410697 410697 1480955 1480955 Liabilities at fair value through profit and Amortised loss cost Total Liabilities as per the Company balance sheet Trade payables and amounts due to subsidiary companies  1649726 1649726 Liabilities at fair value through profit and Amortised loss cost Total Liabilities as per the Company balance sheet Trade payables and amounts due to subsidiary companies  46738 46738 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 56 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 21 Financial instruments continued Financial risk management The principal financial risks to which the Group is exposed are those relating to foreign currency credit liquidity and interest rate.
These risks are managed in accordance with Boardapproved policies.
Foreign currency risk The Group operates in more than one currency jurisdiction and is therefore exposed to currency risk on the retranslation of the income statement and the balance sheet of its overseas subsidiaries from euros and rupees into its functional currency of pounds sterling.
The Company funds its subsidiaries by a mixture of equity and intercompany loan financing and these balances are subject to exchange rate movements that can give rise to movements in equity.
The Group also buys and sells goods and services in currencies other than the functional currency principally in euros and US dollars.
The Group has US dollar and eurodenominated bank accounts and where possible the Group will offset currency exposure where purchases and sales of goods and services can be made in these currencies.
The Groups nonsterling revenues profits assets liabilities and cash flows can be affected by movements in exchange rates.
It is currently Group policy not to engage in any speculative transaction of any kind but this will be monitored by the Board to determine whether it is appropriate to use additional currency management procedures to manage risk.
At 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 the Group had not entered into any hedge transactions.
The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a possible change in currency rates on the Groups profit before tax and equity through the impact of sterling weakening against the US dollar the euro the rupee and the Canadian dollar.
Effect on Decrease profit Effect on in currency before tax equity rate Trade and other receivables 5% 64907 Trade and other payables 5% 46546 Cash and cash equivalents 5% 13488 Net investment in overseas subsidiary 5%  550043 Trade and other receivables 5% 84208 Trade and other payables 5% 25803 Cash and cash equivalents 5% 19465 Net investment in overseas subsidiary 5%  379 An increase in currency rate of 5% would have a similar but opposite effect.
Credit risk The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its trade receivables.
The Group conducts its operations in many countries so there is no concentration of risk in any one area.
In most cases the Group grants credit without security to its customers.
Creditworthiness checks are undertaken before entering into contracts with new customers and credit limits are set as appropriate.
The Group conducts most of its operations through distributors and is therefore able to maintain a fairly close relationship with its immediate customers.
As such the Group monitors payment profiles of customers on a regular basis and is able to spot deteriorations in payment times.
An allowance for impairment is made that represents the potential loss in respect of individual receivables where there is an identifiable loss event which based on previous experience is evidence of a reduction in the recoverability of cash flows.
The amounts presented in the balance sheet are net of allowance for doubtful receivables.
An analysis of trade receivables from various regions is analysed in the following table 2017 2016 Trade Trade receivables receivables UKEurope 799640 1170609 North America 127634 267995 SouthCentral America 66090 199784 Asia and Far East 475335 407940 Africa and the Middle East 331403 375620 1800102 2421948 site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 57 Financial Statements 21 Financial instruments continued Financial risk management continued Capital management The Group funds its operations with a mixture of short and longterm borrowings or equity as appropriate with a view to maximising returns for shareholders and maintaining investor creditor and market confidence.
The Board reviews and approves an annual budget to help ensure it has adequate facilities to meet all its operational needs and to support future growth in the business.
Liquidity risk The Groups objective is to maintain sufficient headroom in cash generation and banking facilities to meet its foreseeable financing and working capital requirements.
The Group maintains a surplus balance of cash and cash equivalents to ensure flexible liquidity to meet financial liabilities as they fall due.
The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities at 31 March 2017 based on the undiscounted cash flows of liabilities which include both future interest and principal amounts outstanding based on the earliest date on which the Group can be required to pay.
The amounts of future interest are not included in the carrying value of financial liabilities on the balance sheet.
Less than 3 to 12 1 to 5 3 months months years Total
Trade payables 943120   943120 Obligations under finance leases 32421 137748 296816 466985 975541 137748 296816 1410105 Trade payables 1070258   1070258 Obligations under finance leases 27439 119906 298040 445385 1097697 119906 298040 1515643 The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Companys financial liabilities at 31 March 2017 based on the undiscounted cash flows of liabilities based on the earliest date on which the Company can be required to pay.
Less than 3 to 12 1 to 5 3 months months years Total
Trade payables and amounts due to subsidiary companies 1649726   1649726 1649726   1649726 Trade payables and amounts due to subsidiary companies 46738   46738 46738   46738 Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 58 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 21 Financial instruments continued Financial risk management continued Interest rate risk All of the Groups borrowings are at variable rates of interest.
The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a possible change in interest rates on the Groups profit before tax through the impact on floating rate borrowings and cash balances.
Effect on profit before tax Increase in and equity Consolidated basis points Cash and cash equivalents 25 2549 Cash and cash equivalents 25 4093 The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a possible change in interest rates on the Companys profit before tax through the impact on floating rate borrowings and cash balances.
Effect on profit before tax Increase in and equity Company basis points Cash and cash equivalents 25 1112 Cash and cash equivalents 25 1912 Fair values The carrying amount for all categories of financial assets and liabilities disclosed on the balance sheet and in the related notes to the accounts is equal to the fair value of such assets and liabilities as at both 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016.
The monetary value attributable to these financial assets and liabilities is the same value that has been disclosed in the related notes to the accounts.
The valuation methods used to fair value the financial assets and liabilities have been disclosed in Note 2 to the financial statements under the heading of Financial instruments.
The carrying amount recorded in the balance sheet of each financial asset as at 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 represents the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk.
Financial Statements Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held at Omega House Hillfoots Business Village Clackmannanshire FK12 5DQ on 29 August 2017 at 11am for the following purposes To receive and adopt the reports of the Directors and the auditors and the audited accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017.
To reappoint Ernst and Young LLP as auditors of the Company to hold office until the conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid before the Company and that their remuneration be fixed by the Directors.
To reelect Mr Jagdeep Grewal as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Mr William Rhodes as a Director of the Company.
That in accordance with section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the Directors be generally and unconditionally authorised to allot shares in the Company or grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares in the Company Rights up to an aggregate nominal amount of 1699535.28 ordinary shares of 4 pence each Ordinary Shares provided that this authority shall unless renewed varied or revoked by the Company expire on the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or if earlier on 31 October 2018 save that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require shares to be allotted or Rights to be granted and the Directors may allot shares or grant Rights in pursuance of any such offer or agreement notwithstanding that the authority conferred by this resolution has expired.
This authority is in substitution for all previous authorities conferred on the Directors in accordance with section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 but without prejudice to any allotment already made or to be made pursuant to such authority.
Resolution 6 is proposed as a special resolution.
That conditional upon the passing of resolution 5 above and in accordance with section 570 of the Companies Act the Directors be generally empowered to allot equity securities as defined in section 560 of the Companies Act 2006 pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 5 as if section  of the Companies Act 2006 did not apply to any such allotment provided that this power shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities in connection with an issue in favour of the holders of Ordinary Shares where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interests of all holders of Ordinary Shares are proportionate as nearly as may be to the respective number of Ordinary Shares held by them but subject to such exclusions or arrangements as the Directors may deem necessary or expedient to deal with fractional entitlements arising or any legal or practical problems under the laws of any overseas territory or the requirements of any regulatory body or stock exchange and the allotment of Ordinary Shares otherwise than pursuant to subparagraph 6.1 above up to an aggregate nominal amount of 257505.32 and provided that this power shall unless renewed varied or revoked by the Company expire on the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or if earlier 31 October 2018 save that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and the Directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of any such offer or agreement notwithstanding that the power conferred by this resolution has expired.
By order of the Board Kieron Harbinson Company Secretary 29 June 2017 Registered in England and Wales number site Omega Diagnostics Group PLC One London Wall
EC2Y 5AB United Kingdom tel
NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING Omega Diagnostics Group PLC 60 Entitlement to attend and vote Pursuant to Regulation 41 of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001 the Company specifies that only those members registered on the Companys register of members at close of business on 25 August 2017 shall be entitled to attend and vote at the Meeting.
Appointment of proxies If you are a member of the Company at the time set out in Note 1 above you are entitled to appoint a proxy to exercise all or any of your rights to attend speak and vote at the Meeting and you should have received a proxy form with this Notice of Meeting.
You can only appoint a proxy using the procedures set out in these notes and the notes to the proxy form.
A proxy does not need to be a member of the Company but must attend the Meeting to represent you.
Details of how to appoint the Chairman of the Meeting or another person as your proxy using the proxy form are set out in the notes to the proxy form.
If you wish your proxy to speak on your behalf at the Meeting you will need to appoint your own choice of proxy not the Chairman and give your instructions directly to them.
You may appoint more than one proxy provided each proxy is appointed to exercise rights attached to different shares.
You may not appoint more than one proxy to exercise rights attached to any one share.
To appoint more than one proxy please contact the registrars of the Company Share Registrars Limited on 0tel.
A vote withheld is not a vote in law which means that the vote will not be counted in the calculation of votes for or against the resolution.
If no voting indication is given your proxy will vote or abstain from voting at his or her discretion.
Your proxy will vote or abstain from voting as he or she thinks fit in relation to any other matter which is put before the Meeting.
The notes to the proxy form explain how to a direct your proxy to vote on each resolution or withhold their vote b appoint proxies c change proxy instructions and d terminate proxy appointments.
Corporate representing Corporate members are referred to the guidance issued by the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators on proxies and corporate representatives  www. csa. ite  for further details of this procedure.
Issued shares and total voting rights As at the date of this Annual Report the Companys issued voting share capital comprised 108745669 ordinary shares of 4 pence each.
Each ordinary share carries the right to one vote at a general meeting of the Company and therefore the total number of voting rights in the Company is as at the date of this Annual Report 108745669.
The Company anticipates issuing up to a further 20007003 ordinary shares of 4 pence each pursuant to the Fundraising announced on 30 June 2017.
Communications with the Company Except as provided above members who have general queries about the Meeting should telephone Kieron Harbinson on 44 0telno other methods of communication will be accepted.
You may not use any electronic address provided either in this notice of Annual General Meeting or any related documents including the proxy form to communicate with the Company for any purposes other than those expressly stated.
Voting through CREST CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies through the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so for the Annual General Meeting and any adjournments thereof by using the procedures described in the CREST Manual.
CREST Personal Members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service providers should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service providers who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
In order for a proxy appointment or instruction made using the CREST service to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST Proxy Instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with CRESTCo Limiteds specifications and must contain the information required for such instructions as described in the CREST Manual.
The message regardless of whether it relates to the appointment of a proxy or to an amendment to the instruction given to a previously appointed proxy must in order to be valid be transmitted so as to be received by the issuers agent 7RA36 by the latest times for receipt of proxy appointments specified above.
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the timestamp applied to the message by the CREST Applications Host from which the issuers agent is able to retrieve the message by enquiry to CREST in the manner prescribed by CREST.
After this time any change of instructions to proxies appointed through CREST should be communicated to the appointee through other means.
CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers should note that CRESTCo Limited does not make available special procedures in CREST for any particular messages.
Normal system timings and limitations will therefore apply in relation to the input of CREST Proxy Instructions.
It is the responsibility of the CREST member concerned to take or if the CREST member is a CREST personal member or sponsored member or has appointed a voting service providers to procure that his or her CREST sponsor or voting service providers takes such action as shall be necessary to ensure that a message is transmitted by means of CREST by any particular time.
In this connection CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers are referred in particular to those sections of the CREST Manual concerning practical limitations of the CREST system and timings.
The Company may treat as invalid a CREST Proxy Instruction in the circumstances set out in Regulation a of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001.
NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING site Annual Report and Group Financial Statements 2017 61 Financial Statements
Nominated adviser and broker finnCap Limited 60 New Broad Street London EC2M 1JJ
Ernst and Young LLP
5 George Square Glasgow G2 1DY
Brodies LLP 15 Atholl Crescent Edinburgh EH3 8HA
Share Registrars Limited The Courtyard 17 West Street
Surrey GU9 7DR Public relations Walbrook PR Limited 4 Lombard Street London EC3V 9HD Country of incorporation England and Wales Omega Diagnostics Group PLC Registered number Printed by Ripping Image on FSC certified paper.
100% of the inks used are vegetable oil based 95% of press chemicals are recycled for further use and on average 99% of any waste associated with this production will be recycled.
This document is printed on Heaven 42 and Edixion offset.
Both papers are from FSC certified forests.
Omega Diagnostics Group PLC Omega House Hillfoots Business Village Alva FK12 5DQ
United Kingdom site tel
