TECH N O L O G Y P L C Annual Report Castleton T echnology plc Annual Report 2017 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
In This Report STRATEGIC REPORT 01 Operational Highlights
02 Chairmans Statement
04 Chief Executives Review
08 Financial Review
12 Strategic Report
Board of Directors 15 Advisers
16 Corporate Governance Statement
18 Directors Remuneration Report
20 Directors Report Statement of Directors Responsibilities Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Castleton Technology plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 27 Consolidated Balance Sheet Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 29 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Company Balance Sheet 57 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 58 Company Cash Flow Statement Notes to the Company Financial Statements The year has primarily been one of consolidation and we continue to see enormous potential to become the goto supplier for software and it services in the social housing market.
Strategic Report
Financial Statements 01 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
Highlights
T urnover of 20.3 million 2016 18.0 million Adjusted EBITDA of 4.4 million 2016 3.6 million Acquisition of mobile technology IP in the year Cash generated from operations of 4.6 million 2016 0.6 million Basic EPS up to 0.59p 2016 loss of 1.56p Over 60% of revenue is recurring 02 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
Statement
There remain significant crossselling opportunities within the customer base for us to provide our customers with the technology and services that they require.
David Payne NonExecutive Chairman Strategic Report
Financial Statements 03 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Dear Shareholder I am pleased to be able to report on another year of solid progress for
Following the acquisitive growth of FY2015 and FY2016 FY2017 has been a year of consolidation as we put in place firm foundations for the Group to build on its position as a successful niche player in software and IT managed services within the public sector market place.
The acquisition of seven small companies brings great rewards but also significant integration efforts.
Despite early teething issues previously noted Im delighted to say that the business has now dealt with these and as we enter our fourth year we fully expect the company to demonstrate its growth potential.
With respect to the year under review I am encouraged that we have demonstrated our ability to improve the mix of sales as the Company has successfully transitioned to targeting multiyear SaaS software revenues whilst continuing to grow our overall sales.
A key success in the year has been clearly demonstrating the highly cash generative nature of our business model which facilitated a reduction in our net debt.
The Board There have been changes at Board level as the Group puts in place our foundations for future growth.
Dean Dickinson joined the Board as CEO on 31 October 2016 replacing Ian Smith who became Executive Deputy
Dean was previously Managing Director of Advanced Business Solutions part of Advanced Computer Software Group Limited previously Advanced Computer Software plc  ACS where he led the impressive growth of the Public Sector and Enterprise division following the acquisition of COA Solutions in 2010.
Dean was part of the senior management team that sold ACS to Vista Private Equity for 725 million in March 2015.
Caro Bell resigned from the Board as Operations Director on 30 August 2016 having joined in November 2015 and Davinder Sanghera resigned from the Board as Chief Operations Officer on 16th January 2017 having joined when Documotive was acquired by Castleton in November 2014.
Davinder was appointed as Chief Operations Officer on 9 April 2015.
I would like to thank them both for the hard work they have put in to help make Castleton the company it is today.
Opportunity  Outlook The year has primarily been one of consolidation and we continue to see enormous potential to become the goto supplier for software and IT services in the social housing market.
There remain significant crossselling opportunities within the customer base in order to provide our customers with the technology and services that they require.
The low penetration of our comprehensive product and service set across our customer base combined with a healthy pipeline of new business gives me confidence for the year ahead.
With the team currently in place a broad customer base a wide range of products and services and solid cash flows enabling repayment of debt I am confident of our future success and I expect that the Group will show further growth when it next reports.
David Payne
17 July 2017 04 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Chief Executives
Each of the acquisitions has brought best in class software solutions or managed services capability.
The range of solutions provides customers with significant improvements in service performance and insight.
Dean Dickinson Chief Executive Strategic Report
Financial Statements 05 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
I am pleased to report the significant progress the Group has made during the financial year to 31 March 2017 .
I arrived at the end of October 2016 with the Company having made multiple acquisitions in prior years and the start of the financial year saw Castleton improve the terms of its existing exclusive reseller agreement with 365 Agile Group plc  Agile granting us an exclusive licence for Agiles suite of mobile working software solutions in relation to the social housing sector.
Each of the acquisitions has brought best in class software solutions and managed services capability so the foundations for a successful and scalable business were already in place.
The focus during the year has also been on integrating the businesses acquired and since my arrival in October 2016 I have made further changes to the structure and organisation which strengthened our platform and which will allow the Group to grow and maximise the opportunities available in our chosen market.
Our Market and What We Do The markets in which we operate are focused around public sector and notforprofit social housing but also include the contractors who provide repairs services to the social housing providers.
Castleton has six offices in the UK and a growing operation in Australia demonstrating our ability to grow and scale our business in a new geography.
The Group remains aligned along two divisions Software Solutions and Managed Services with each focusing on their separate yet complementary offerings.
Our Software Solutions division provides all key business processes to social landlords covering everything from tenant engagement rent collection financial planning and control document managing and repairs management.
All key processes are available to be utilised on a mobile platform via apps or digital engagement.
The range of solutions provides customers with significant improvements in service performance and insight.
Our Managed Services division offers a wide range of IT Infrastructure solutions which support an organisations business objectives including helping to drive efficiencies manage legacy architectures or providing customers and staff with the latest social mobile and cloud technologies.
Trading Results Revenue for the year showed an increase of 13% to 20.3 million 2016 18 million with in excess of 60% of revenue being recurring in nature 2016 58%.
Adjusted EBITDA  showed a stronger performance improving by 22% to 4.4 million 2016 3.6 million reflecting the Companys operational gearing and ability to scale profitably.
The underlying metrics of the business were particularly encouraging.
The
Managed Services divisions trading EBITDA  grew 32% year on year as we look to transition to more profitable deals.
The Software Solutions divisions trading EBITDA  grew 15%.
Operating cash conversion was outstanding at 105% of adjusted EBITDA pre exceptional costs and 86% of adjusted EBITDA  post exceptional costs enabling a reduction in net debt and pleasingly earnings per share at a basic level were 0.59p following a loss in the previous year of 1.56p per share.
Operational Review Much of the focus this year has been on completing the integration of the companies acquired since June 2014 which I am pleased to say is largely done and building a platform and infrastructure to enable continued profitable growth and take full advantage of the market opportunity.
We have made improvements to the quality of the business processes people structure and control.
The organic growth of the business is building on the back of the acquisitive growth.
Our contracted backlog of revenue has grown by over 40% which gives us good forward visibility of revenue.
The increase in revenues was driven by the addition of new customers and through crossselling of products and services into the Groups existing base.
Castleton now supports over 750 customers and during the year the number of those who have two or more of our products increased to 35%.
Not only does this show traction in our intention to crosssell and our customers confidence in our product suite but also means that 65% of our customer base still uses just one product providing a very strong opportunity for further organic growth.
Earnings for the year from continuing operations before net finance costs tax depreciation amortisation exceptional costs and share based payment charges.
Trading EBITDA before Group costs i.
Board and its advisors Net cash less borrowings deferred consideration contingent consideration and convertible loan notes.
06 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Chief Executives Review continued Castleton is well positioned to provide an ecosystem of integrated modular solutions supported by scalable infrastructure platforms helping organisations to operate more effectively and achieve their goals whilst bringing visible recurring annuity revenues to the Group.
As referred to above the start of the year in April 2016 saw Castleton improve the terms of its existing exclusive reseller agreement with Agile by entering into a new perpetual licence agreement with the company whereby we were granted an exclusive licence for their suite of mobile working software solutions in relation to the social housing sector.
New contracts signed during the year include a landmark agreement with Wentworth Community Housing in Australia signed in November 2016 for the provision of Kyperas housing system and three other products including Agiles mobile working solutions.
This followed on from the installation of a local management team and is evidence of the opportunity available in the Australian market and the relevance of Castletons product suite in that country.
In January this year two new contracts were announced namely a ten year agreement with Clid Housing Association Clid in Ireland and a fiveyear contract with Arcon Housing Association  Arcon in Manchester.
Both agreements were for multiple products and  or services with Clid being the first customer to take the complete suite of software products validating the Groups intention of becoming a one stop shop serving the social housing sector and showing the Groups ability to crosssell and upsell the product suite.
Our success in winning these new contracts demonstrates the unique proposition that Castleton can bring to the market and we continue to seek to expand on this success by increasing the number of customers who take multiple products which is a major focus going forwards.
Strategic Report
Financial Statements 07 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 At the end of the year the Company had further success in signing two multi year agreements extending both the contract base and the level of recurring revenue.
The first is a seven year contract with North Hertfordshire Homes and the second a three year contract with a community regeneration and housebuilding company.
Post year end a new operational structure has been put in place with clearly aligned objectives and sales teams have been tasked with defined territories and targets.
The initial feedback has been positive both internally and from customers.
Outlook
Castleton is well positioned to provide an ecosystem of integrated modular solutions supported by scalable infrastructure platforms helping organisations to operate more effectively and achieve their goals whilst bringing visible recurring annuity revenues to the Group.
The Group brings together trusted brands with a pedigree of delivering solutions that meet customer needs whilst offering a refreshing change of culture and approach focusing on customer collaboration using modern technology.
We see the public and notforprofit sectors as attractive markets due to their niche requirements and we believe a significant opportunity exists to capitalise on the ability to address historic underinvestment in IT infrastructure in those sectors.
I am confident that the business is now in a position to maximise the opportunities that we see in our chosen markets by offering our customers an integrated suite of products either on an installed or cloud delivery basis in turn allowing them to increase efficiencies and lower their costs of operating.
Post yearend we have had a number of successes selling our software products on a cloud basis.
Combined with the general long term nature of the contracts entered into selling our products on a hosted basis gives greater recurring revenue and greater visibility of earnings and cash flow as we move forward.
The new financial year has started well and in line with expectations.
The Company has good visibility of revenues a strong and improving product suite combined with a defined roadmap for further development and an improved structure to enable us to execute our strategy.
The existing customer base provides a significant opportunity for crossselling opportunities adding further organic growth along with new customers.
The Board continues to view the future with confidence.
Dean Dickinson Chief Executive 17 July 2017 08 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
Review
Haywood Chapman Chief Financial Officer Revenue Adjusted EBITDA Gross Prot tel 3.6mteltel Strategic Report
Financial Statements 09 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 I am pleased to present this report as Chief Financial Officer.
Principal events and overview Other than the new licence agreement with Agile further details of which can be found below the period since the last report has been one of consolidation compared to the previous two years of considerable acquisitive activity.
As with the prior years there has been a considerable amount of integration activity partly contributing to the 0.7 million exceptional charge within the Income Statement.
Agiles suite of solutions have been merged into Castleton Software Solutions Ltd which along with Castleton Managed Services Ltd form the two divisions in the
Also during the year we merged the offices acquired along with the acquisition of Impact Applications Limited into our Software Solutions headquarters in Sutton Coldfield.
With the exception of Kypera all acquired entities are on a common accounting platform across the Group which brings a greater degree of process and visibility to our back office operations.
We plan to bring Kypera onto our common accounting platform during the current year.
Agile
On 4 April 2016 the Group improved its existing exclusive reseller agreement with Agile and entered into a new perpetual licence agreement whereby Castleton was granted an exclusive licence for Agiles suite of mobile working software solutions in relation to the social housing sector the  Agile Licence.
Agiles software solutions are complementary to Castletons range of solutions which have been designed to enable social housing organisations to work more efficiently and effectively.
Agiles software solutions allow field based and customer facing teams to securely access any system data or document from any global location allowing users to complete tasks in real time.
T o continue to support and develop the product a number of staff members transferred from Agile to the Group and as a result the grant of the licence and the transfer of staff collectively meet the definition of a business combination under IFRS3 and consequently are recorded as a business combination in these accounts.
Under the terms of the Agile Licence Castleton will pay Agile 600000 per year over a three year period with the potential for a further payment of at least 300000 in the year to 31 March 2020 dependent on total sales during the first three years of the agreement.
The Board of Castleton believes that the Agile Licence and staff transfer are strategically important as they secure the Groups use of Agiles software solutions going forward whilst enhancing the margin with an estimated payback period of two years.
Goodwill
A fair value reassessment of 0.9m was performed on Kypera the majority of which relates to claims in relation to onerous contracts that were in place prior to acquisition together with the associated rectification costs.
Discussions are currently ongoing however the resolution of such claims remains uncertain.
Trading results The trading results for the year comprise a full year of trading for all entities acquired in the prior years and from 4 April 2016 a full year of trading from the updated Agile Licence Revenue and gross profit Revenue amounted to  20.3 million 2016 18.0 million of which 10.8 million was generated by the Software Solutions division 2016 8.3 million and 9.4 million 2016 9.7 million was generated by the Managed Services division.
Recurring revenue is in excess of 60% of total revenues 2016 58%.
Gross profit amounted to 14.3 million 2016 11.3 million representing a gross margin of 70% 2016 63%.
The increase in overall gross margin is partly due to a full year of trading from the Kypera business which was acquired in the previous year and sits in the Software Solutions division and has a higher gross margin and also as a result of the new Agile Licence where there is no longer a 70% commission included in cost of sales.
Gross margin for the Software Solutions division increased from 80% to 84% and for the Managed Services division it increased from 40% to 45%.
Administrative expenses including exceptional items The administrative expenses were incurred in the running of all entities and include the cost of the Board and its advisors including the cost of occupancy back office support services and the fees associated with maintaining the AIM listing as well as amortisation of 3.0 million and exceptional items.
Exceptional items of 0.7 million 2016 2.2 million include costs relating to restructuring activities undertaken in the year.
Adjusted EBITDA The adjusted EBITDA for the year amounts to 4.4 million 2016 3.6 million.
The cost in the year for the plc Board and its advisors was 1.3 million 2016 1.2 million and we continue to maintain tight controls on expenditure.
Trading EBITDA was therefore 5.7 million 2016 4.6 million.
Finance income and costs Finance income represents the interest earned on deferred income from the sale of the consulting business sold in 2015 and finance costs comprise interest payable on bank borrowings and the interest and unwind of discount on the convertible loan notes issued in January 2016 to part fund the acquisition of Kypera Loan Notes.
Finance income and costs amounted to 0.02 million 2016 0.3 million and 0.7 million 2016 0.7 million respectively.
Earnings for the year from continuing operations before net finance costs tax depreciation amortisation exceptional costs and share based payment charges.
10 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Gross profit
Cash generated from operations Adjusted EBITDA Gross margin 70%
Review continued Strategic Report
Financial Statements 11 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company The Group profit for the year to 31 March 2017 was 0.5 million 2016 loss of 1.1 million.
This comprises the loss before tax of 0.5 million 2016 loss of 1.9 million which includes the finance income of 0.02 million 2016 0.3 million and a tax credit of 1.0 million 2016 0.8 million arising from RandD tax credits the unwind of deferred tax recognised on intangible assets and prior year adjustments.
Cash flow Cash generated from operations during the year was 4.6 million 2016 0.6 million reflecting a decrease in working capital of approximately 0.1 million 2016 increase of 3.0 million.
Net of cash acquired 1.0 million of cash was used in business combinations 0.5 million for Brixx and 0.5 million for Agile which was funded through cash generated by the business.
This resulted in an overall increase in funds of 0.6 million giving a net positive cash position at the balance sheet date of 0.3 million 2016 net negative cash position of 0.3 million.
Deferred income Deferred income arises where revenue is invoiced ahead of delivery of performance obligations and therefore recognition of revenue.
This is common in software maintenance hosting managed services and software subscription agreements.
Invoicing is largely quarterly half yearly or annually in advance and therefore deferred income levels fluctuate throughout the year.
At 31 March 2017 deferred revenue of 8.4 million is 0.7 million higher than at the end of March 2016 due to growth in the above contracts.
Funding and debt repayment During the year the Group repaid 1.0 million of the Barclays term loan in line with the facility agreement.
As at the balance sheet date 4.3 million of term loan was outstanding.
In addition in March 2017  the Group repaid 0.5 million of the 3.5 million Loan Notes issued to part fund the acquisition of Kypera.
A further 0.5 million of the Loan Notes were repaid in April 2017 .
The Loan Notes are capable of being converted into new ordinary shares at a price of 85.6 pence per ordinary share which represented a 5% premium to the mid closing price on 28 January 2016 the day immediately prior to completion of the acquisition of
Conversion is at the option of the holder at any time during the five year term.
On 29 May 2016 the final 0.5 million of deferred consideration for the acquisition of Brixx was paid and also during the year 0.5 million of the 1.8 million due under the terms of the Agile Licence was paid.
During the year 0.15 million of the 0.45 million of convertible loan notes that were issued as part of the acquisition of Opus the Opus Loan Notes were converted into shares.
Post yearend the remaining 0.3 million of the Opus Loan Notes were cancelled in agreement with the holders.
Going Concern The Directors have prepared detailed cash flow projections including sensitivity analysis on key assumptions.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance and the timing of key strategic events show the Group will be able to operate within the level and conditions of available funding.
Based on the funding available the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its consolidated financial statements.
Haywood Chapman Chief Financial Officer 17 July 2017 12 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
Report
The Directors present their strategic report for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
Review of the business and future developments A detailed review of the business is set out in the Chairmans Statement and in the Chief Executives and Financial
Included in these reviews are comments on the key performance indicators that are used by the Board on a monthly basis to monitor and assess the performance of the business.
These indicators include the level of turnover gross profit gross profit percentage adjusted EBITDA  and costs.
Future developments and current trading and prospects are set out in the Chairmans Statement and in the Chief Executives and Financial reviews.
These reports together with the
Corporate Governance Statement the
Audit Committee report are incorporated into this report by reference and should be read as part of this report.
The Groups strategy is focused on selling multiyear annuity deals across its customer base and increasing the number of products and services each customer takes.
Principal risks and uncertainties Identifying evaluating and managing the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group is an integral part of the way we do business.
We have policies and procedures in place throughout our operations that enable us to do so embedded within our management structure and as part of our normal operating processes.
Market and economic conditions are recognised as one of the principal risks in the current trading environment.
This risk is mitigated by the monitoring of trading conditions and the constant search for ways to achieve new efficiencies in the businesses without impacting levels of service.
Reliance on key personnel and management The success of the Group will be dependent on the services of key management and operating personnel.
The Directors believe that the Groups future success will depend largely on its ability to attract and retain highly skilled and qualified personnel and to expand train and manage its employee base.
There can be no guarantee that suitably skilled and qualified individuals will be retained or identified and employed.
If the Group fails to retain or recruit the necessary personnel or if the Group loses the services of any of its key executives its business could be materially and adversely affected.
Competition risk The Group operates in a highly competitive IT product software and services marketplace and while the Directors believe the Group enjoys significant strengths and advantages in competing for business some of the competitors are much larger with considerable scale that could allow them to offer similar services for materially lower prices than the Group could match while maintaining a margin in the range targeted by the management of the Group.
Therefore competitors could materially adversely impact both the scale of the Groups revenues and its profitability.
Technology
The market for Castletons products and services is in a state of constant innovation and change.
The Group actively participates in a number of industrywide forums and devotes significant resource to the development of new products and services ensuring new technologies can be incorporated and integrated with the Groups core services.
Postacquisition integration risk and risks of an acquisition strategy The Directors recognise that the Group has been very acquisitive over the last three years and that integrating these acquisitions and the associated change management can take a period of time.
The Company may not be able to fully achieve its strategic objectives and operating efficiencies in an acquisition or these may take longer than anticipated.
Inherent uncertainties exist in integrating the operations of an acquired entity.
Earnings for the year from continuing operations before net finance costs depreciation amortisation exceptional costs and sharebased payment charges.
Strategic Report
Financial Statements 13 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 In addition the markets and industries in which the Company and its potential acquisition targets operate are highly competitive.
The Company may lose existing customers or the customers of an acquired entity as a result of its acquisition.
The Company also may lose key personnel either from the acquired entity or from itself as a result of an acquisition.
These factors could contribute to the Company not achieving the expected benefits from its acquisitions within desired time frames if at all.
Future business acquisitions could be material to the Company and it may issue additional equity to pay for those acquisitions which would dilute current shareholders ownership interest.
Acquisitions could also require the Company to use substantial cash or other liquid assets or to incur debt.
In such a case it could become more susceptible to economic downturns and competitive pressures.
Jenny Y oung Company Secretary On behalf of the Board 17 July 2017 Registered Office 100 Fetter Lane
EC4A 1BN 14 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
Executive Directors Ian Smith Executive Deputy Chairman A highly experienced IT and communications industry developer of new business Ian has held senior sales positions with Dataworkforce Cisco Systems Foundry Networks and Cable and Wireless.
Most recently for seven years as CEO of Xploite plc Ian was responsible for the buy build and sell strategy that saw 26 corporate transactions including two substantial disposals and the creation and return of c.
20 million of cash to the companys shareholders.
NonExecutive Directors Dean Dickinson
Chief Executive Officer
Dean joined Castleton in October 2016.
Dean was previously Managing Director of Advanced Business Solutions part of Advanced Computer Software Group Limited previously Advanced Computer Software plc  ACS where he led the impressive growth of the Public Sector and Enterprise division following the acquisition of COA Solutions in 2010.
Dean was part of the senior management team that sold ACS to Vista Private Equity for 725 million in March 2015.
David Payne NonExecutive Chairman David Payne is Chair of the Remuneration Committee and a member of the Audit and Nomination Committees of the Board of Directors.
David Payne has a varied background in the leisure computer and property industries.
For 20 years after leaving university he worked for Julianas a leisure company that floated on the London Stock Exchange in 1983.
He was subsequently recruited by a venture capital fund to become Chairman of Virtuality a company at the forefront of developing virtual reality.
He oversaw the successful flotation of this company on the LSE in 1994 and then left to devote more time to the development of a quoted property company.
Phil Kelly NonExecutive Director Phil brings a 30 year track record of leading successful companies within the technology sector having worked with both quoted and private equity backed businesses.
Phil sits on both the Audit and Remuneration committees.
Haywood Chapman Chief Financial Officer Haywood Chapman joined Castleton on 1 December 2014.
He has significant technology sector expertise in quoted and private equity backed companies.
Prior to Castleton Haywood held a number of senior finance positions at Northgate Information Solutions Infinity SDC and Avnet Inc.
Haywood is a Chartered Accountant having trained at PwC and gained MandA experience in their Transaction Services team.
15 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements
Company Secretary Jenny Y oung Registered Office 100 Fetter Lane
EC4A 1BN Financial Adviser and Broker finnCap Limited 60 New Broad Street London EC2M 1JJ Independent Auditors RSM UK Audit LLP Portland 25 High Street
West Sussex RH10 1BG
Beachcroft
100 Fetter Lane London EC4A 1BN
Capita Registrars Northern House Woodsome Park Fenay Bridge
West Y orkshire HD8 0GA Principal Bankers Barclays Bank plc 54 Lombard Street London EC3V 9EX Company Number Further details can be found on the Castleton T echnology website at the following address site 16 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Corporate Governance
As an AIM quoted company Castleton is not required to comply with the principles and provisions of the 2012 UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Directors have decided to adopt the Corporate Governance Code for small and midsized quoted companies as published by the Quoted Companies Alliance and have sought to meet its recommendations in so far as it considers them appropriate for a company of Castletons size and nature.
The Board of Directors At the financial yearend the Board comprised the NonExecutive Chairman David Payne the Executive Deputy Chairman Ian Smith the Chief Executive Officer Dean Dickinson the Chief Financial Officer Haywood Chapman and one NonExecutive Director Phil Kelly.
Davinder Sanghera who was appointed to the Board as Chief Operating Officer on 9 April 2015 resigned from the Board on 16 January 2017 and Caro Bell who was appointed to the Board as Operations Director on 2 November 2015 resigned from the Board on 30 August 2016.
The business and management of the Company and its subsidiaries are the collective responsibility of the Board.
At each meeting the Board considers and reviews the trading performance of the Group.
The Board has a formal written schedule of matters reserved for its review and approval.
These include the approval of the annual budget major capital expenditure investment proposals the interim and annual results and a review of the overall system of internal control and risk management.
There are three standing Board Committees Audit Nominations and Remuneration.
Each of these Committees acts within defined terms of reference.
Additional information is set out later in this report and also in the Directors Remuneration Report in respect of the Remuneration Committee.
Authority for the execution of the approved policies business plan and daily running of the business is delegated to the executive
During the year the Board met formally on ten occasions.
Phil Kelly is the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and has served throughout the year.
The Companys Articles of Association require onethird of the Directors to stand for reelection each year at the Annual General Meeting and that each Director should seek reelection every 3 years.
In addition Directors appointed by the Board during the year must seek reappointment at the next Annual General Meeting.
Accordingly Dean Dickinson and Phil Kelly will retire and offer themselves for reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring that Board procedures and applicable rules and regulations are observed.
The Board has a procedure whereby any Director may seek through the office of the Company Secretary independent professional advice at the Companys expense in furtherance of his or her duties.
Formal agendas and reports are provided to the Board on a timely basis for Board and Committee meetings and the Chairman ensures that all Directors are properly briefed on issues to be discussed at Board meetings.
Directors are able to obtain further advice or seek clarity on issues raised at the meetings from within the Company or from external sources.
All Directors are subject to appraisal by the Board.
The nonexecutive Director is responsible for the evaluation of the Chairman.
Nominations Committee The Nominations Committee consisted of David Payne Chairman and Phil Kelly throughout the year.
For nominations the Nominations Committee meets as and when necessary to consider the appointment of new executive and nonexecutive Directors.
A process is in place for the appointment of new Directors involving the use of external consultants where appropriate followed by meetings with both the Nominations Committee and subsequently with the Board as a whole together with the Company
This ensures that the selection process is both formal and objective.
The Nominations Committee has formal terms of reference available on request from the Company Secretary and meets at least once a year to review succession planning at both Board and senior management level across the Group.
During the year the Nominations Committee met formally on two occasions and there were no absences from the meetings.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee consisted of David Payne Chairman and Phil Kelly throughout the year.
Details of the Remuneration Committee and its policies are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report.
The Remuneration Committee has formal terms of reference available on request from the Company Secretary.
During the year the Remuneration Committee met formally on three occasions.
There were no absences from the formal meetings.
17 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Audit Committee The Audit Committee consisted of Phil Kelly Chairman and David Payne throughout the year.
The Audit Committee has formal terms of reference available on request from the Company Secretary.
These include the recommendation appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditors the review of the scope and results of the interim review and external annual audit by the auditors their cost effectiveness independence and objectivity.
The Audit Committee also reviews the nature and extent of any nonaudit services provided by the external auditors.
In addition the Audit Committee reviews the effectiveness of internal controls considers the need for an internal audit function and considers any major accounting issues and reports on such matters to the Board.
The Audit Committee reviews the integrity of the financial statements and formal announcements.
A whistleblowing arrangement exists whereby matters can be confidentially reported to the Audit
The executive Directors are not members of the Audit Committee but attend the meetings by invitation as necessary to facilitate its business.
The Chief Financial Officer monitors the level and nature of nonaudit services and specific assignments are flagged for approval by the Audit Committee as appropriate.
The Audit Committee reviews nonaudit fees and considers implications for the objectivity and independence of the relationship with the external auditors.
The Board is satisfied that the Chairman of the Audit Committee has recent and relevant financial experience.
The Audit Committee met on three occasions during the year and there were no absences from the meetings.
Internal control The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The implementation and maintenance of the risk management and internal control systems are the responsibility of the executive Directors and senior management.
The internal control system is designed to manage risk rather than eliminate it and can therefore only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board confirms that there are ongoing processes for identifying evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the Group.
The Group is committed to maintaining high standards of business conduct and operates under an established internal control framework covering financial operational and compliance controls.
This is achieved through an organisational structure that has clear reporting lines and delegated authorities.
The reporting lines and delegated authorities are clearly defined.
Management monitors the risk and performance of the Group.
In addition the Group maintains written processes to control expenditure authorisation limits purchase ordering sales order intake project management inventories and assets to the extent applicable given the changes in the Groups activities during the year.
The Board receives monthly financial information which includes key performance and risk indicators and the Chief Executive Officer reports on significant changes in the business and the external marketplace to the extent they represent significant risk.
There is an established budgetary system with an annual budget approved by the Board.
The Board reviews the results monthly against budget and forecasts together with other business measures.
The principal treasury related risks are documented and approved by the Board.
Details of financial instruments are set out in notes 22 and 23 to the financial statements.
Relations with shareholders and investors Copies of the Annual Report and Accounts are issued to all shareholders and copies are available on the Groups website site The Half Y ear Report is also available on the Groups website.
The Group makes full use of its website to provide information to shareholders and other interested parties.
The Company Secretary also deals with a number of written or emailed enquiries throughout the year.
Shareholders are given the opportunity to raise questions at the Annual General Meeting and the Directors are available both prior to and after the meeting for further discussion with shareholders.
During the year the Executive Deputy Chairman the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer met with institutional investors after the announcement of the interim and yearend results.
Additional meetings were arranged during the year by the Groups brokers finnCap Limited.
Feedback arising from these meetings was communicated to the Board and the Company Secretary also reported to the Board on feedback from shareholders.
Phil Kelly as Senior Independent NonExecutive Director is available to shareholders if they wish to raise any matters that contact through the normal channels of NonExecutive Chairman Executive Deputy Chairman Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer or Company Secretary has failed to resolve or for which such contact is inappropriate.
Phil Kelly Chairman Audit Committee 17 July 2017 18 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Directors Remuneration
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprised David Payne Chairman and Phil Kelly.
The Remuneration Committee makes recommendations to the Board within agreed terms of reference on the remuneration and other benefits including bonuses and share options of the executive Directors.
In considering the remuneration for the year the Remuneration Committee consulted with the executive Directors about its proposals.
The Board sets the fees payable to the nonexecutive Directors.
Remuneration policy The Remuneration Committee is aware that remuneration packages should be sufficiently competitive to attract retain and motivate individuals capable of achieving the Groups objectives and thereby enhancing shareholder value.
Basic salary and benefits Basic salaries are reviewed on a discretionary basis.
Performance related bonus The Remuneration Committee determines the criteria for the award of performance bonuses for the executive Directors in advance of each year.
The bonuses are nonpensionable.
Nonexecutive Directors do not receive a bonus.
No bonuses were paid for year ended 31 March 2017 .
Fees
The Board within the limits stipulated by the Articles of Association and following recommendation by the executive Directors determines nonexecutive Directors fees.
The fees were 30000 for nonexecutive Directors and 30000 for the nonexecutive Chairman including in both cases a fee of 5000 for chairing a Board committee.
Service contracts The Companys policy is for all executive Directors to have service contracts with provision for termination of no more than 12 months notice.
Nonexecutive Directors have letters of appointment.
Appointments can be terminated by the Company giving 6 months notice or the individual giving 1 months notice.
The remuneration of the nonexecutive Directors takes the form solely of fees which are not pensionable.
The details of the executive and nonexecutive Directors service contracts are summarised below Date of contract Notice period months Executive Directors Ian Smith 8 September 2010 1 Dean Dickinson 31 October 2016 6 Haywood Chapman 1 December 2014 6 Davinder Sanghera resigned 16 January 2017 9 April 2015 6 Carolyn Bell resigned 30 August 2016 1 November 2015 3 Nonexecutive Directors David Payne 23 July 2001 6 Phil Kelly 1 October 2014 6 The service contracts continue until notice on either side is given.
Phil Kelly and Dean Dickinson retire in line with the terms of the Articles of Association of the Company and being eligible offer themselves for reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
19 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Directors remuneration Basic salary allowances and fees
Pension
Total
T otal
Dean Dickinson 65   65 Ian Smith 187   187 204 Haywood Chapman Davinder Sanghera Carolyn Bell
David Payne 30   30 30 Phil Kelly 30 Social security costs in respect of directors emoluments were 59000 2016 52000.
Directors emoluments payable to Ian Smith were paid to MXC Capital Advisory Limited.
Share options At 1 April
2p options lapsed during the year
2p Options
Number
At 31 March
Executive
Dean Dickinson a   799982 799982 Haywood Chapman 1692301   1692301 Davinder Sanghera 846151 846151 Carolyn Bell 331125 331125
David Payne 338460   338460 Phil Kelly 169230   169230 None of the directors made any gains on exercise of share options in 2017 or 2016.
On 2 December 2016 EMI Share Options over 416665 ordinary shares were awarded to Dean Dickinson.
The options vest after three years at an exercise price of 0.60.
On 10 February 2017 options were awarded under a combination of unapproved share options and hurdle shares to increase overall options held by Dean Dickinson to 1.4%.
The 1.4% of options held is evergreen in nature meaning that the percentage of the fully diluted issued share capital held under option will remain constant notwithstanding any further issues of ordinary shares in the capital of the Company.
Within the 1.4% the number of EMI Share Options is a fixed number of 416665.
The options are being awarded under a variety of schemes both approved and unapproved.
All of the options are subject to vesting criteria with a compound share price growth rate of 12% per annum over 3 years.
If the average price of an ordinary share does not reach or exceed the target above then the options shall lapse.
Share price The market price of the Companys shares on 31 March 2017 was 64.5p per share.
The highest and lowest market prices during the year were 84.5 pence and 53.0 pence respectively.
David Payne Chairman Remuneration Committee On behalf of the Board 17 July 2017 20 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017
Report
The Directors present their report together with the audited financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
Principal activity The principal activity of the Group during the year was the provision of software and managed services to the public and not for profit sectors predominately the social housing sector.
The Company is an investment holding company.
Review of the business and future developments The review of the year and the directors strategy and objectives for the future are set out in the Strategic Report.
Overseas Presence The company has one overseas business being Kypera Australia Pty Limited.
Income streams originating from this business amounted to 353000 2016 38000.
Research and Development Castletons research and development activities underpin its new Software Solutions offerings.
During the year advancement of operational integration has resulted in such activity being reliably measured to meet the groups accounting policy for capitalising such costs.
Capital expenditure on research and development in the year ended 31 March 2017 amounted to 0.3 million.
The capitalisation rate was 23%.
Dividends
The Company did not pay a dividend during the year.
The Directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend 2016 nil.
Financial instruments The Groups financial instruments primarily comprise borrowings loan notes and cash balances.
In addition various other financial instruments such as trade receivables and payables arise directly from its operations.
T o finance the acquisitions of Brixx and Impact during the prior year the Group entered a new bank facility on 1 June 2015 with the Groups existing bankers Barclays Bank Plc comprising a term loan of 5.0 million together with an overdraft of up to 2.0 million.
On 1 February 2016 to finance the acquisition of Kypera the Group extended this loan facility with Barclays by 1 million and increased the overdraft by 0.5 million.
The loan is repayable at a rate of 250000 per quarter commencing August 2015 and attracts interest of 3.0% above LIBOR.
The overdraft is secured on the assets of the group by way of fixed and floating charges.
0.4 million of convertible loan notes were issued in the year ended 31 March 2016 to satisfy the contingent consideration for the acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited Opus Loan Notes.
The Opus Loan Notes were redeemable in cash or convertible into new ordinary shares of 2 pence each in the capital of the Company Ordinary Shares at a price of 40 pence per Ordinary Share in various tranches 0.15 million on 30 September 2016 0.15 million on 30 September 2017 and 0.1 million on 30 September 2018.
On 21 June 2017  it was agreed by the beneficiaries of the loan notes issued at the time of the Companys acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited Opus that they would waive the remaining 0.25m of loan notes in lieu of surrendering any potential warranty claims under the sale and purchase agreement.
In addition on 29 January 2016 in order to fund the acquisition of Kypera the Company issued 3.5 million of unsecured loan notes Kypera Loan Notes which have a term of 5 years and carry interest at a rate of 5% per annum which is not cash paid.
The Kypera Loan Notes can be converted into new Ordinary Shares at a price of 85.6 pence per Ordinary Share.
Conversion is at the option of the holder at any time during the 5year term.
The Company can redeem the Kypera Loan Notes from the third anniversary of issue if not already converted and earlier by request.
In March 2017  the Group repaid 0.5 million of the 3.5 million Kypera Loan Notes and a further 0.5 million of the Loan Notes were repaid in April 2017 Further details of the Groups risks and policies regarding financial instruments are set out in notes 22 and 23.
Subsequent events On 27 April the Group repaid a further 0.5 million of the 3.5 million of unsecured convertible loan notes that were issued on 29 January 2016 to assist in the funding for the acquisition of Kypera Loan Notes.
This was in addition to the 0.5 million Loan Notes repaid on 29 March 2017 .
On 21 June 2017  it was agreed by the beneficiaries of the loan notes issued at the time of the Companys acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited Opus that they would waive the remaining 0.25m of loan notes in consideration of surrendering any potential warranty claims under the sale and purchase agreement.
21 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements
As at 31 March 2017 the Directors and their beneficial interests and those of their families in the share capital of the Company were as follows 31 March Number of Ordinary shares of 2p 31 March Number of Ordinary shares of 2p Ian Smith note a 20021211 18094336 Dean Dickinson 185000 David Payne 50313 50313 Phil Kelly 136386 136386 Note a  these shares are in the name of MXC Capital Limited a company in which Ian Smith is a substantial shareholder.
Details of the Directors contracts remuneration and share options granted are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report.
As permitted by the Articles of Association the Directors have the benefit of an indemnity which is a qualifying third party indemnity provision as defined by Section 234 of the Companies Act 2006.
The indemnity was in force throughout the last financial year and is currently in force.
The Company also purchased and maintained throughout the financial year Directors and Officers liability insurance in respect of itself and its Directors.
Staff policy The Groups employment policies are designed to ensure that they meet the statutory social and market practices in the UK where the Group operates.
The Group systematically provides employees with information on matters of concern to them consulting them or their representatives regularly so that their views can be taken into account when making decisions that are likely to affect their interests.
Employee involvement in the Group is encouraged as achieving a common awareness on the part of all employees of the financial and economic factors affecting the Group plays a major role in maintaining its relationship with its staff.
The Group is committed to employment policies which follow best practice based on equal opportunities for all employees irrespective of sex race colour disability or marital status.
The Group gives full and fair consideration to applications for employment for disabled persons having regard to their particular aptitudes and abilities.
Appropriate arrangements are made for the continued employment and training career development and promotion of disabled persons employed by the Group.
If members of staff become disabled the Group continues employment either in the same or an alternative position with appropriate retraining being given if necessary.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting  AGM will be held at the offices of DAC Beachcroft LLP  100 Fetter Lane London EC4A 1BN at 11.00am on 23 August 2017 to conduct all mandatory business.
A resolution is to be proposed at the forthcoming AGM for the reappointment of RSM UK Audit LLP as auditor of the Company at a rate of remuneration to be determined by the Audit Committee.
Disclosure of information to auditors The Directors who were members of the Board at the time of approving the Directors Report are listed on page 14.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors each of these Directors confirms that T o the best of each Directors knowledge and belief there is no information relevant to the preparation of their report of which the Groups auditors are unaware and Each Director has taken all the steps a Director might reasonably be expected to have taken to be aware of relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of that information.
Jenny Y oung Company Secretary On behalf of the Board 17 July 2017 Registered Office 100 Fetter Lane
EC4A 1BN 22 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Statement of Directors
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Strategic Report and the Directors Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Company financial statements for each financial year.
The directors are required by the AIM Rules for Companies to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have elected under company law to prepare the parent company financial statements on the same basis.
The financial statements are required by law and IFRS adopted by the EU to present fairly the financial position of the Group and the Company and the financial performance of the Group.
The Companies Act 2006 provides in relation to such financial statements that references in the relevant part of that Act to financial statements giving a true and fair view are references to their achieving a fair presentation.
Under Company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and the companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Jenny Y oung Company Secretary 17 July 2017 Registered Office 100 Fetter Lane
EC4A 1BN 23 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Castleton T echnology plc
We have audited the financial statements of Castleton T echnology plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the group for the year ended 31 March 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated and parent company balance sheets the consolidated and parent company statement of changes in equity the consolidated and parent company cash flow statement and notes to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the groups profit for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to SME listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identified including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Revenue recognition The group generates a number of different revenue streams from its customers a number of which have different recognition criteria.
There is a risk that that the revenue recognition policy may not have been correctly applied to contracts in the following instances Where there are contracts with multiple components bundled contracts the appropriate fair value allocation of consideration to each element may not have been applied due to the level of judgement involved and Recognition of software revenue over a period when immediate recognition is appropriate or vice versa.
Our response to the risk included Assessment of whether revenue has been recognised in line with the Groups revenue recognition policies and IAS 18 Performance of substantive analytical review by revenue stream to assess unexpected trends and patterns that could be indicative of incorrect revenue recognition Recalculation of the revenue recognised on a sample of contracts corroborating the details to the underlying contracts.
In respect of bundled contracts we tested the individual components of a sample of contracts to ensure that the revenue was appropriately allocated to the components and that the substance of the contract was appropriately reflected Performance of tests of detail of a sample of accrued revenue and deferred revenue items to ensure the items are in accordance with the revenue recognition policy and Cutoff testing for a sample of revenue items recorded either side of the year end to ensure that revenue was recognised in the period if the contract was signed both by Castleton and the customer and the software or service had been delivered to the customer before the year end.
There were no key observations in respect of this risk.
24 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Castleton T echnology plc continued Carrying value of intangible assets The group has significant intangible assets arising from recent acquisitions and has carried out reorganisations of the businesses acquired to integrate the groups activities.
The combining of activities and the restructurings carried out may give rise to difficulties in carrying out an impairment review as it may be more difficult to identify the performance of the original cash generating units.
The inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting future cash flows which form the basis of the recoverability assessment and the subjectivity of the key assumptions in impairment models make this one of the key judgment areas on which we will focus our audit work Our response to the risk included Examining managements assessment as to whether indicators of impairment have been identified and appropriately evaluated Checking that intangible assets have been allocated or reallocated to appropriate cash generating units Challenging the discounted cash flow impairment models used to support the carrying values of intangible assets and goodwill Challenging the key assumptions used in the forecasts such as projected growth future capital expenditure inflation cost projections and the discount rate Checking the groups historical forecasting accuracy by comparing the forecast for the year ending 31 March 2017 to the actual outturn Challenging managements sensitivity analyses of the key assumptions and discount rates
Determining the adequacy of disclosures of sensitivity and key risks inherent in the calculations.
There were no key observations in respect of this risk.
Our application of materiality When establishing our overall audit strategy we set certain thresholds which help us to determine the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures and to evaluate the effects of misstatements both individually and on the financial statements as a whole.
During planning we determined a magnitude of uncorrected misstatements that we judge would be material for the financial statements as a whole FSM.
During planning FSM was calculated as 334000 which was not changed during the course of our audit.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all unadjusted differences in excess of 8350 as well as differences below those thresholds that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
An overview of the scope of our audit The Group has fifteen components of which eight are nontrading or dormant.
Of the remaining seven components six were subject to full scope audits by RSM UK Audit LLP .
One small component was subject to specific procedures which principally consisted of desktop review of management figures.
The components subject to full scope audits accounted for 98% of group turnover and 96% of group net assets.
The audit was scoped to support our audit opinion on the group and company financial statements of Castleton T echnology plc and was based on group materiality and an assessment of risk at group level.
The procedures described above in the key audit matters section were applied to all of the six full scope audit components where applicable.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
25 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement set out on page 22 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at httpwww. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
T o the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Geoff Wightwick Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of RSM UK AUDIT LLP  Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants
25 High Street
West Sussex RH10 1BG 17 July 2017 26 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 March 2017 Continuing operations Note Y ear ended 31 March Y ear ended 31 March Revenue 20269 17987 Cost of Sales 5980 6721 Gross Profit 14289 11266 Administrative expenses 14100 12759 Adjusted EBITDA  4383 3601 Exceptional Items 5 741 2184 Depreciation 225 168 Amortisation 2997 2542 Charges for sharebased payments 231 200 Operating profit  loss 189 1493 Finance income 7 21 321 Finance costs 7 749 728 Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 539 1900 Income tax 9 1002 773 Profitloss for the year attributable to owners of the parent company 463 1127 Earnings loss per share T otal basic profit  loss per share 10 0.59p 1.56p T otal diluted profit  loss per share 10 0.54p 1.56p T otal result for the year before net finance costs tax depreciation amortisation exceptional costs and sharebased payment charges The notes on pages 3055 are an integral part of these financial statements.
27 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Consolidated Balance Sheet as at 31 March 2017
31 March 31 March
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 11 33605 32674 Property plant and equipment 12 781 680 Trade and other receivables 13 261 418 34647 33772 Current assets Inventories 50 187 Trade and other receivables 13 5050 6552 Current income tax asset Cash and cash equivalents 14 586 823 5831 7562 T otal assets 40478 41334 Equity and liabilities Equity attributable to owners of the parent Share capital 24 1625 1612 Share premium account 16995 16758 Equity reserve 2919 2919 Other reserves 7966 7966 Accumulated loss 13996 14690 T otal equity attributable to the owners of the parent 15509 14565
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 15 8836 8880 Current income tax liabilities 9  340 Finance leases 16 46 24 Borrowings 17 1324 2194 Convertible loan notes 18 140 443 Deferred consideration 19 838 500 Provisions 20 751 332 11934 12713 Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 15 1893 2433 Borrowings 17 3352 4360 Convertible loan notes 18 2957 3277 Deferred consideration 19 707 Contingent consideration 19 748 Provisions 20  224 Deferred taxation liabilities 9 3377 3762 13034 14056 T otal liabilities 24968 26769 T otal equity and liabilities 40478 41334 The notes on pages 3055 are an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 2655 were approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 17 July 2017 and are signed on its behalf by Dean Dickinson Haywood Chapman
Director 28 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 March 2017 Attributable to the owners of the Parent Company Called up share capital
Equity reserve a
Accumulated
Loss
T otal equity At 1 April 2015 1206 10689 1423 7966 13763 7521 Loss for the period     1127 1127 Transactions with owners in their capacity as owners Share based payments     200 200 Convertible loan notes issued Conversion of financial instruments 206 3187 40   3353 Exercise of options 16 119    135 Exercise of warrants 12 116    128 Issue of replacement options  936 936 Share Issue 172 3583    3755 At 31 March 2016 1612 16758 2919 7966 14690 14565 Profit for the period     463 463 Transactions with owners in their capacity as owners Share based payments     231 231 Conversion of loan notes c 13 237    250 At 31 March 2017 1625 16995 2919 7966 13996 15509 Equity reserve The equity reserve consists of the equity element of convertible loan notes that were issued as part of the consideration for the acquisitions of Castleton Software Solutions Ltd Keylogic Limited Opus Information T echnology Limited and Kypera Holdings Limited.
The fair value of the equity component of convertible loan notes issued is the residual value after deduction of the fair value of the debt component of the instrument from the face value of the loan note.
The merger reserve arose from the acquisition of Redstone Communications Limited 216000 and Maxima Holdings Limited formerly Maxima Holdings plc 7 750000 and represents the difference between the value of the shares acquired nominal value plus related share premium and the nominal value of the shares issued.
Conversion of loan notes On 8 July 2016 the company issued 250000 new ordinary shares of 2 pence each Ordinary Shares at a price of 40 pence pursuant to the conversion of loan notes issued as part of the previous acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited.
The vendors have undertaken not to sell or otherwise dispose of their interests in the new Ordinary Shares at any time during the 12 months following the admission of the new Ordinary Shares to trading on AIM.
On 4 October 2016 the company issued a further 375000 new Ordinary Shares at a price of 40 pence pursuant to the conversion of loan notes issued as part of the previous acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited.
The vendors have undertaken not to sell or otherwise dispose of their interests in the new Ordinary Shares at any time during the 12 months following the admission of the new Ordinary Shares to trading on AIM.
29 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Consolidated Cash Flow Statement for the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 31 March Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 26 4581 589 Exceptional costs 797 1499 Finance charges paid 256 611 Income taxes refunded  paid 133 170 Net cash flows generated from used in operating activities 3661 1691 Cash flows from investing activities Receipt of deferred consideration from sale of businesses sold 53 48 Acquisition of businesses net of cash acquired 450 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired  11660 Purchase of property plant and equipment 297 167 Purchase of intangible assets Net cash flows used in investing activities 1003 11821 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issuance of shares  2200 Cost of share Issue  111 Borrowings  11000 Exercise of share options  135 Exercise of share warrants  220 Settlement of deferred consideration 26 500 Repayment of borrowings 26 1558 788 Net cash flows used ingenerated from financing activities 2058 12656 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents from activities 600 856 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 April 330 526 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 March 270 330
Cash and cash equivalents
17 316 1153 270 330 30 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements year ended 31 March 2017 1 Accounting policies  Group Castleton T echnology plc Castleton is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales whose shares are publicly traded on AIM the market of that name operated by the London Stock Exchange.
The registered office is 100 Fetter Lane London EC4A 1BN and the principal place of business is the United Kingdom.
The principal accounting policies which have been applied consistently in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements throughout the year and by all subsidiary companies are set out below 1 Basis of preparation The consolidated financial statements of Castleton have been prepared on the going concern basis and in accordance with EU adopted International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS IFRIC interpretations and the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements are disclosed in Section 1.28 in the accounting policies.
New standards adopted in the year are discussed in Section 1.27 .
Going Concern The Directors have prepared detailed cash flow projections including sensitivity analysis on key assumptions.
The Groups forecasts and projections show the Group will be able to operate within the level and conditions of available funding.
Based on the performance for the year and the funding available the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its consolidated financial statements.
1.2 Basis of consolidation Subsidiaries are all entities including special purpose entities over which the Group has control.
The group controls an entity when the group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the group.
The Group applies the acquisition method to account for business combinations.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a business is the total of the fair values of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interests issued by the Group.
The consideration transferred includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
The Group recognises any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree on an acquisitionbyacquisition basis either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the recognised amounts of the acquirees identifiable net assets.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the Group is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of contingent consideration classified as a liability is recognised in accordance with IAS 39 either in profit or loss or as a change to other comprehensive income.
Contingent consideration that is classified as equity is not remeasured and its subsequent settlement is accounted for within equity.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains or losses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed where necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
1.3 Intangible assets
Goodwill is initially measured as the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred and the fair value of any non controlling interest over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
If this consideration is lower than the fair value of the net assets of the business acquired the difference is recognised in profit or loss.
Following initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
The carrying amount of goodwill allocated to a cash generating unit is taken into account when determining the gain or loss on disposal of the unit or of an operation within it.
Goodwill disposed of in this circumstance is measured on the basis of the relative values of the operation disposed of and the portion of the cash generating unit retained.
31 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 1 Accounting policies  Group continued Software and customer relationships Intangible assets that meet the criteria to be separately recognised as part of a business combination are carried at cost which is equal to their fair value at the date of acquisition less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
An intangible asset acquired as part of a business combination is recognised separately if the asset is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights and its fair value can be measured reliably.
Intangible assets acquired in this manner include software and customers relationships.
They are amortised over their estimated useful lives on a straight line basis as follows Software  715 years Customer contracts and related relationships  715 years Impairment and amortisation charges are included within the administrative expenses line in the income statement.
Capitalisation of development costs Costs directly attributable to the development of software are capitalised as intangible assets only when technical feasibility of the project is demonstrated the Group has an intention and ability to complete and use the software and the costs can be measured reliably as per IAS 38.
Such costs include internal labour costs of employees directly involved in the project with research costs being recognised as an expense when incurred.
Upgrade of software Upgrades are specifically referred to in customer contracts which state the Company will make Patches and Upgrades available to Customers.
Customers have a contractual right to these upgrades within a reasonable time after their publication.
Upgrades are defined as an incremental modification or enhancement software release in object code form containing new enhancements features or functionalities and may be a consolidation of one or more Patches.
They do not constitute a fundamental change in the software.
As the costs occur regularly over the course of the contract they are recognised and written off to the profit and loss account as incurred 1.4 Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment in value.
The cost includes the original price of the asset and the cost attributable to bringing the asset to its current working condition for its intended use.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis on the cost of the asset less residual value over the estimated useful life of the asset which is reviewed on an annual basis as follows Short leasehold improvements 5 years or over lease term Network infrastructure 15 years Equipment fixtures and fittings 25 years An item of property plant and equipment is derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Any gain or loss arising on derecognition of the asset calculated as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the item is included in the income statement in the year the item is derecognised.
1.5 Impairment of assets Goodwill is not subject to amortisation and is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
As at the acquisition date any goodwill acquired is allocated to each of the cash generating units expected to benefit from the business combinations synergies.
Impairment is determined by assessing the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit to which the goodwill relates.
When the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit is less than the carrying amount including goodwill an impairment loss is recognised.
Other intangible assets and property plant and equipment are subject to amortisation and depreciation and are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying values may not be recoverable.
In addition the carrying value of capitalised development expenditure is reviewed for impairment annually.
If any such indication exists and where the carrying values exceed the estimated recoverable amount the assets or cash generating units are written down to their recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of intangible assets and property plant and equipment is the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash inflows the recoverable amount is determined by the cash generating unit to which the asset belongs.
Fair value less costs to sell is where known based on actual sales price net of costs incurred in completing the disposal.
Nonfinancial assets that were impaired in previous periods are reviewed annually to assess whether the impairment is still relevant.
32 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 1 Accounting policies  Group continued 1.6 Share capital Ordinary shares and redeemable preference shares are classified as equity.
The redeemable preference shares are classified as equity as the option to redeem lies with the company.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction from proceeds.
Share warrants that are issued outside of the scope of IFRS 2 are measured at fair value at date of Issue.
They are classified as equity instruments based on the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into whereby a fixed amount of cash will be received for a fixed number of the Companys own equity instruments.
1.7 Leases Where the group has substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of property plant and equipment the assets are capitalised as property plant and equipment and depreciated over the shorter of their useful economic life and the lease term.
The resulting lease obligations are included in borrowings net of finance charges.
Interest costs on finance leases are charged to the income statement so as to produce a constant periodic rate of charge on the remaining balance of the liability for each period.
Leases where the lessor retains substantially all the risks and benefits of ownership of the asset are classified as operating leases.
Operating lease payments are recognised as an expense in the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
1.8 Current and deferred income tax Current tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities based on tax rates and laws that are enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax is provided for on all temporary differences at the balance sheet date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes with the following exceptions where the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future and deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences carried forward tax credits or tax losses can be utilised.
1.9 Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables are recognised and carried at the lower of their original value and recoverable amounts.
Provision is made where there is evidence that the balances will not be recovered in full.
Significant financial difficulties of the debtor probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default or delinquency in payments are considered indicators that the trade receivable is impaired.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows.
The Groups trade and other receivables are noninterest bearing.
10 Inventories Inventories comprise goods for resale and are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
11 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purpose of the consolidated cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as defined above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
12 Foreign currencies The functional and presentation currency of Castleton is Pounds Sterling  and the Group conducts the majority of its business in Sterling.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency by applying the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the functional currency rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
All differences are taken to the income statement.
13 Provisions Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
33 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 1 Accounting policies  Group continued If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
14 Pensions The Group operates a number of defined contribution schemes.
Pension costs are charged directly to the income statement in the period to which they relate on an accruals basis.
The Group has no further payment obligations once contributions have been paid.
15 Sharebased payment transactions The cost of equitysettled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair value of the award at the date at which they are granted and is recognised as an expense over the vesting period which ends on the date at which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award.
Fair value is determined by an external valuer using an appropriate pricing model for which the assumptions are approved by the Directors.
In valuing equitysettled transactions only vesting conditions linked to the market price of the shares of the Company are considered.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance conditions are satisfied.
At each balance sheet date before vesting the cumulative expense is calculated representing the extent to which the vesting period has expired and managements best estimate of the achievement or otherwise of nonmarket conditions number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest or in the case of an instrument subject to a market condition be treated as vesting described above.
The movement in the cumulative expense since the previous balance sheet date is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding entry in equity.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified or a new award is designated as replacing a cancelled or settled award the existing charge is recognised immediately.
In addition an expense is recognised over the remainder of the new vesting period for the incremental fair value of any modification based on the difference between the fair value of the original award and the fair value of the modified award both as measured on the date of the modification.
No reduction is recognised if this difference is negative.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately.
Any compensation paid up to the fair value of the award at the cancellation or settlement date is deducted from equity with any excess over fair value being treated as an expense in the income statement.
16 Accrual for employee benefits including holiday pay Provision is made for employee benefits including holiday pay to the extent of the liability if all employees of the Group had left the business at its reporting date.
17 Financial assets The Group classifies its financial assets as loans and receivables.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments which are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than 12 months after the balance sheet date which are classified as noncurrent assets.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents on the balance sheet.
18 Compound financial instruments Compound financial instruments issued by the group comprise convertible notes that can be converted to share capital at the option of the holder and the number of shares to be issued does not vary with changes in their fair value.
The liability component of a compound financial instrument is recognised initially at the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an equity conversion option.
The equity component is recognised initially at the difference between the fair value of the compound financial instrument as a whole and the fair value of the liability component.
Any directly attributable transaction costs are allocated to the liability and equity components in proportion to their initial carrying amounts.
Subsequent to initial recognition the liability component of a compound financial instrument is measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
The equity component of a compound financial instrument is not remeasured subsequent to initial recognition except on conversion or expiry.
19 Interestbearing loans and borrowings All loans and borrowings are initially recognised at fair value less directly attributable transaction costs.
After initial recognition interestbearing loans and borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
34 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 1 Accounting policies  Group continued Gains and losses arising on the repurchase settlement or otherwise cancellation of liabilities are recognised in the finance cost line in the income statement.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the end of the reporting period.
1.20 Trade and other payables Trade payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
1.21 Finance costs Loans are carried at fair value on initial recognition net of unamortised issue costs of debt.
These costs are amortised over the loan term.
Where a significant change occurs in respect of a loan any unamortised issue costs arising from previous issues of debt are recognised in the income statement in full.
All other borrowing costs are recognised in the income statement on an accruals basis using the effective rate method.
1.22 Revenue Revenue comprises the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for the sale of goods and services in the ordinary course of the groups activities.
Revenue is shown net of Value Added T ax returns rebates and discounts and after eliminating sales within the group.
The group recognises revenue when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity and when specific criteria have been met for each of the groups activities as described below.
The amount is not considered to be reliably measurable until all contingencies relating to the sale have been resolved.
The group bases its estimates on historical results taking into account the type of customer the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrangement.
The group sells licences to use its software products either on a perpetual royalty free basis or on a rental basis for a fixed period of time.
Revenue arising from the sale of perpetual licences is recognised at the time of sale provided that all the Groups obligations associated with the sale of the licence have been fulfilled.
Revenue from licences sold on a rental or subscription basis is recognised over the period for which the Group has obligations under the contract.
Amounts billed to customers in advance of revenue recognition are shown as deferred income.
The group sells consultancy training implementation and project management services to customers either separately from or in conjunction with the sale of licences.
Revenue from the sale of services is recognised over the period in which the service has been provided.
Where services are not invoiced as incurred revenue is accrued or deferred as necessary.
Amounts billed to customers in advance of revenue recognition are shown as deferred income.
Sales of goods are recognised at the point that risks and rewards of ownership are transferred.
This is usually on delivery.
The group enters into contracts to provide these services on an annually quarterly or other periodic basis.
Revenue from such agreements is recognised in equal instalments over the period of the agreements.
Amounts billed to customers in advance of revenue recognition are shown as deferred revenue.
Revenue is deferred in respect of the following four income streams Software licence fees nonperpetual where the revenue is spread over the term of the licence.
Invoicing is usually in advance of revenue recognition ii support maintenance and managed services the income from which is spread over the length of the service period.
This is usually billed for either a quarter or the whole year in advance iii services which may give rise to deferred revenue where the customer is invoiced in advance for consultancy training implementation and project management services and iv subscriptions where the revenue is spread over the period to which the subscription relates.
This is usually billed for either a quarter or the whole year in advance.
35 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 1 Accounting policies  Group continued Bundled contracts When products are bundled together before being sold to the customer it is necessary to apply the recognition criteria to the separately identifiable components of a single transaction in order to reflect the substance of the transaction.
The associated revenue is allocated between the constituent parts of the bundle on a relative fair value basis.
The Group has a systematic basis for allocating relative fair values in these situations.
When customers are offered discounts on bundled products andor services the combined discount is allocated to the relative constituent elements of the bundle based upon internal price lists.
1.23 Finance income Income is recognised on an accrual basis using the effective interest method.
1.24 Exceptional items Items which are material either because of their size or their nature are highlighted separately on the face of the income statement.
The separate reporting of exceptional items helps provide a better picture of the Groups underlying performance.
Items which may be included within the exceptional category include acquisition costs spend on the integration of significant acquisitions and other major restructuring programmes significant goodwill or other asset impairments and other particularly significant or unusual items.
Spend on integration is incurred by the Group when integrating one trading business into another.
The types of costs include employment related costs of staff made redundant as a consequence of integration due diligence costs property costs such as lease termination penalties and vacant property provisions third party advisor and consultant fees and rebranding costs.
Exceptional items are excluded from the headline profit measures used by the Group and are highlighted separately in the income statement as management believe that they need to be considered separately to gain an understanding of the underlying profitability of the trading businesses.
1.25 Operating profit or loss The operating profit or loss is identified in the income statement and represents the profit on activities before finance income and costs and taxation.
1.26 Segmental reporting The Chief Operating Decision Maker has been identified as the Executive Board.
The Executive Board reviews the Groups internal reporting in order to assess performance and allocate resources.
Management has determined the operating segments based on these reports.
The Executive Board assess the performance of the operating segments based on adjusted EBITDA.
Information provided to the Executive Board is measured in a manner consistent with that in the Financial Statements.
1.27 Application of new IFRSs and interpretations There were no significant new financial reporting standards adopted in the year ended 31 March 2017 .
The following standards and interpretations which are not yet effective and not yet endorsed by the EU and have not been early adopted by the Group will be adopted in future accounting periods International Financial Reporting Standard IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers effective 1 January 2018 International Financial Reporting Standard IFRS 9 Financial instruments effective 1 January 2018 International Financial Reporting Standard IFRS 16 Leases effective 1 January 2019 IFRS 15 IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers will be effective for Castleton T echnology Plc for the period starting 1 April 2018.
There are no plans to adopt IFRS 15 early.
The standard permits two possible transition methods 1 retrospectively to each prior period presented or 2 retrospectively with the cumulative effect of initially applying the standard recognised on the date of initial application.
The transition method to be adopted by Castleton is currently being considered.
We have identified differences between our current accounting policies and the future IFRS 15 based policies as far as these have already been developed.
Based on our analyses so far these differences include We expect a revised revenue pattern for onpremise subscription contracts which combine the delivery of software and support service.
Under our current policies we recognise the subscription amount rateably over the subscription term.
In contrast under IFRS 15 we would recognise the portion of the transaction price allocated to licence throughout the implementation period only at the outset of the arrangement.
36 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 1 Accounting policies  Group continued Based on the nature of our software and the complexity of implementation we expect to combine the provision of a licence and its implementation into one performance obligation.
We do not currently capitalise the cost of obtaining a contract.
We expect the capitalisation amount to increase under IFRS 15 due to a broader definition of what is capitalisable as cost to obtain a contract.
We expect to match the amortisation of capitalised costs to obtain a contract to the revenue recognised but will use the practical expedient of IFRS 15 to not capitalise costs that relate to revenue that will be recognised within 12 months.
As a practical expedient and as allowed under the standard we will apply the five step approach under IFRS 15 to portfolios of contracts which have similar characteristics and where we expect that the financial statements would not differ materially had the standard been applied to the individual contract within the portfolio.
Although it is expected that the standard will have an impact on the timing and amount of revenue and costs being recognised there will be no impact on cash flows with cash collections remaining in line with contractual terms.
The quantitative impact of IFRS 15 on our 2019 financial statements is currently neither known to us nor reasonably estimable.
We will continue to assess the impact that the application of IFRS 15 will have in the period of initial application which will also depend on our commercial strategy.
IFRS 16 The new IFRS 16 standard covering the accounting of leases will replace IAS 17 and associated interpretations.
It introduces a standard accounting model for lessees.
As a result lessees are obliged to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases unless the term is less than 12 months or the underlying asset has a low value.
The lessee recognises an asset reflecting its right to use the underlying leased object.
It also recognises a lease liability reflecting its obligation to make lease payment.
The impact of IFRS 16 on Castleton is being assessed.
The main impact is expected to be around property leases of which the company currently has 7 .
IFRS 9 The Introduction of IFRS 9 is not expected to have a material Impact on the results of the Group.
1.28 Critical accounting estimates and judgements a Critical accounting estimates Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The Group makes estimates and assumptions concerning the future.
The resulting accounting estimates will by definition seldom equal the related results.
The estimates and assumptions that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are
Where the directors believe a customer claim or complaint will probably give rise to a liability provision is made for the directors best estimate of the eventual cost.
The outcome in each case cannot be predicted with certainty and the cost may be more or less than the amount provided.
See note 20 for details of provisions.
Estimated valuation of intangibles On acquisition of a new business the Group identifies intangible assets.
This calculation involves estimates about future revenues costs cash flows and the cost of capital for the Group.
It also involves estimating royalty rates used in the valuation model for software acquired in business combinations and the estimated life of customer relationships.
Estimated impairment of goodwill and intangible assets The Group tests annually whether goodwill and intangible assets have suffered any impairment in accordance with the accounting policy stated in 1.5.
The recoverable amounts of cash generating units have been determined based on valueinuse calculations.
These calculations require the use of estimates.
No reasonably possible changes in assumptions would cause an impairment charge.
Estimated valuation of financial instruments Convertible loan notes and share warrants are valued based on the following definition of fair value per IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
These calculations require the use of estimates.
External experts have been engaged for valuation purposes where appropriate.
If the discount rate used was 10% lower or 10% higher than the rate used the effect would increase or decrease the value of the liability by 4%.
37 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 1 Accounting policies  Group continued b Critical judgements in applying accounting policies Revenue recognition The directors exercise judgement in relation to the amounts of revenue and deferred income to be recognised on bundled contracts.
Classification of exceptional costs The Directors have exercised judgement when classifying certain costs as integration and strategic costs.
They believe that these costs are all related to the costs described in note 1.24.
Estimated impairment of irrecoverable trade receivables.
The directors have exercised judgement in assessing the recoverability of trade debts and the amount which may need to be provided.
Contingent consideration The directors have exercised judgement in assessing the fair value of contingent consideration payable for acquisitions.
They believe forecasts used give sufficiently accurate information to make a reasonable assessment of the fair value of such liabilities.
Business combinations In accounting for business combinations the directors have exercised judgement in assessing the valuation of intangibles and the associated estimates about future revenues costs cash flows and the cost of capital for the Group.
2 Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting to the Chief Operating Decision Makers
The CODM has been identified as the Executive Board.
The Group is comprised of the following main operating segments Managed Services In this segment are the results of Castleton Managed Services Ltd for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
In the year ended 31 March 2016 this segment comprised the results of Castleton Managed Services Ltd for the year and Keylogic Limited from 1 April 2015 to 20 September 2015 at which point the trade and assets of Keylogic were hived up into Castleton Managed Services Ltd.
The segment is engaged in the provision of IT infrastructure and support for businesses throughout the United Kingdom.
Software Solutions This segment comprises the results of Castleton Software Solutions Ltd Kypera Limited and Kypera Australia Pty Limited for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
In the year ended 31 March 2016 this segment comprised the results of Opus Information T echnology Limited for the period from 1 April 2015 to 30 November 2015 as well as Castleton Financial Modelling Solutions Ltd and Impact Applications Limited for the period from acquisition on 31 May 2015 to 30 November 2015.
On 1 December 2015 the trade and assets of Opus Information T echnology Limited Impact Applications Limited and Castleton Financial Modelling Solutions Ltd were hived up into Castleton Software Solutions Ltd.
The segment also included the results of Kypera Limited and Kypera Pty from the date of acquisition on 29 January 2016 to 31 March 2016.
The segment is engaged in the provision of document management process management customer relationship management solutions provision of IT consultancy IT solutions software and finance software solutions and software support to the housing association sector.
38 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 2 Segment reporting continued Y ear ended 31 March 2017 Managed Services Software Solutions
T otal Revenue 9437 10832  20269 Operating profitloss before amortisation of intangible assets and management charge 2750 2127 1691 3186 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 969 2028  2997 Management charge 1063 368 1431 Operating profit loss 718 269 260 189 Finance income 20  1 21 Finance costs  189 560 749 Profitloss before tax 738 458 819 539 Adjusted EBITDA  3012 2668 1297 4383 Earnings for the year before net finance costs tax depreciation amortisation exceptional items group management charge and share based payment charges.
Managed Services Software Solutions
T otal Segment assets 11454 31757 2733 40478 Segment liabilities 3070 13535 8364 24969 Net assetsliabilities 8384 18222 11097 15509 Managed Services Software Solutions
T otal Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment Intangibles 275 284  559 Depreciation 125 99 1 225 Amortisation of intangibles 969 2028  2997 Earnings for the year from continuing operations before net finance costs depreciation amortisation exceptional items group management charges and sharebased payment charges.
Y ear ended 31 March 2016 Managed Services Software Solutions
T otal Revenue 9665 8322 Operating profitloss before amortisation of intangible assets and management charge 2208 638 1797 1049 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 945 1597  2542 Management charge 963 575 1538 Operating profit loss 300 1534 259 1493 Finance income 25 Finance costs 3 7 718 Profitloss before tax 322 1541 681 Adjusted EBITDA  2301 2318 1018 3601 Earnings for the year before net finance costs tax depreciation amortisation exceptional items group management charge and share based payment charges.
Managed Services Software Solutions
T otal Segment assets 12778 28354 202 41334 Segment liabilities 4268 10019 12482 26769 Net assetsliabilities 8510 18335 12280 14565 39 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 2 Segment reporting continued Y ear ended 31 March 2016 Managed Services Software Solutions
T otal Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment Intangibles 42   42 Depreciation 95 71 2 168 Amortisation of intangibles 945 1597  2542 Income streams originating outside of the United Kingdom comprised 353000 in respect of Kypera Australia Pty Limited 2016 38000.
The Group had no customers who accounted for more than 10% of the Groups revenue during the year 2016 nil.
3 Expenses by nature Direct staff costs 543 Direct material costs 2347 1750 Hosting and other cost of sales 3090 4263 Employee costs within administrative expenses 7212 6108 Amortisation of intangible assets 2997 2542 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 225 168 Sharebased compensation see note 25 231 200 Exceptional costs see note 5 741 2184 Amounts payable under operating leases 393 299 Other administrative costs 2301 1258 T otal cost of sales and administrative expenses 20080 19481 4 Auditors remuneration Below are the fees payable to the auditors and their associates Audit services Fees payable to Companys auditor for the audit of parent company and consolidated financial statements 36 29 Other services The audit of the Companys subsidiaries 80 84 Audit related assurance services 14 29 T ax advisory services 46 64 Amounts relating to due diligence services 22 65 Other non audit services 11 T otal 209 271 40 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 5 Exceptional costs In accordance with the Groups policy in respect of exceptional costs the following charges were incurred for the year Integration and strategic costs 278 488 Acquisition and reorganisation costs 448 812 Opussettlement of contingent consideration  734 Creation of restructuring provision see note 20 15 65 Other reorganisation  85 741 2184 6 Business Combinations
On 4 April 2016 the Group improved its existing exclusive reseller agreement with 365 Agile Group plc  Agile and entered into a new perpetual licence agreement with Agile whereby Castleton has been granted an exclusive licence for Agiles suite of mobile working software solutions in relation to the social housing sector.
T o continue to support and develop the product a number of staff members transferred from Agile to the Group and as a result the grant of the licence and the transfer of staff collectively meet the definition of a business combination under IFRS3 and consequently are recorded as a business combination in these accounts.
Castleton will pay Agile consideration of 1.8 million payable over three years with a contingent element payable depending on total revenue in the first three years of the agreement.
From the date of acquisition to 31 March 2017  Agile recorded revenue of 0.7 million and a profit before taxation of 0.2 million compared to profit before taxation of 0.2 million under the previous arrangement.
The recorded revenue for the period 1 April 2016 to 3 April 2016 was 2645 with a profit of 611.
The total goodwill representing synergies expected to accrue to the enlarged group and the knowledge and ability of the workforce and intangible assets arising from the business combinations is the difference between the fair value of consideration less the fair value of assets acquired as set out below.
Agile
Kypera
Impact
T otal Deferred consideration 1795   1795 Contingent consideration 619   619 Fair value of purchase consideration 2414   2414 Less fair value of assets acquired Software 2189   2189 Fair value adjustment  912 43 955
Cash consideration is payable over three years for a value of 1.8 million of which 0.5 million has been paid to date.
Further contingent consideration of 0.3 million is payable if revenue from the software of 2.2 million is generated by 4 April 2019.
Further contingent consideration will be paid at 50% of the revenue that exceeds the 2.2 million threshold.
If the conditions are met the amounts payable are due to be paid within 90 days of 4 April 2019.
On acquisition the Directors assessed the business acquired to identify any intangible assets.
Intellectual property met the criteria for recognition as intangible assets as it is separable and has a measurable fair value being the amount for which an asset would be exchanged between knowledgeable and willing parties in an arms length transaction.
For the intellectual property the fair value of the intangible assets was calculated by using the discounted cash flows arising from the revenue forecast.
A long term growth rate of 2.0% was applied with a discount rate of 9.9%.
The reasonable economic life of the intellectual property was assumed to be 15 years.
41 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 6 Business Combinations continued The goodwill represents the assembled workforce acquired with the Agile licence.
Kypera
The assessment of the fair values of the assets and liabilities on acquisition has been completed.
A fair value adjustment to goodwill was made in relation to an onerous contract provision which existed at the date of acquisition of 0.752 million which related to a customer claim and the associated rectification costs.
A further fair value adjustment of 0.16 million was made upon review of the acquisition balance sheet.
Impact
A fair value adjustment in relation to accrued costs was also created of 43000.
7 Finance income and costs Finance income Fair value gain on interest rate swap  298 Other finance income Finance cost Interest payable on bank loans and overdrafts 278 581 Interest expense in respect of Convertible loan notes and deferred consideration discount unwind 471 146 Finance lease obligations  Employee benefits expense Staff costs for the year for continuing operations including executive Directors amounted to Wages and salaries 6838 6041 Social security costs 778 686 Pension costs 139 93 Sharebased payments 186 200 7941 7020 Average monthly number of people including executive Directors employed Sales and Administration 41 26 Management 13 12 Operations 131 125 T otal average headcount 185 163 Remuneration of key management personnel Salary 1227 1083 Other long term benefits 70 20 Share based payment expense 89 69 1386 1172 42 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 8 Employee benefits expense continued Key management is considered to comprise the Senior Management T eam.
Key management personnel emoluments are disclosed in note 8.
Details of directors remuneration are given in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Social security costs in respect of the Senior Management T eam were 171000 2016 149000.
The remuneration of the Directors of the Company was as follows Basic salary allowances and fees
Pension
Total
T otal Social security costs in respect of directors emoluments were 59000 2016 52000.
Further details are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report.
9 Income tax a Tax on profit on ordinary activities
Corporation Tax Adjustment in respect of prior years 617 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing differences 385 773 T otal tax credit 1002 773 The rate of UK Corporation tax for the year beginning 1 April 2015 is 20% and will be 19% from 1 April 2017 and 17% from the year beginning 1 April 2020.
Deferred tax has been remeasured on the basis of these new rates and reflected in the financial statements.
Total
Current income tax asset 145 Current income tax liabilities  340 The current income tax asset relates to RandD relief recoverable in respect of prior periods.
The tax on the Groups profit before tax differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the weighted average tax rate applicable to losses of the consolidated entities as follows Loss from operations before taxation 539 1900 Accounting loss multiplied by the UK standard rate of corporation tax of 20% 2016 20% 108 380 Net items not deductible for tax purposes 154 185 Unrelieved losses  50 Adjustment to tax charge in respect of previous year 617 Movement in unprovided deferred tax and the effect of the change of tax rate 431 537 T otal income tax credit on operations 1002 773 c Unrecognised deferred tax The Group has unrecognised deferred tax assets in respect of losses and reliefs of 9.1 million 2016 13.7 million.
The composition of these losses and reliefs is as follows property plant and equipment differences 3.1 million 2016 4.8 million shortterm temporary differences 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million and tax losses of 5.9 million 2016 8.8 million.
Deferred tax assets have not been recognised in respect of losses and reliefs where it is the view of the Directors that it is not certain that future taxable profits of the nature required will be available to offset against any deferred tax asset.
43 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 9 Income tax continued d Deferred tax liability At 31 March 2015 2478 Business combinations 2063 On acquisitions 6 Credit to income statement 773 At 31 March 2016 3762 Credit to income statement 385 At 31 March 2017 3377 Deferred tax liabilities arise in respect of the temporary differences on acquired intangible assets.
10 Earningsloss per share Basic earningsloss per share and diluted earningsloss per share are calculated using a weighted average number of shares of 78339832 and 86215879 respectively March 2016 weighted average number of shares of 72265145 and 80345997.
Statutory EPS T otal basic profit  loss per share 0.59p 1.56p T otal diluted profit  loss per share 0.54p 1.56p The weighted number of shares and the loss for the year ended 31 March 2016 for the purposes of calculating the fully diluted earnings per share are the same as the basic loss per share calculation.
This is because the outstanding share options and warrants would have the effect of reducing the loss per ordinary share and would therefore not be dilutive under the terms of IAS 33.
11 Intangible assets
Software
Customer contacts and related relationships
T otal
At 1 April 2015 5209 618 12622 94 18543 Additions    42 42 Business Combinations 5827 2844 8604  17275 At 31 March 2016 11036 3462 21226 136 35860 Additions   250 309 559 Business Combinations 1180 2189   3369 At 31 March 2017 12216 5651 21476 445 39788
At 1 April 2015  50 568 26 644 Charge for the year  349 2155 38 2542 At 31 March 2016  399 2723 64 3186 Charge for the year  498 2435 64 2997 At 31 March 2017  897 5158 128 6183 Net carrying amount 31 March 2017 12216 4754 16318 317 33605 31 March 2016 11036 3063 18503 72 32674 31 March 2015 5209 568 12054 68 17899 44 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 11 Intangible assets continued The amortisation in both years relates to operations and is included in the profit  loss for the year from operations in the Income Statement within administrative expenses.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired Goodwill is supported by calculating the discounted cash flows arising from the existing businesses.
A long term growth rate of 2.0 percent was applied with a discount rate of 9.9 percent.
Impairment tests for goodwill The recoverable amount of all cash generating units CGU has been determined based on valueinuse calculations.
These calculations use pretax cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by management until 31 March 2018.
Cash flows beyond this period are extrapolated using the estimated growth rates stated below.
For each of the CGUs with a significant amount of goodwill the key assumptions in addition to long term growth rate and discount rate used in the valueinuse calculations are as follows Managed Services Gross margin 44 percent Operating margin 31 percent Software Solutions Gross margin 90 percent Operating margin 32 percent For all cash generating units the long term growth rate assumed is 2.0%.
The pretax discount rate used is 9.9% which reflects managements riskadjusted estimate of the weighted average cost of capital.
A reasonably possible adverse movement in any of the above key assumptions made would not give rise to impairment.
12 Property plant and equipment
Network infrastructure and equipment
T otal
At 1 April tel95 718 Additions Business Combinations At 31 March tel279 1040 Additions At 31 March tel350 1366 Accumulated depreciation At 1 April Charge for the year At 31 March Charge for the year At 31 March 2017 4telNet book amount 31 March tel101 781 31 March tel222 680 31 March tel87 527 As at 31 March 2017 included in equipment fixtures and fittings are assets held under finance leases with a carrying value of 69000 2016 54000 on which the depreciation charge was 27 000 2016 11000.
The depreciation for the year of 225000 2016 168000 and has been charged to administrative expenses.
A mortgage loan of 110000 2016 118000 is secured on a long leasehold property with a book value of 170000.
Short leasehold property has a book value of 89000.
45 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements For details on fixed and floating charges held by the Groups lender over the Companys assets see note 17 .
13 Trade and other receivables Trade receivables 3929 5281 Less provision for impairment of trade receivables 220 344 Trade receivables  net 3709 4937 Other receivables 435 625 Prepayments 906 990 Amounts due with 12 months 5050 6552 Prepayments due after more than 12 months T otal receivables 5311 6970 As at 31 March 2017  trade receivables of 0.2 million 2016 0.3 million were impaired and fully provided for.
The carrying value of trade receivables that would otherwise be past due or impaired but whose terms were renegotiated were nil.
The individually impaired receivables relate to receivables over 182 days customers in financial difficulty customer acceptance issues and cancelled contracts.
As at 31 March 2017  trade receivables of 1.9 million were past due but not impaired 2016 2.9 million.
In the table below these comprise the receivables over 30 days which relate to a number of independent customers for whom there is no recent history of default.
The ageing analysis of net trade receivables which are past due and not impaired is as follows Days outstanding 3160 days 1038 1412 6190 days 448 697 91180 days 379 749 1865 2858 The provision is calculated by central management with local knowledge on a specific basis based on their best estimate of recoverability taking into account the age and specific circumstances relating to the debtor.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the fair value of each class of receivable mentioned above.
The Group does not hold any collateral as security.
The carrying amounts of the Groups trade and other receivables are denominated in pounds.
Movements on the Group provision for impairment of trade receivables are as follows At 31 March 2015 83 Fair Value on Business Combinations 108 Utilised in year 84 Created in year 237 At 31 March 2016 344 Utilised in year 324 Created in year 200 At 31 March 2017 220 The creation and release of a provision for impaired receivables has been included in administrative expenses in the income statement.
Amounts charged to the allowance account are generally writtenoff when there is no expectation of recovering additional cash.
The other asset classes within trade and other receivables do not contain impaired assets.
46 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 14 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand excluding overdrafts 586 823 The table below shows the balance with the major counterparty in respect of cash and cash equivalents.
Credit rating 15 Trade and other payables
Trade payables 298 1645 Other payables 67 90 T axation and social security 646 675 Accruals 1180 1257 Deferred income 6645 5213 8836 8880 Non current Deferred income 1718 2433 Accrued interest 175 1893 2433 16 Finance lease liability The present value of finance lease liabilities is as follows Minimum lease payments
Principal
Less than one year 46  46 Total 46  46 Minimum lease payments
Principal
Less than one year 25 1 24 Total 25 1 24 17 Borrowings
Mortgage 8 8 Bank loan 1000 1033 Overdraft 316 1153 1324 2194 47 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 17 Borrowings continued
Bank Loan 3250 4250 Mortgage 102 110 3352 4360 The mortgage is secured over a long leasehold property.
The property is held within fixed assets at a cost 0.2 million.
The mortgage is repayable at an interest rate of 2.9% above base rate.
The remaining term at 31 March 2017 is 137 months.
Overdraft facility The Company has an overdraft facility of 2.5 million with Barclays.
Interest is payable at 3.5% above LIBOR on the overdraft balance which is repayable on demand.
At the balance sheet date 0.3 million 2016 1.15 million of the facility had been utilised.
The overdraft is secured on the assets of the group by way of fixed and floating charges.
Bank loan On 31 May 2015 the Company entered into a loan facility agreement with Barclays Bank plc Barclays for 5 million.
Interest is payable at 3.5% above LIBOR on the outstanding balance which is repayable at a rate of 250000 per quarter over 5 years.
On 31 January 2016 Barclays extended the facility by a further 1 million which increased the payment terms by 12 months.
The overdraft is secured on the assets of the group by way of fixed and floating charges.
18 Convertible loan notes
Kypera
Total
At 1 April 2015 Additions 443 3500 3943 Interest unwound  28 28 Fair value adjustment  251 251 At 31 March 2016 443 3277 3720 Interest unwound 22 280 302 Interest due to be paid  175 175 Conversion 250  250 Repayments  500 500 At 31 March 2017 215 2882 3097 Within one year 140  140 Over one year 75 2882 2957 215 2882 3097 0.4 million of convertible loan notes were issued in the year ended 31 March 2016 to satisfy the contingent consideration for the acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited Opus Loan Notes.
The Opus Loan Notes were redeemable in cash or convertible into new ordinary shares of 2 pence each in the capital of the Company Ordinary Shares at a price of 40 pence per Ordinary Share in various tranches 0.15 million on 30 September 2016 0.15 million on 30 September 2017 and 0.1 million on 30 September 2018.
On 21 June 2017  it was agreed by the beneficiaries of the loan notes issued at the time of the Companys acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited Opus that they would waive the remaining 0.25m of loan notes in consideration of surrendering any potential warranty claims under the sale and purchase agreement.
On 8 July 2016 the company issued 250000 new Ordinary Shares pursuant to the conversion of loan notes issued as part of the previous acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited.
A further 375000 Ordinary shares pursuant to the conversion of loan notes were issued on 4 October 2016 all in part settlement of the balance.
The Noteholder can convert the loan note at any time given sufficient notice is provided per the agreement.
Interest is accrued on the compounding amount at 5% per annum.
In addition on 31 January 2016 in order to fund the acquisition of Kypera the Company issued 3.5 million of unsecured loan notes Kypera Loan Notes which have a term of 5 years and carry interest at a rate of 5% per annum which is rolled up into the loan.
The Kypera Loan Notes can be converted into new Ordinary Shares at a price of 85.6 pence per Ordinary Share.
Conversion is at the option of the holder at any time during the 5 year term.
The Company can redeem the Kypera Loan Notes from the third anniversary of issue if not already converted and earlier by request.
On 31 March 2017 0.5 million of the Kypera Loan Notes were repaid.
A further repayment of 0.5 million was made on 27 April 2017 in respect of the Kypera Loan Notes.
48 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 19 Deferred and contingent consideration
Deferred consideration 83telNoncurrent Deferred Consideration 707 Contingent consideration 748 Castleton will pay Agile consideration of 1.8 million payable over four years with a contingent element payable depending on total revenue in the first three years of the agreement.
The Group believes that this is strategically important as it secures the use of the Agile product going forward whilst enabling Castleton to keep 100% of the revenue associated with sales thereof by the Group compared to having a 70% commission payable to Agile under the previous agreement.
Cash consideration is payable over four years for a value of 1.8 million of which 0.5 million has been paid to date.
Further contingent consideration of 0.3 million is payable if revenue from the software of 2.2 million is generated by 4 April 2019.
A further contingent fee will be paid at 50% of the revenue that exceeds the 2.2 million threshold.
If the conditions are met the amounts payable are due to be paid within 90 days of 4 April 2019.
The balance shown as due after more than one year includes the unwinding of the discount on deferred consideration.
On 26 January 2017 the Group entered into individual agreements with the former owners of Keylogic to ensure that neither individual is able to compete with the company or a Group Company in the sale of hosted desktop services to a Social Housing Entity in exchange for 125000 each payable in equal tranches in April 2017 and October 2017 .
20 Provisions
Customer Claim provisions
T otal At 31 March 017 Charged to income statement Utilised 260 60 206 526 At 31 March Charged to income statement Business combinations  752  752 Utilised  192 212 404 Released 10  158 168 At 31 March 2017 1telThe expected timing of the cash flows to settle the obligations is as follows 31 March 2017 Within one year 1tel1tel31 March 2016 Within one year Between 2 and 5 years   Restructuring In February 2017 the Group announced its intention to close an office of Castleton Software Solutions Ltd.
Provisions have been recognised to cover redundancies and associated costs.
Customer claims Provision has been made In respect of customer claims for the expected liabilities arising.
Current claims are expected to be resolved by the end of 2017 .
49 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 20 Provisions continued
The Group currently has one vacant property.
A provision has been recognised to cover the rent business rates and service charges for the period the property is expected to be vacant being up to the lease expiry.
Provisions are calculated using the contracted rates of rents and service charges on the individual lease arrangement.
Dilapidation provisions are built up over the life of the associated lease based on estimates of costs of work required to fulfil the Groups contractual obligation under the lease agreements to return the property to the same condition as at the commencement of the lease.
21 Commitments and contingencies a Operating leases Future aggregate minimum annual lease payments under noncancellable operating leases as at 31 March are as follows
Land and buildings
Land and buildings
Not later than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years 500 23 396 1tel58 The Groups operating leases related to property motor vehicles and office equipment and had remaining terms of between 1 and 5 years.
The Group had no contracted but not provided for capital commitments at 31 March 2017 2016 nil.
The Groups subsidiaries and the Company are currently and may be from time to time involved in a number of legal proceedings.
Whilst the outcome of current outstanding actions and claims remains uncertain it is expected that they will be resolved without a material impact on the Groups financial position.
As is usual practice in corporate transactions the Company has given warranties and indemnities in relation to businesses disposed of.
The directors have not received any claims under such warranties or indemnities and have no reason to believe that there will be any sustainable claims forthcoming over the remaining period of 2 years.
No provision has been made for any potential claims in these financial statements.
Commitments and contingencies for the year ended 31 March 2016 has been restated following a review of lease agreements.
22 Financial instruments by category The objectives of the Groups treasury activities are to manage financial risk secure costeffective funding where necessary and minimise adverse effects of fluctuations in the financial markets on the value of the Groups financial assets and liabilities on reported profitability and on cash flows of the Group.
The Groups principal financial instruments for financing are bank borrowings overdraft facilities and loans.
The Group has various other financial instruments such as cash trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
Financial assets  Loans and receivables Trade receivables 3709 4937 Other current assets 435 625 Cash and cash equivalents 586 823 T otal 4730 6385 The fair value of the above items equals their carrying amounts.
50 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 22 Financial instruments by category continued Other financial liabilities at amortised cost
Financial liabilities  amortised cost Trade and other payables excluding statutory liabilities 10082 10638 Bank loan 4250 5283 Overdraft 316 1153 Convertible loan notes 3097 3720 Mortgage 110 118 Finance leases 46 24 Deferred consideration 1545 500 Total 19446 21436 The fair value of the above items equals their carrying amounts.
23 Financial risk management The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks market risk including foreign exchange fair value interest rate risk cash flow interest rate risk and price risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
Risk management is carried out centrally under policies approved by the Board of Directors.
Management identifies evaluates and hedges financial risks.
The Board provides principles for overall risk management as well as policies covering specific areas such as foreign exchange risk interest rate risk credit risk use of derivative financial instruments and nonderivative financial instruments and investments of excess liquidity.
The Group mainly operates within the UK and foreign exchange risk arises from future commercial transactions recognised assets and liabilities.
The Group receives interest on cash and cash equivalents and pays interest on its borrowings.
The impact on posttax profit and equity of a  1% shift in the interest rate would not be material.
The Group is not exposed to significant commodity or security price risk.
Credit risk is managed at a central level.
Credit risk arises from cash and cash equivalents derivative financial instruments and deposits with banks and financial institutions as well as credit exposures to customers including outstanding receivables and committed transactions.
Individual risk limits are set based on internal and external ratings and review by the Board where appropriate.
The utilisation of credit limits is regularly monitored with appropriate action taken by management in the event of a breach of credit limit.
Management reviews cash forecasts of the operating companies of the Group.
The Groups liquidity management policy involves projecting cash flows and considering the level of liquid assets necessary to meet these.
The table below analyses the Groups financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period from the balance sheet date to the contractual maturity date.
These amounts disclosed in the table are the contracted undiscounted cash flows.
Balances within 12 months equal their carrying balances as the impact of discounting is not significant.
51 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 23 Financial risk management continued At 31 March 2017 Within 1 year 12 years More than 2 years
Trade and other payables 8189 1893  10082 Convertible loan notes 215  3496 3711 Overdraft 330   330 Mortgage Bank Loan 1114 1081 2420 4615 9859 2985 6024 18868 At 31 March 2016 Within 1 year 12 years More than 2 years T otal Trade and other payables 8205 2433  10638 Convertible loan notes 443  3996 4439 Overdraft 1203   1203 Mortgage Bank Loan 1213 1081 3501 5795 11075 3525 7605 22205 24 Called up share capital Number 000 Allotted called up and fully paid share capital Ordinary shares of 0.1p 1 April 2015 1155534538 1156 Share issues see below b 171866764 172 Conversion of equity instruments see below c 182839978 183 Ordinary shares of 0.1p prior to consolidation 1510242280 1511 Share Consolidation 1434729216 Conversion of equity instruments see below d 2577768 51 Ordinary shares of 2p 1 April 2016 78089832 1562 Conversion of loan notes see below a 625000 13 Allotted called up and fully paid share capital at 31 March 2017 of 2p each 78714832 1575 Redeemable preference shares of 10p each At start and end of year 500000 50 T otal issued share capital 79214832 1625 a Conversion of loan notes On 8 July 2016 the company issued 250000 new Ordinary Shares pursuant to the conversion of loan notes issued as part of the previous acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited.
A further 375000 Ordinary shares pursuant to the conversion of loan notes were issued on 4 October 2016.
Ordinary shareholders have the right to attend vote and speak at meetings receive dividends and receive a return on assets in the case of a winding up.
The redeemable preference shares may be redeemed at the Companys option at any time without payment of a premium.
On a winding up they rank ahead only of the ordinary shares and will be repaid at par.
Redeemable preference shareholders do not have the right to vote and speak at meetings nor to receive dividends.
52 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 24 Called up share capital continued b Share issues During the year ended 31 March 2016 the following shares were issued
Placing with investors at 2.25 pence per share 2015 1.1 pence per share 97777876 In consideration for acquisition of Impact Applications Limited at 2.25 pence per share 74088888 In order to part fund the acquisition of Impact Applications Limited and Brixx Solutions Limited the Company raised 2.2 million by way of an equity placing of 97 777 876 new Ordinary Shares at a price of 2.225 pence per Ordinary Share.
Other than on conversion of loan notes no shares were issued in the year ended 31 March 2017 .
Conversion of equity instruments During the previous year the following shares of 0.1p prior to consolidation were issued on exercise of options pursuant to the terms of convertible loan notes.
Number
MXC Capital  30 June 2015 75000000 Documotive loan note 90909090 MXC Capital  30 September 2015 16930888 d During the previous year the following shares of 2p each were issued on exercise of equity instruments pursuant to the terms of such.
Number
Keylogic loan note 2000000 Colin Sales warrant 577768 25 Sharebased payment plans The sharebased payment charge comprises Equitysettled sharebased charge arising from share option plans for employees 204 109 Equitysettled sharebased charge arising from warrants 27 91 T otal equitysettled sharebased payments 231 200 Share options are granted to directors and selected employees to reward and motivate the groups employees and to MXC Capital Limited.
At the year end the Group had four share based payment plans.
Grants for the year ended 31 March 2017 have been made as follows ESS number of options EMI number of options
Scheme number of options MXC Share Option scheme number of options T otal number of options As at 1 April 2016 712892 1654129 1661253 4417491 8445765 Options granted  848024 696543  1544567 Options lapsed 227585 973397 266217  1467199 T otal options granted as at 31 March 2017 485307 1528756 2091579 4417491 8523133 53 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 25 Sharebased payment plans continued The terms of the current plans are as follows Employee Shareholder Scheme ESS The ESS was established in July 2015 and this discretionary scheme permits the grant of options to all eligible employees of the group.
The options are exercisable within ten years from date of grant.
Employee Management Incentive scheme EMI The EMI was established in July 2015 and this discretionary scheme permits the grant of options to all eligible employees of the group.
The options are exercisable between three and ten years from date of grant.
Unapproved scheme The Unapproved scheme was established in July 2015 and this discretionary scheme permits the grant of options to all eligible employees of the group.
The options are exercisable within ten years from date of grant.
All of the above options are subject to vesting criteria with a compound share price growth rate of 12% per annum over 3 years.
MXC Share Option Scheme The MXC Share Option Scheme was established in July 2015 when 5% of the fully diluted share capital was awarded to MXC Capital Limited MXC a company in which Ian Smith is a substantial shareholder.
The MXC options are subject to criteria whereby the average price per Ordinary Share must exceed 50 pence for 50% of the options to vest and 60 pence for the other 50% of the options to vest both criteria for a 10 day period between the second and fifth anniversaries of 1 April 2015.
All of the Options are evergreen meaning that the percentage of the fully diluted issued share capital held under option will remain constant notwithstanding any further issues of ordinary shares in the capital of the Company.
The options are being awarded under a variety of schemes both approved and unapproved.
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices WAEP of and movements in share options during the year.
Number of options
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 8445765 16.38p Granted in the year 1544567 65.88p Lapsed in the year 1467199 58.33p Outstanding at the end of the year 8523133 30.90p There were no options exercisable at the end of the year 2016nil.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding at the end of the year was 22p to 75.5p 2016 0p to 75.5p.
The fair value of the equitysettled share options granted is estimated as at the date of grant using an average of BlackScholes and an empirical model to take into account market conditions attaching to the options.
Key inputs to the model were Volatility 19%68% Risk free rate 0.5%
Expected dividend nil 54 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 26 Net cash flows from operating activities Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 539 1900 Adjustments for Exceptional items 797 1499 Net finance costs 727 407 Noncash contingent consideration through income statement  695 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 225 168 Amortisation of intangibles 2997 2542 Equitysettled sharebased payment charge 231 200 Movements in working capital Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 1514 1907 Decrease in trade and other payables 950 509 Decrease in provisions 558 461 Decreaseincrease in inventories 137 145 Cash generated from operations 4581 589 Noncash transactions The principal noncash transactions are the additions to intangibles in respect of Kypera and Impact as set out in note 6.
Reconciliation of borrowings
Bank borrowings Opus Loan notes Kypera loan notes
T otal At 1 April 2015 31 118    149 Additions 25 6000 443 3500 500 10468 Interest unwound  33  28  61 Interest paid 1     1 Repayment 31 750   781 Fair value adjustment    251  251 At 31 March 2016 24 5401 443 3277 500 9645 Additions 73    1504 1577 Interest unwound Interest paid 1 180    181 Interest reclassified  33    33 Interest due to be paid    175  175 Conversion   250   250 Repayments 50 1008  500 500 2058 At 31 March 2017 46 4360 215 2882 1545 9048 Within one year 46 1008 215  838 2107 Over one year  3352  2882 707 6941 At 31 March 2017 46 4360 215 2882 1545 9048 Within one year 24 1041 73  500 1638 Over one year  4360 370 3277  8007 At 31 March 2016 24 5401 443 3277 500 9645 55 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 27 Pensions The Group operates defined contribution pension schemes for eligible employees.
The charge for the year ended 31 March 2017 relating to operations is 138732 2016 92879.
An amount of 4038 is included in other payables being outstanding contributions at 31 March 2017 2016 6624.
28 Subsidiaries At 31 March 2017  the Company had the following subsidiary undertakings.
Principal activity Country of incorporation % ordinary share capital owned Held directly by Castleton T echnology plc Castleton T echnology Intermediate Holding Company Limited Intermediate holding company England and Wales 99.8% Held indirectly by an Intermediate Holding
Castleton Group Holdings Limited Management of Group England and Wales 100% Castleton i4e Limited Nontrading England and Wales 100% Castleton T echnology Holdings Ltd Nontrading England and Wales 100% Castleton Information Group Limited Nontrading England and Wales 100% Castleton Managed Services Ltd IT Infrastructure sales and services England and Wales 100% Castleton Software Solutions Ltd Software sales and services England and Wales 100% Opus Information T echnology Limited Dormant England and Wales 100% Keylogic Limited Dormant England and Wales 100% Kypera Holdings Limited Intermediate holding company England and Wales 100% Kypera Limited Software sales and services England and Wales 100% Kypera Australia Pty Limited Software sales and services Australia 100% hometeam.
Castleton Financial Modelling Solutions Limited Dormant England and Wales 100% Impact Applications Limited Dormant England and Wales 100% The registered office address of all the above companies is 100 Fetter Lane London EC4A 1BN.
29 Subsequent events On 27 April 2017  the Group repaid a further 0.5 million of the 3.5 million of unsecured convertible loan notes that were issued on 29 January 2016 to assist in the funding for the acquisition of Kypera Loan Notes.
This was in addition to the 0.5 million Loan Notes repaid on 29 March 2017 .
On 21 June 2017  it was agreed by the beneficiaries of the loan notes issued at the time of the Companys acquisition of Opus Information T echnology Limited Opus that they would waive the remaining 0.25m of loan notes in consideration of surrendering any potential warranty claims under the sale and purchase agreement.
30 Related parties Ian Smith and Davinder Sanghera were directors and controlling shareholders of 365 Agile Limited until 21 August 2015.
At 31 March 2017 the amount owed to the Company by 365 Agile Limited was nil 2016 nil and the amount owed to 365 Agile Limited by the Company was nil 2016 53790.
On 4 April 2016 Castleton Software Solutions entered into an agreement to acquire a software license from 365 Agile Group plc for consideration and provisional fair value of 1800000.
See note 6 for details.
Ian Smith director and shareholder of Castleton T echnology plc is a director and one of the substantial shareholders of MXC Capital Limited MXC.
MXC hold share options as follows At 1 April
2p options Granted during the year
At 31 March
MXC 3733278  3733278 56 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Company Balance Sheet as at 31 March 2017
31 March 31 March Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiaries 2 4190 3986 Prepayment 41 50 Current assets Trade and other receivables 3 12762 12512 T otal assets 16993 16548 Equity and liabilities Share capital 12 1625 1612 Share premium account 16995 16758 Equity reserves 2527 2527 Accumulated loss 12933 13865 T otal equity 8214 7032
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 4 163 47 Borrowings 5 2309 1941 2472 1988 Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 4 175 Borrowings 5 3250 4250 Loan notes 6 2882 3278 6307 7528 T otal liabilities 8779 9516 T otal equity and liabilities 16993 16548 The notes on pages 5964 are an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements set out on pages 5664 were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 17 July 2017 and are signed on its behalf by.
Dean Dickinson Haywood Chapman
Director 57 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Company Statement of Changes in Equity
Equity instruments
Profit and loss account T otal At 1 April 2015 1206 1380 10689 5154 8121 Loss for the year    8846 8846 Equity instruments issued  251   251 Equity instruments converted 206 1266 1881  3353 Exercise of options 16  119  135 Exercise of warrants 12  116  128 Cancellation of warrants  370 370 Share based payment    135 135 Shares issued in the year 172  3583  3755 At 31 March 2016 1612 2527 16758 13865 7032 Profit for the year    728 728 Equity instruments converted 13  237  250 Share based payment    204 204 At 31 March 2017 1625 2527 16995 12933 8214 An explanation of the movements on reserves is set out in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity on page 28.
58 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Company Cash Flow Statement for the year ended 31 March 2017
31 March 31 March Cash flows from operating activities 13 1306 1454 Finance charges paid 206 204 Net cash flows generated fromused in operating activities 1100 1658 Cash flows from financing activities Drawdown of borrowings  1500 Repayment of borrowings 1500 750 Net cash flows generated from financing activities 1500 750 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents from activities 400 908 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 April 908 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 March 1308 908
Overdraft 1308 908 1308 908 59 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements Notes to the Company Financial Statements year ended 31 March 2017 1 Accounting policies Castleton T echnology Plc has taken advantage of the exemption provided under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to disclose the Company profit and loss account.
The profit made by the Company in the year was 624000 2016 loss of 8846000.
The principal accounting policies which have been applied consistently throughout the year in the preparation of the financial statements are the same as those of the Group except that the Company has no policy on consolidation and as set out below.
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared on the going concern basis and in accordance with EU adopted International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS IFRIC interpretations and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates and these are consistent with these of the Group disclosed in note 1.28 to the consolidated financial statements.
Investments are initially recognised at cost being the fair value of the consideration given and including acquisition costs associated with the investment.
The carrying value of investments is reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
2 Investments in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries
At 1 April 2015 11062 Additions 156 Transfers 5255 At 31 March 2016 5963 Additions 204 At 31 March 2017 6167 Provision for impairment At 1 April 2015 1977 Charge in year At 31 March 2016 and 31 March 2017 1977 Net book value At 31 March 2017 4190 At 31 March 2016 3986 At 31 March 2015 9085 The directors annually review the carrying amount of the Companys investment for impairment.
Following this review the directors believe that carrying value of the investments is supported by their underlying net assets and cash flows.
A list of the companys subsidiaries is set out in note 28 to the consolidated financial statements.
3 Trade and other receivables Amounts due from subsidiary undertakings 12762 12512 12762 12512 Amounts due from subsidiary undertakings are unsecured interestfree and have no fixed payment terms.
60 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Company Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 4 Trade and other payables
Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 119 31 Accruals Non current Other payables 175 The fair value of the above items equals their carrying amounts.
5 Borrowings
Bank loan 1000 1033 Overdraft 1309 908 2309 1941 Non current Bank Loan 3250 4250 3250 4250 Overdraft facility The Company has an overdraft facility of 2.5 million with Barclays.
Interest is payable at 3.5% above LIBOR on the overdraft balance which is repayable on demand.
Bank loan On 31 May 2015 the Company entered into a loan facility agreement with Barclays Bank plc Barclays for 5 million.
Interest is payable at 3.5% above LIBOR on the outstanding balance which is repayable at a rate of 250000 per quarter over 5 years.
On 31 January 2016 Barclays extended the facility by a further 1 million which increased the payment terms by 12 months.
6 Convertible loan notes On 31 January 2016 in order to fund the acquisition of Kypera the Company issued 3.5 million of unsecured loan notes Kypera Loan Notes which have a term of 5 years and carry interest at a rate of 5% per annum.
The Kypera Loan Notes can be converted into new ordinary shares of 2 pence each at a price of 85.6 pence per Ordinary Share.
Conversion is at the option of the holder at any time during the 5 year term.
The Company can redeem the Kypera Loan Notes from the third anniversary of issue if not already converted.
The Kypera Loan Notes are valued on a Black Scholes option pricing model under standard option pricing assumptions.
The fair value of the Kypera Loan Notes was calculated as follows Debt element 2702 Equity element 251 2953 61 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 6 Convertible loan notes continued On 31 March 2017 0.5m of the Kypera Loan Notes were repaid.
A further repayment of 0.5m was made on 27 April 2017 in respect of the Kypera Loan Notes.
T otal At 1 April 2015 Additions 3500 Interest payable accrued 28 Fair value adjustment 251 At 31 March 2016 3277 Interest payable accrued 280 Interest due to be paid 175 Repayments 500 At 31 March 2017 2882 Within one year Above one year 2882 7 Sharebased payment plans See note 25 in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The sharebased payment charge comprises Equitysettled sharebased charge arising from share option plans for employees 204 109 Equitysettled sharebased charge arising from warrants  91 T otal equitysettled sharebased payments 204 200 Share options are granted to directors and selected employees to reward and motivate the groups employees and to MXC Capital.
At the year end the Group had four share based payment plans.
Grants for the year ended 31 March 2017 have been made as follows ESS number of options EMI number of options
Scheme number of options MXC Share Option scheme number of options T otal number of options 18 July 2015 14257832 16128966 33225064 88349820 151961682 Restated following share consolidation 712892 806448 1661253 4417491 7598084 23 December 2015  39735   39735 As at 1 April 2016 712892 846183 1661253 4417491 7637819 Options granted  416665   416665 Options lapsed 227585 403224 215341  846151 T otal options granted as at 31 March 2017 485307 859624 1445912 4417491 7208334 The terms of the currents plans are outlined in note 25 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
62 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Company Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 7 Sharebased payment plans continued The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices WAEP of and movements in share options during the year.
Number of options
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 7968944 5.23p Forfeited during the year prior to share consolidation Granted in the year prior to share consolidation Granted in the year 416665 60.0p Lapsed in the year 846151 50.7p Outstanding following share consolidation 7539458 5.17p Exercised following share consolidation Granted following share consolidation Outstanding at the end of the year 7539458 5.17p There were no options exercisable at the end of the year 2016nil.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding at the end of the year was 0p to 75.5p 2016 0p to 75.5p.
The fair value of the equitysettled share options granted is estimated as at the date of grant using an average of BlackScholes and an empirical model to take into account market conditions attaching to the options.
Key inputs to the model were Volatility 19%68% Risk free rate 0.5%
Expected dividend nil 8 Auditors remuneration The Company audit fee is 35500 2016 29000.
This fee was borne by another Group company.
9 Directors remuneration The directors emoluments are paid by Castleton Group Holdings and were not recharged to the Company.
Details are set out in the Directors Remuneration report.
10 Financial instruments by category The objectives of the Companys treasury activities are to manage financial risk secure costeffective funding where necessary and minimise adverse effects of fluctuations in the financial markets on the value of the Companys financial assets and liabilities on reported profitability and on cash flows of the Company.
The Companys principal financial instruments for fundraising are bank borrowings overdraft facilities and loans.
31 March 2017
Total
Liabilities
Trade and other payables excluding statutory liabilities 339 339 Bank loan 4250 4250 Overdraft 1309 1309 Convertible Loan Notes 2882 2882 T otal 8780 8780 63 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Statements 10 Financial instruments by category continued 31 March 2016
Total
Liabilities
Trade and other payables excluding statutory liabilities 47 47 Bank loan 5283 5283 Overdraft 908 908 Convertible Loan Notes 3277 3277 T otal 9515 9515 11 Financial risk management The Companys activities expose it to liquidity risk.
The Companys overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Companys financial performance.
Risk management is carried out centrally under policies approved by the Board of Directors.
Management identifies evaluates and hedges financial risks.
The Board provides principles for overall risk management as well as policies covering specific areas such as interest rate risks.
Liquidity risk Management reviews cash forecasts of operating companies of the Company in accordance with practice and limits set by the
The Companys liquidity management policy involves projecting cash flows and considering the level of liquid assets necessary to meet these.
The table below analyses the Companys financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period from the balance sheet date to the contractual maturity date.
These amounts disclosed in the table are the contracted undiscounted cash flows including interest.
Balances within 12 months equal their carrying balances plus interest as the impact of discounting is not significant.
At 31 March 2017
1 year 12 years More than 2 years
Loan Notes   3496 3496 Overdraft 1365   1365 Bank Loan 1114 1081 2420 4615 2479 1081 5916 9476 At 31 March 2016
1 year 12 years More than 2 years T otal Loan Notes 443  3996 4439 Overdraft 947   947 Bank Loan 1213 1081 3501 5795 2603 1081 7497 11181 12 Called up share capital See note 24 to the consolidated financial statements.
64 Castleton Technology plc Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Company Financial Statements continued year ended 31 March 2017 13 Net cash flows from operating activities Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 728 8910 Adjustments for Noncash exceptional items 1252 8324 Net finance costs 494 340 Equitysettled sharebased payment charge 204 200 Movements in working capital Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables  1423 Increase in trade and other payables 84 15 Cash from  used in operations 1306 1454 The noncash exceptional item for the year ended 31 March 2016 of 8.3 million related to a provision for an intercompany balance which was subsequently partly recovered during the year ended 31 March 2017 of 1.2 million.
14 Control In the opinion of the directors there is no single controlling party.
The financial statements of this company are available to the public and may be obtained from site 15 Related parties During the year ended 31 March 2017  trading transactions were entered into with other members of the Group of nil 2016 nil.
Amounts owed to group undertakings Amounts owed from group undertakings Castleton Software Solutions Ltd 52 Castleton Managed Services Ltd 67 31 Castleton T echnology Intermediate Holding Company Limited   12762 12512 119 31 12762 12512 At 31 March 2017 the Company had an amount due with Castleton Group Holdings Limited of 19575000 2016 20804000 which has been provided for.
Key management is considered to comprise the Senior Management T eam.
Key management personnel emoluments are disclosed in note 9.
Details of directors remuneration are given in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Social security costs in respect of directors emoluments were 52000.
There are loan notes relating to the Opus Information T echnology Ltd acquisition where the equity element of the loan notes are with Castleton T echnology plc and the debt element is within Castleton T echnology Intermediate Holding Company Limited.
Designed and produced by Radley Yeldar site TECH N O L O G Y P L C 100 Fetter Lane
