MATERIALS
FOR LIFE Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Core business growth and momentum Our core business accelerated particularly in the second half of the year with nine new commercial agreements the integration of acquired businesses under one brand and a new commercial organisation.
Strengthened balance sheet to fuel growth We have ambitious goals to grow and a plan to reach profitability.
To support these goals we recently raised up to 10.8 million in equity and a venture debt facility.
Our cash position is now stronger than ever.
Exciting proprietary products pipeline Our new pipeline of proprietary products addresses significant market opportunities and clinical needs in cartilage regeneration bone and wound healing.
New management team and advisory board We made several key appointments with industry expertise and track records of success including our new CEO our General Manager of New Zealand and our Heads of Commercial and RandD as well as empanelled a Scientific Advisory Board to support the product portfolio strategy.
We created Collagen Solutions to address a unique opportunity in regenerative medicine based on a strong foundation of scientific expertise and biomaterials experience.
Over the past year we have seen significant changes in the business with a new management team new funding an exciting pipeline of proprietary products and continued core business momentum taking us further towards our vision to be the industrys first choice for regenerative biomaterials.
POSITIVE MOMENTUM View details of our team page 12 View our proprietary products page 5 Tissue Collagen Product development and OEM View our financial review page 18 View our progress page 10
STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGIC REPORT
IFC Highlights
2 At a glance 4 Our products 6 Our business model 8 Chairmans statement 10 Chief Executives statement Strategic report 18 Financial review CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 20 Board of directors 22 Corporate governance 24 Directors remuneration report 25 Directors report FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 28 Independent auditors report Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Consolidated statement of financial position Company statement of financial position Consolidated statement of changes in equity Company statement of changes in equity 34 Consolidated statement of cash flows 35 Company statement of cash flows 36 Notes to the financial statements 61 Notice of Annual General Meeting 64 Officers and professional advisers Visit our websitesitesite Operational highlights Commercial organisation delivered nine new commercial agreements Online US sales launch to provide additional access to the research markets 60% stake taken in Cre8ive Collagen to move into Chinese market Strengthened executive team with key RandD sales and marketing and general management hires Provisional patent for bone graft substitute filed Australian patent for sourcing ultrathin processed pericardium granted Balance sheet strengthened with up to 10.8 million gross in equity and venture debt facility Participation in second major Horizon 2020 project Financial highlights Revenue and other income 4090tel
1259361tel Cash and cash equivalents 8978tel 3391tel Gross profit margin 75.1% 75.1% 74.1% 78.0% Before separately identifiable items.
STRATEGIC REPORT 1 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT At a glance Making strong progress A GLOBAL REGENERATIVE BIOMATERIALS COMPANY
Invited to participate in an upcoming Horizon 2020 project which will enhance our scientific expertise and provide us with funding.
OCTOBER
Appointed Kevin Darling as General Manager of our New Zealand operations ensuring the continued stability of a critical part of our business.
JANUARY
Formed Scientific Advisory Board to advise the Company on opportunities in regenerative medicine and provide guidance on the business.
2016 2017 Our core business is the supply development and manufacture of collagen and tissuebased materials and medical devices.
Our vision Be the industrys first choice for regenerative biomaterials.
Our mission Improving patients quality of life by being a trusted partner with our customers providing innovative biomaterial solutions and passionate delivery from our global team.
Our team We have scientific expertise and a collaborative approach providing a faster time to market improved production and a superior product range for our customers.
Our markets We serve three primary customer markets research and diagnostics medical devices and regenerative medicine.
Within all of these customer segments over time we create sustainable value by becoming embedded in their critical processes.
Our products Our products are used in the following markets cardiovascular orthopaedics dental wound healing research and other applications.
2 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Global reach Collagen Solutions is a global business serving a diverse and expanding customer base across North America Asia Pacific and Europe.
FEBRUARY
Raised up to 10.8 million helping us accelerate our strategic plans to create significant shareholder value by growing revenue five times within five years.
Brad Selman VP Global Sales and Marketing appointed.
MARCH
Granted divisional patent coverage for pericardium from the Australian Patent
Patent coverage has also been established in the US and New Zealand.
Chris Wattengel VP Global Research and Development appointed.
APRIL
Signed agreement to develop and manufacture Smart Matrix an advanced wound care scaffold.
Weve also delivered nine new agreements in the year.
Operations Sales officelogistics
European regional headquarters RandD clean room manufacturing and distribution GLASGOW SCOTLAND South Korea Asia Pacific commercial office
New Zealand Asia Pacific regional headquarters RandD clean room manufacturing and distribution
US
Global commercial headquarters RandD and distribution MINNEAPOLIS MN
Logistics
SYDNEY
STRATEGIC REPORT 3 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT Our products COLLAGEN FORMULATIONS FOR PRECISE REQUIREMENTS We use natural collagen proteins and tissue to engineer regenerative biomaterials and medical devices.
MEDICALGRADE COLLAGEN Collagen is a primary structural protein in tissues and provides a conducive environment for cells.
Standard and custom formulations.
Examples of uses tissue engineering scaffolds medical device components and research assays.
PERICARDIUM AND OTHER TISSUES Natural and semiprocessed tissues with ideal physical and biological properties for medical devices.
Pericardium examples of uses heart valves and dental membranes.
Additional sourcing of vessels tendons dermis and bone.
Pericardium
Collagen fibres Collagen fibrils Collagen molecules triple helices Amino acid chains 4 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 CARTILAGE REPAIR The patentprotected ChondroMimetic Osteochondral Scaffold developed in partnership with the University of Cambridge and MIT is designed for minimally invasive treatment of cartilage defects addressing a potential market of over 450000 procedures per year 500 million1 billion.
Promotes hyaline cartilage and subchondral bone repair leading to restoration of joint function Study in process to demonstrate results of seven to eight years in patients Launch expected following CE mark and partner selection WOUND TREATMENT An internally developed novel collagen matrix with the potential to address multiple markets in wound care and burns potentially addressing approximately 40% of a 1 billion market.
Excellent handling properties formulated to fill uneven wound sites with intact fibrillar collagen matrix Designed to address partial and fullthickness wounds diabetic foot ulcers tunnelling wounds burns and other complex wounds Currently under development both US and European markets targeted following regulatory approvals BONE REGENERATION A collagenceramic synthetic bone graft substitute with novel properties covered by a recent provisional patent application that addresses approximately 30% of a 1.7 billion orthopaedic bone graft market.
Formulated with superior handling properties and inorganic particle retention to enhance ease of use for the surgeon and ensure that the graft remains at the operative site Platform technology with multiple potential applications in spinal fusion orthopaedic trauma reconstructive surgery and dental procedures Currently under development first indications for US and European markets targeted following regulatory approvals OUR PROPRIETARY PRODUCT PIPELINE OF FINISHED MEDICAL DEVICES The Company is developing several proprietary products it intends to commercialise through outlicensing to distribution partners.
STRATEGIC REPORT 5 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT Our business model Our core products include medicalgrade collagen the primary protein in those tissues that provides a supportive environment for the cells and processed native tissues such as pericardium a uniquely strong tissue that surrounds the heart and medicalgrade collagen formulations.
We supply these as standard raw materials as well as in custom formulations that are used for the spectrum of basic research to regenerative medicine therapies and medical devices.
In addition we have several proprietary products in development based on our IP and knowhow for cartilage regeneration wound healing and bone grafting that we plan to outlicense to distribution partners.
Example collagenbased medical devices We enable creation of regenerative medicine technologies through our extensive experience in biomaterials.
Collaborative approach Our team works in partnership with our customers to engineer the best solution resulting in faster time to market improved production and superior products for our customers.
Comprehensive offering of products and services We have a broad range of soluble and freezedried monomeric and polymeric medicalgrade collagen plus access to a wide range of xenograft tissues providing customers with a single source with a flexible range of options for their biomaterials needs.
More importantly we are one of a few companies with the knowhow in collagen and tissue processing related to tissue scaffold and medical device development.
Worldclass quality standards Given the highly regulated nature of our business and barriers to entry the quality of our products along with our regulatory dossiers and animal sourcing from Australia and New Zealand the lowest BSE risk provides our customers with confidence and reduces risk in their supply chains.
Products D iff er en t i a t o r s Collagen Solutions vision is to be the industrys first choice for regenerative biomaterials.
Growth model We have multiple initiatives to drive longterm accelerating revenue growth as we i significantly expand our core business of biomaterials development supply and manufacturing that has sticky recurring revenue and ii introduce multiple proprietary products for licensing and distribution.
Dental membranes Heart valves Bone grafts Skin substitutes
6 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 With reference to our value differentiators innovation begins by leveraging our extensive scientific expertise and our collaborative approach with customers.
Innovation
Development
Through our three RandD centres of excellence in the US UK and New Zealand we are able to offer a wide variety of development services depending on the customers needs.
Early in a project we contract with a customer to iterate a formulation andor device that meets the specific technical and commercial product needs before entering the final stages of development.
Supply
When customers choose to manufacture their own product we supply the critical biomaterials needed for their application.
We manufacture those materials in our New Zealand and UK facilities and maintain an ongoing supply.
This supply chain is sticky in that once materials are embedded in a customers product the demand typically follows the growth in volume once the product is launched.
Manufacturing
We manufacture semifinished or finished devices to spec for our customers under their private label.
Additionally as we develop our own proprietary products they will be manufactured in our UK and New Zealand plants and then private labelled for our licensingdistribution partners.
Growth strategy Collagen Solutions growth strategy entails multiple initiatives within two areas of the business core development supply and manufacture and proprietary products.
Our core business includes a wide range of biomaterial supply and product development services and contract manufacturing for medical devices regenerative medicine and research.
Our initiatives to grow this core business include expansion and investment in our direct and distribution partner sales channels geographic expansion especially in Asian markets and increasing the OEM mix of our business.
Because our products are embedded in our customers final products early in the design and regulatory process our sales growth is expected to follow the growth of our customers products.
Commercial management To reach the most accessible customers in medical device and regenerative medicine markets we have invested in a direct sales team in the US UK and South Korea.
This team is primarily responsible for sourcing new prospects and advancing the pipeline of opportunities to secure agreements with the support of marketing to increase brand awareness through a number of channels such as live events webbased marketing campaigns and direct customer engagement and sales operations to coordinate contracting and customer responsiveness across our three centres of excellence ensuring seamless global support.
Value creation process Strategies Summary value proposition Collagen Solutions has established multiple opportunities for accelerated growth over the next several years in both our core development supply and manufacturing business as well as our new proprietary products to take advantage of the highgrowth regenerative medicine opportunity with few competitors that can match the quality expertise and experience we bring along with our extensive offering of products and services.
Innovation
STRATEGIC REPORT 7 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT
Chairmans statement
WE HAVE SET OURSELVES A GOAL TO ACCRETE VALUE BY CREATING A LEADING BIOMA TERIALS BUSINESS AND WE BELIEVE THE MOMENTUM FOR ACHIEVING THIS IS INCREASING.
I am pleased to present Collagen Solutions annual report and accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Strategy
Earlier in the year we committed to a strategic plan to accelerate our business growth and enhance shareholder value by both developing our core business and commercialising the investment in our proprietary device programmes.
In March we secured up to 10.8 million in funding by way of a placing and open offer of 6.8 million and a venture debt facility of up to 4.0 million which will provide the resources to deliver a targeted increase in revenue of five times in the five years to 2021.
Our commercial and RandD teams have been strengthened in the past year to execute on these plans over the coming years.
Innovation and IP We have continued to invest in the proprietary product pipeline in particular in ChondroMimetic an exciting cartilage repair technology based around a bilayered collagen sponge.
Manufacturing validations have commenced in Glasgow and significant work has been undertaken in preparation for the CE mark submission which will be delayed slightly as a result of a Board decision to secure as many patients as possible from the original clinical trial conducted in Budapest in 2009.
To that end we have secured patient consent from 15 out of the original 17 with the other two having moved out of Hungary making it logistically difficult for them to participate.
This new trial which is technically known as an openlabel extension trial will provide us with seven to eight years of longitudinal data which if positive will help enormously with our partnering activities.
Our other key projects are in wound healing and in bone graft substitutes where we have filed for a provisional patent.
We remain confident about our ability to partner these products although the increasing burden of regulation has resulted in extended timelines.
Our collaborations with various academic and industry partners include our participation in two prestigious European Horizon 2020 consortiums to develop i a diseasemodifying therapy for Parkinsons which could slow down the progression of the disease rather than offering symptomatic benefits and ii cellbased tissue regeneration techniques.
Board and management During the year we have made a number of key appointments to strengthen the executive team.
Kevin Darling joined us in October as General Manager New Zealand taking over the reins from Geoff Bennett who in January moved from his previous executive director position to become a nonexecutive director.
In February we appointed Brad Selman to the role of VP Global Sales and Marketing to lead our commercial team and in March Chris Wattengel joined the team as VP Global RandD to lead our product development programmes.
Cofounder Dr Stewart White stepped down from the Board on 30 June 2017 but will remain in a consultancy role and continue to participate as a member of the Scientific Advisory Board.
I personally would like to thank Stewart for all his Executive team appointments New employees Participation in European Horizon 2020 consortiums 8 hard work and what we have achieved together in the growth of the business to date and I look forward to continued interaction via his continued membership of the Scientific Advisory Board.
The Board is confident that we now have a team in place to deliver the short to mediumterm strategic goals and have also strengthened our functional teams to drive product innovation and take the business to the next level of growth.
Our people As part of our vital initiatives for the coming year we are committed to providing development opportunities for our employees and have been working with them on individual employee development plans to deliver the required targeted training to allow them to deliver enhanced performance to the business in its growth phase.
We value feedback from our employees and carry out an annual survey to measure our performance in this area.
Overview
Our Board and management team have continued to make positive progress delivering nine new commercial agreements with strong sales growth in Asia where we established a regional sales office in Seoul and in Europe.
We have also seen an increase in demand for tissue biomaterials from our Australian and New Zealand sources.
The investment in the multipurpose processing facility in New Zealand last year has allowed product development and prototyping to be carried out which will generate further revenues in the coming year.
The quality of the customer pipeline is building up with some interesting projects to be executed.
We continue to put in place the clear organisation and detailed initiatives to drive our focused strategy in the current financial year and beyond which is to build a leading global regenerative biomaterials business based upon a core supply development and manufacturing platform enhanced by developing our own novel products such as across a range of clinical indications.
The funding secured in March allows us to implement these initiatives and we will continue to strengthen our core business through operational improvements and investing in innovation to create significant value.
Our activities in entering the Chinese market continue with Cre8ive where we have been successful in achieving initial shipments of product via our import agents and are in discussion with potential customers.
We have set ourselves a goal to accrete value by creating a leading biomaterials business through a combination of organic growth and exploitation of our own and licensed IP as well as through appropriate acquisitions and we believe the momentum for achieving this is increasing.
Results
The Groups results for the year ended 31 March 2017 are set out in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income and discussed further in the Financial Review.
Outlook
The past year has seen significant change in the business and we expect the current year will be no different in terms of the speed and magnitude of progress.
We are an ambitious company with ambitious targets and the agenda for the coming year reflects both the opportunities that we have identified and the associated challenges.
Our key targets for the current year are as follows We have a multitude of development milestones amongst the high value product portfolio and we will seek to progress further projects into development.
ChondroMimetic is the most advanced such project and we expect to complete the openlabel extension study in Hungary for the 15 identified patients.
We expect an evergreater contribution to the value of the business from these projects as they approach commercialisation.
Based on a successful outcome to the aforementioned product.
More likely is a partnering arrangement that will be for Europe and the rest of the world excluding the US but with an option to commercialise the product in the US where the regulatory authorities will demand that the product goes down the premarket approval route.
Given the significant cost of this regulatory pathway we would expect these costs to be met by the partner.
Achieving continued revenue growth across all our key territories and to seek to address a specific risk with a Korean customer on potential reduced quantities at contract renewal which could possibly impact 1819 revenues if not addressed this year.
As you would expect and hope for we are at an advanced stage of mitigating this risk by discussing new product categories and services with the customer as well as leveraging our market reach to help accelerate their sales.
Forging the most mutually beneficial arrangement with Cre8ive our partner in China.
We continue to examine a number of potential options for a route forward and hopefully we will be able to arrive at the best option soon.
The work we have done in the past year has underlined the potential for our medicalgrade collagen sourced from Australia and New Zealand.
This differentiator gives us a clear advantage over local Chinese producers where environmental factors such as heavy metal contamination alone can impact the quality of the product.
To successfully execute the relocation of our San Jose RandD facility and ensure the transfer to a new facility in Minneapolis.
The Company is keen to reflect its ambition by contemplating potential transactions which could help deliver critical mass in its core business and access additional products and technology which will be accretive to future commercial plans for highvalue products.
We will continue to review such opportunities as they arise.
I continue to be very committed to ensuring Collagen Solutions is a success and continue to be assured by the quality of the people we have at Collagen Solutions and the fact that we have been able to attract into the Company people of a very high calibre the quality of our current product offering and our development the continued support of the Board to our strategic plan and the continued support of yourselves as shareholders.
Finally last year I referred to us being on a journey.
In the past year I feel that we have travelled a long way and I believe that in the next year we will travel even further.
Hopefully as a shareholder you will see this better reflected in our share price.
David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman 10 July 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 9 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 10 STRATEGIC REPORT Chief Executives statement I am pleased to report the results for the year ended 31 March 2017 for Collagen Solutions and the considerable progress we have made towards realising value from multiple growth initiatives.
Building on momentum and strengthened financials Firstly and perhaps most significantly we strengthened our financial position substantially at the end of the financial year by securing 10.8 million financing inclusive of 6.8 million in equity and a venture debt facility of up to 4.0 million via Norgine
This positions us to continue to grow our core business invest in our proprietary devices and satisfy our contingent payment obligations related to the successful acquisition of Southern Lights Biomaterials.
Investments in our commercial organisation last year have begun to deliver results.
While the sales cycles in our core business can be from 1218 months we have seen the early benefits with nine new agreements during the year under review mostly towards the end of the period.
Critically we hired our new VP Global Sales and Marketing Brad Selman to continue this momentum and develop and lead the commercial team to deliver accelerated growth over the next few years.
Another key executive team position filled was the new General Manager of Collagen Solutions New Zealand formerly Southern Lights Biomaterials Kevin Darling.
Kevins strong commercial and operational background has been key to continuing the momentum of the New Zealand business especially as we see greater growth opportunities in our tissue business.
Finally we prioritised and initiated three projects related to our proprietary products platform as well as strengthening our RandD leadership by appointing Chris Wattengel VP Global Research and
Chris experience in medical device development regulatory approvals intellectual property and biomaterials will be vital to ensuring the success of these programmes.
Revenue growth Revenue and other income during the year ended 31 March 2017 was 4.09 million including 3.95 million in sales and 0.14 million in other income and represented 26% growth on the prior year.
This growth was organic and driven largely by gains in Europe and Asia where the first investments in commercial activities were made.
Revenue from North America grew by 0.12 million to 1.92 million an increase of 6%.
This region was the last to benefit from new sales team hires and new business was offset partially by some sales volume reductions amongst a few customers.
Revenue from Asia grew by 0.42 million to 1.60 million an increase of 36% our fastestgrowing region driven by new business wins and a dedicated commercial manager in place in Seoul.
Revenue from EMEA grew by 0.28 million to 0.42 million an increase of 190% driven by new customers and as a result of commercial activities by the team in the UK.
OUR COMMERCIAL INVESTMENTS OF LAST YEAR DELIVERED NINE NEW AGREEMENTS AND POSITIVE MOMENTUM AND OUR RECENT FUNDRAISING STRENGTHENED OUR BALANCE SHEET TO FUEL OUR GROWTH INITIATIVES.
Revenue and other income 26% New agreements
10.8m During the year the team delivered nine new supply development and distribution agreements including distribution partnerships in Korea and Japan.
Most of these agreements closed in the second half of the year.
In addition the Company has seen its pericardium tissue business grow by 30% resulting in a specific initiative to diversify and increase its tissue supply base in Australia and New Zealand to meet the additional demand.
Innovation and product development The Company has historically been committed to extensive research and development investments and has made continued progress in biomaterials innovation both for our core supply development and manufacturing business and also our proprietary products programmes.
With AustraliaNew Zealand tissue sourcing becoming a more significant part of our core business we were pleased to have been granted a patent from the Australian Patent Office for the use of our novel ultrathin processed pericardium material which can be used for heart valve replacement medical devices and other applications.
Patent coverage has already been established in New Zealand and the US.
Related to our bone graft substitute programme we have added substantial expertise in this field with our new Scientific Advisory Board as well as Chris Wattengels background.
With this groups guidance weve completed surgeon and industry voice of customer feedback identified the regulatory and preclinical pathways and established a revised plan to meet these needs resulting in a mid2019 estimate for regulatory clearance.
We also filed a provisional US patent application covering novel properties of a bone graft substitute formulation.
The provisional patent covers several novel proprietary characteristics related to the products superior handling properties and inorganic particle retention which will enhance ease of use for the surgeon and ensure that the substitute remains at the operative site.
Our wound healing project is based upon core technology we developed over several years with promising results presented at multiple conferences including the recent Society for Biomaterials Annual Meeting in Minneapolis.
The Companys scientists presented new data related to the potential for a fibrillar collagenbased matrix that protects autologous cells during delivery and promotes cellular adhesion to a wound site.
The potential of the research may address the limitations of current split or fullthickness autologous skin grafts particularly in large wound sites.
We have completed surgeon and industry voice of customer feedback identified the regulatory and preclinical pathways and targeted our preclinical trials to begin in early 2018 with wound market clearance expected to follow in late 2018.
Additionally the Companys cartilage ChondroMimetic programme has advanced significantly since the acquisition of the assets of Orthomimetics at the end of 2015.
With first human use in 2009 and original launch in 2010 ChondroMimetic offers a rare opportunity to come to market with over seven years of inpatient results.
We recently initiated the extension of the original clinical study to review the results of the first patients from a safety study conducted in 2009 and have begun manufacturing validations of the product at our Glasgow UK facility.
The longterm extension study will collect seven to eight years of data from up to 15 of the original 17 patients.
Our CE mark submission is pending this study conclusion and completing internal validations with a target commercialisation outside the US in mid2018.
Finally we recognise the need for close coordination between our global commercial and RandD teams as well as the expertise needed for successful development and regulatory approvals of our proprietary medical devices.
We recently announced our plans to relocate our US RandD from San Jose to Minneapolis where we will realise some operational cost savings by merging the two sites and also enhance our global RandD and commercial coordination with leadership and both teams at the same Minneapolis site.
Strategic initiatives Last year was the first implementation of our global strategic planning process resulting in several initiatives we felt critical to our future growth.
I am pleased with the results the team delivered on these initiatives and look forward to accomplishing similar success on our initiatives for FY 2018.
Our 2017 initiatives generally focused on three areas sales channel development marketing brand launch and operational excellence.
Our sales channel development initiative resulted in the recruitment hiring and training of a full specialised direct sales team and support including our new VP of Global Sales and Marketing as well as sales process improvements that led to nine new customer agreements in the fiscal year.
Our marketing brand launch initiative resulted in the execution of a full integrated marketing communications programme leading to an increase in several customer touchpoint metrics in terms of commercial leads web traffic and social media engagement.
Finally we successfully completed several initiatives to improve operational excellence including a new OEM programme that improved timetoclose deal flow and throughput contributing to nine new agreements during the year.
Looking forward to FY 2018 we are continuing our strategic initiative programme and selected four Vital Few initiatives aligned with our strategic pillars of Customers Our People Products and Capabilities and Growth which are summarised as follows Customers identify and attain more highvalue customers.
Our People implement an employeedriven individual development plan programme.
Products and Capabilities secure and create a stronger pericardium business.
Growth successfully develop and partner our three key proprietary products.
Conclusion
The critically important financing of the Company that closed at the end of the last financial year has put us in a strong position to execute on our growth initiatives including fueling our proprietary products development and was a significant focus of the Company.
We delivered growth based on commercial investments made in the prior year and also recruited necessary talent in RandD commercial and general management to execute on these growth initiatives and continue towards our shared vision to be the industrys first choice for regenerative biomaterials.
Jamal Rushdy
Chief Executive Officer
10 July 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 11 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT Chief Executives statement continued What are the top achievements from last year While the team was very busy and accomplished several important goals last year two stand out as critical achievements.
First our successful fundraising at the very end of the fiscal years was necessary in order to meet our operating and other obligations as well as to ensure the multiple growth initiatives were excited about can come to fruition.
Second we are pleased to see the commercial investments made last year beginning to demonstrate results including delivering nine new agreements mostly in the back half of the year.
How is your strategy developing We remain enthusiastic about the strategy we set forth last year strengthening our supply development and manufacturing core business with commercial investments and leveraging that platform to create a portfolio of proprietary products.
As we continue to receive feedback from the marketplace we believe this strategy is sound and our focus on orthopaedics and wounds in particular for our proprietary products is the right direction.
How are you strengthening your team I am pleased with the talent weve added to the executive team this year.
First Kevin Darling became our General Manager of New Zealand in October succeeding Geoff Bennett who remains on our Board and continues to actively support our business as a Board member and leader of our China initiative.
Kevins combination of commercial and operational experience has made a tremendous contribution to ensure the continued momentum of the New Zealand business.
Brad Selman joined us as VP Global Sales and Marketing in February and has already worked to enhance our sales team and processes substantially.
Finally Chris Wattengel brings a critical skill set in finished devices with his 16 years of directly relevant biomaterials and OEM experience.
These new members are great additions to the executive team which also includes our COO Tom Hyland with over 30 years of collagen and medical technologies experience and our CFO Gill Black who has been instrumental in strengthening our financial position as well as deeply involved in operationally supporting the growth of our business.
In addition each of these leaders has also enhanced their own teams with new talent.
So overall I can say weve substantially strengthened the team over the past several months.
We have assembled a highly experienced and dynamic Scientific Advisory Board SAB with a combination of significant industry backgrounds and complementary technical and scientific knowledge within the field of regenerative medicine.
In addition to providing advice on and direction to our current development projects and core business the SAB will help us to assess future market directions and to guide our activities towards the development of both commercially and clinically relevant next generation products.
The SAB consists of Andrew Lynn PhD who is a successful entrepreneur and founder of Orthomimetics Ltd.
Professor William Bill Walsh PhD who has over 27 years of academic and industryrelated research experience in orthopaedics and other surgical fields Tom Buckland PhD who was a cofounder of ApaTech Ltd. and development director with Baxter Inc. business and product development experience.
What does the RandD pipeline look like The RandD side of our strategy has evolved the most in selecting our key three projects cartilage wound healing and bone grafts and doing the indepth work to refine the customer requirements and novel product attributes.
While we have several new product concepts that were taken to various stages of development in multiple areas of tissue engineering we are going to focus on these three projects to ensure they are developed to deliver a compelling value proposition to our customers supported by the appropriate data.
What is critical for the Company this year We have multiple growth initiatives each with significant upside potential so its critical we focus on realising value from these.
Our
Vital Few initiatives are sonamed because we think these are the critical initiatives for the Company for success and this is where we will focus.
On the commercial side its about continuous improvement of our sales pipeline and processes to identify and attain more highvalue customers.
Our people development is critical to everything we do and we believe the employee development plans will improve our employee engagement and effectiveness.
We see upside potential in our tissue business which led to our initiative with respect to tissue supply and growth.
Finally we are focused on advancing our proprietary products and securing partners for successful commercialisation.
Q A with the CEO 12 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report Collagen Solutions strives to be the industrys first choice for regenerative biomaterials and will advance and enhance customers collagenbased products for the timely benefit of patients.
Our strategy Our mission is to increase the profitability of our business by growing revenue through continual improvement and development of our product offering innovation and harnessing IP and by superior engagement and understanding of our customers and their market segments.
Our aim is to develop sales channels around the world while investing in our manufacturing facilities to enable the Group to meet that sales growth.
Our progress to date is noted in both the Chairmans and the Chief Executives Statements.
Our markets Our extensive technical expertise in the area of collagen formulations and our GMP capacity and capabilities make us very well placed to meet the needs of customers in the research and diagnostics medical device and regenerative medicine markets in all geographical areas.
We offer foundational products in the large regenerative biomaterials sector which can be used in the repair replacement or regeneration of damaged organs or tissue in tissue engineering and are used in many major markets including cardiovascular orthopaedics dental and wound care.
We will continue to invest in our sales and marketing operations and channel development including penetration of the Chinese market through our 60% holding in Cre8ive Collagen Limited.
Our products Our standard product range includes raw tissue supply including pericardium which is used in heart valves and dural patches various strengths of soluble and acid soluble collagen acid swollen gels freezedried powders collagen sheets and fibrous collagen.
The Group manufactures a fibrillar collagen gel which can be used in wound care and cell therapy fields in addition to other collagen components for approved medical devices for use in bone void fillers and in sponges for cell therapy skin substitute applications.
Future plans include commercialising additional products by harnessing licensed IP for wider patient benefits and development of formulations from novel sources of raw materials.
In addition to developing market access products we also will develop the platform technology within the of the regenerative medicine market.
Competitive advantage The Groups competitive advantages are based on both the ability to source quality raw materials from accredited sources and to develop novel and relevant formulations from different types of materials to meet customer needs.
We can also assist customers through the regulatory approval process for their medical devices and then offer the GMP facilities for large scale production thereby taking their products to market.
We are uniquely placed to add value throughout the entire supply chain having surety of supply through high grade collagen sourcing from negligible BSErisk sources.
Review of the business The Groups results are set out in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income on page 29 and are explained within the Financial Review on pages 18 and 19.
In March 2017 the Group raised funding of up to 10.8 million through a placing and open offer together with a venture debt facility from Norgine Ventures.
A full review of the Groups activities and future developments is incorporated into the Chairmans and the Chief Executives Statements.
Corporate social responsibility The Group embraces working in a way that delivers financial socially responsible and environmentally sustainable business performance and ensures adherence to the law and conducts its affairs to the highest ethical standards.
We expect our customers and suppliers to embrace these same principles.
The Group values teamwork taking personal responsibility positive attitudes and working hard to deliver positive outcomes for all our stakeholders customers staff and shareholders alike.
We encourage the personal learning growth and development of our team and voluntarily try to eliminate practices that harm the environment.
We are particularly proud of our team in New Zealand which is positively impacting the communities where we work and live.
Over the last year we sponsored the NZ National Art Exhibition which directs all proceeds to charitable endeavours in Napier.
In Glasgow our employees have raised money for charitable causes and organised donations to the local food banks.
Employee involvement Collagen Solutions fosters a culture of responsiveness and customer engagement reflecting our global teams talents in biomaterials science and production and market knowledge.
The Group recognises and seeks to encourage the involvement of its employees with the aim being the recruitment motivation and retention of quality employees throughout the Group.
An option scheme is operated within the Enterprise Management Incentive
We have recently conducted an Employee Satisfaction Survey and will monitor the improvements in the scores arising from increased employee engagement.
One of the key strategic initiatives for 2018 is to implement individual development plans for employees.
The Groups employment policies including the commitment to equal opportunity are designed to attract retain and motivate employees regardless of sex race religion or disability.
Equality of treatment includes full and fair assessment of applications and extends to training and continuing career development.
The Group is committed to ensuring and communicating the requirements for a safe and healthy working environment for all employees consistent with health and safety legislation and wherever practicable gives full consideration to applications for employment from disabled persons.
STRATEGIC REPORT 13 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT Strategic report continued Our senior leadership team developed and is committed to several initiatives this year in order to deliver strong revenue growth enhance and broaden our customer base and advance our RandD pipeline.
GROWTH
Our most recent voice of customer feedback demonstrated improved results in their willingness to recommend our products and services.
We have established an initiative to realise an opportunity to improve our understanding of their needs and accelerate our deal flow by identifying and attaining more highvalue customers.
Employee engagement has improved across multiple metrics.
Our initiative this year is to address a desire by employees for professional growth with an employeedriven development plan aligned with the Companys goals.
With our tissue business growing organically by 30% with growing demand yet limited somewhat by sufficient supply our focus for this year is an initiative focused on securing and creating a stronger pericardium business.
We see significant value creation potential over time with our three proprietary product programmes in cartilage wounds and bone.
Our RandD and commercial teams are collaboratively focused on an initiative to ensure progress of these three projects with an aim toward successful commercial partnering of each one.
Channel development We developed a specialised direct sales team focused regionally on medical devices and regenerative medicine companies in North America Asia and Europe that represents the full integrated product and service offering of our multiple business operations.
Marketing brand launch Our Voice of Customer results from an independent 2016 survey confirmed the strength of our value proposition as well as the opportunity to improve awareness especially of our full product portfolio with the Southern Lights Biomaterials acquisition.
Operational excellence Our aim is to improve execution of our OEM original equipment manufacturer and RandD programmes through continuous process improvement and global alignment of our multiple sites.
Achievements
Hired and trained the full commercial organisation including our new VP Global Sales and Marketing Brad Selman.
Delivered nine new customer agreements in the fiscal year.
Achievements
Launched and communicated a new brand image including integration of the former Southern Lights Biomaterials branding based on a clear value proposition encompassing our collaborative approach comprehensive offering of products and services and worldclass quality standards.
Demonstrated increase in multiple touchpoint metrics in terms of commercial leads web traffic and social media engagement.
Achievements
Implemented a robust OEM process with improved timetoclose deal flow and contributed to nine new agreements during the year.
Initiated three proprietary product development programmes in RandD and hired our new VP Global Research and Development Chris Wattengel.
Future focus Continuous improvement in speed and quality of customer acquisition process.
Future focus Continued engagement across multiple communication channels and industry events to reinforce the brand and associated value proposition.
Future focus Continuous improvement of our medical device project management capabilities and effectiveness including consolidation of US RandD activities in Minneapolis.
Our strategic initiatives for FY 2017
PRODUCTS
AND CAPABILITIES OUR PEOPLE Our strategic initiatives for FY 2018 Our current year strategic initiatives are aligned to each of our four strategic pillars 14 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Key performance indicators Financial KPIs The directors consider the principal financial performance indicators of the Group to be revenue and revenue growth gross profit gross profit margin operating costs
EPS and cash and cash equivalents.
The directors consider the principal nonfinancial performance indicators to be development of collagen product portfolio development of distribution partners and channels to market collaboration with strategic partners to develop embedded value products and IP maintaining GMP processes and building capability and capacity and enhancing customer and employee engagement survey scores.
Before separately identifiable items credit of 227155 in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 credit of 152365.
Gross profit 2962tel
0.95ptel Revenue and other income 4090tel 1035500 758926
1259361tel Cash and cash equivalents 8978tel 3391tel Gross profit margin 75.1% 75.1% 74.1% 78.0% STRATEGIC REPORT 15 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT Strategic report continued Principal risks and uncertainties The longterm success of the Group depends on the continual review assessment and control of the key business risks it faces.
The principal risks and uncertainties that could have an adverse impact on the performance of the Group are detailed below Risk and impact Mitigating controls Change Sales and RandD pipeline The impact of our customers stage of regulatory approval of their medical device or product is critical to Collagen Solutions revenue streams.
Our collagen component or formulation may have been developed embedded and listed as part of a customers regulatory admission but contract manufacturing revenues may be delayed until such approval is obtained in the relevant geographical market from the relevant agencies.
Customers in early stage development may be required to secure external funding before committing to volume manufacturing and this can delay revenues for the Group.
Timing of launch of own proprietary products presents risks.
The Group continues to focus on building and diversifying the customer pipeline and has strategies in place to increase production scheduling flexibility accelerate revenues by use of minimum order quantities and nonrefundable fees for engineering and setup costs for a specific GMP process invest in sales and marketing to increase sales pipeline funnel develop longterm collaborative and development partnerships with our customers resulting in our products becoming embedded in their end devices and therapies and closely monitor resources and project management.
Growth
The ability of the Group to manage growth effectively and implement its strategy requires careful planning and management control systems.
The pace of change required could place a significant strain on the Groups management operational financial and personnel resources and could have a detrimental impact on the trading performance of the Group.
The Group has an experienced management team and a clear strategy for any required integration and management of business growth.
IDENTIFYING AND UNDERSTANDING KEY RISKS TO THE BUSINESS The Board and senior leadership team have identified specific strategic initiatives to execute against our business goals  view our initiatives on page 14.
As part of the Groups annual strategic planning process specific risks are reviewed and new ones identified that would have an impact on the Groups performance.
The Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten our business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
Risk mitigation strategies are put in place in relation to identified risks as shown in the table below and we continually review our processes and procedures.
The senior leadership team is responsible for implementing risk mitigating initiatives with key business risks being recorded in the risk register which is reviewed by the Audit and Risk Committee.
Principal risks are overseen by the Board and monitored by the Audit and Risk Committee.
Risk iden tifica tion
Risk mitigation Executing and monitoring
Strategy
16 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Risk and impact Mitigating controls Change
Many of the Groups competitors have access to greater funds however the directors believe that the Group can compete strongly and that there are sufficient barriers to entry to other competitors entering the same markets.
The Groups investment in marketing and business development will support sales in territories across the world.
Technology
Technologies in the medical device market continue to evolve and there is a risk that the Groups offering may become outdated as improvements in technology are made.
The Board has confidence in the Groups research and development capabilities to respond to such eventualities.
The Group relies on information technology systems to run the business and its continued commitment to investment in this area will ensure robust effective management information systems allow management to make key financial decisions affecting the business.
Suppliers
The Group has a limited number of suppliers for some of our raw materials which we may not be able to find replacements for or immediately transition to alternative suppliers.
These materials are used in validated processes and substitution of replacement raw materials may have a revenue impact as a result of potential delays in validation and approval.
The Groups materials are sourced from BSEfree territories with suppliers who have the necessary quality systems certifications and export health attestations in place to ensure reduced risk.
Any change to the BSEfree status of our suppliers could impact our supply chain and ultimately revenues.
Treasury policy and financial risk The Group maintains a centralised treasury function which operates under policies and guidelines approved by the Board.
These cover funding management of foreign exchange exposure and interest rate risk.
The purpose is to manage the financial risks of the business and to secure the most costeffective funding.
The Groups principal financial assets are cash and bank balances which are exposed to varying degrees to the following risks liquidity risk credit risk and foreign currency risk.
The policy for managing these risks is outlined below Liquidity risk  the Group maintains proactive relationships with its banks and investors and its working capital requirements are anticipated via the forecasting and budgetary process.
Credit risk  the Group is mainly exposed to credit risk from its trade and other receivables shortterm deposits and bank balances.
An allowance for impairment is made when there is an identified loss event which based on previous experience is evidence of a reduction in the recoverability of the cash flows.
Cash is held on deposit with a highly reputable financial institution.
Management considers the above measures to control the credit risk exposure.
Foreign currency risk  in addition to GBP revenues the Group has overseas revenue in US dollars with minimal income in NZ dollars and euros and is exposed to trading foreign currency risk.
The functional currency of the Company is sterling.
Revenues in US dollars are utilised in funding US operations and forward exchange rate contracts may be used to hedge exposure.
The Group seeks to negotiate contracts in the functional currency where possible.
This Strategic Report was approved by the Board of directors on 10 July 2017 and signed on its behalf by Gill Black Chief Financial Officer 10 July 2017 Increased risk Decreased risk No change STRATEGIC REPORT 17 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc STRATEGIC REPORT
Financial review
DURING THE YEAR TURNOVER CONTINUED TO INCREASE IN ALL GEOGRAPHIC TERRITORIES WITH PARTICULARLY STRONG GROWTH IN ASIA.
Group results Group revenue and other income increased to 4090549 2016 3244257 for the year ended 31 March 2017.
During the year turnover continued to increase in all geographic territories with particularly strong growth in Asia.
We were pleased to report an increase in gross margin to 75.1% 2016 74.1%.
LBITDA before credit for separately identifiable items of 227155 2016 152365 for the year was 1259361 2016 410016 and the loss before tax before separately identifiable items was 1840905 2016 1018655.
Separately identifiable items comprise a release net of foreign exchange translation loss of contingent consideration provision and legal costs in relation to the Norgine Bond facility 2016 release of contingent consideration provision in relation to the Collagen Solutions LLC asset acquisition.
The loss per share as calculated per note 7 increased to 0.95p 2016 0.57p.
Cash and borrowings As at 31 March 2017 the Group had cash balances of 8.98 million 2016 2.49 million and financial liabilities in relation to the contingent consideration and other borrowings of 4.26 million 2016 2.55 million.
The Statement of Cash Flows shows the movements in funds during the year.
Overheads
The Group has continued to invest in both its sales and marketing and RandD resources during the year in order to support the growth in global demand for its products and services.
RandD expenditure increased to 593986 2016 367496 and selling and marketing costs increased to 718986 2016 333426.
Fundraising
In March 2017 the Group was successful in raising funds by way of a placing and open offer resulting in net proceeds of 6.46 million and in addition received net proceeds of 1.94 million from the first tranche of a Bond issue to Norgine Ventures a strategic debt provider.
A further 2 million of Bond facility is available for draw down during the coming financial year providing certain revenue targets are met.
The funding allows acceleration of core business growth and further investment in key RandD programmes as well as providing additional working capital.
Capital expenditure During the year the Group invested in capital expenditure additions of 137324 2016 565740 to its manufacturing and research facilities in both New Zealand and the UK to increase capabilities for expected future demand.
Business risks Risk management is an important element of the management process throughout the Group and internal controls have been developed to address the main business risks which are considered to be Growth of pericardium tissue business 30% EMEA revenue 190% Asia revenue 36% 18 Strategic The Group operates in a global market and is dependent on enhancing revenues by leveraging existing customers products and facilities in order to provide a broad range of collagen biomaterials development services contract manufacturing for collagenbased medical devices and commercialisation of our own proprietary medical devices.
One of the risks to the business is that of timing of customer projects where as a component supplier we rely on customer demand which is not within our control.
So in order to mitigate this risk we constantly strive to have a diversified customer base and pipeline with multiple products.
The timelines for launching proprietary products also present risks which are addressed through close monitoring and project management.
Key performance indicators KPIs The Group monitors the following KPIs to ensure the business performs in line with expectations and that issues are identified promptly and efficiency measures can be quantified revenue and revenue growth gross profit gross profit margin % operating costs
EPS and cash and cash equivalents.
Operational
The Groups most important assets are its employees its customers and the development of knowhow and intellectual property rights IPR Employees are recruited carefully to address the needs of the business.
Appropriate training is provided to support the development of employees.
The needs of the Groups customers are addressed to ensure that they are appropriately met.
The Group has controls in place to safeguard the IPR that it develops.
The Group also has established procedures to maintain its appropriate accreditations.
The Group recognises the importance of its IT infrastructure and back office systems to deliver its services.
The Group has the appropriate controls in place to secure its data and maximise the operational efficiency of its systems.
Controls exist to ensure information is made available to enable management to monitor the performance of the Group.
The controls address the performance of the Group based on monthly management accounts which include details of sales gross margin and costs.
Treasury policies and financial risk The Group maintains a treasury function which operates under policies and guidelines approved by the Board.
These cover funding management of foreign exchange exposure and interest rate risk.
The purpose is to manage the financial risks of the business effectively and to secure the most costeffective funding.
Contingent consideration The Group made a provision of 1.7 million in December 2014 for the contingent consideration payable resulting from the acquisition of Southern Lights Biomaterials.
This provision was made from an estimate of the maximum to be paid under the earnout conditions.
The directors believed that the provision represented the best estimate of the eventual outcome of the earnout.
Any future revision to the consideration will be charged credited to the income statement in accordance with IFRS 3 revised in future periods.
This is in addition to the provision made in the year ended 31 March 2014 of 2.4 million in relation to the contingent consideration arising from the acquisition of the Collbio
During the year there was a revision to the estimate of the cash earnout payable under the Collbio Group provisions resulting in a release in the provision of 0.291 million 2016 0.152 million.
There was also a revision to the cash earnout payable under the Southern Lights Biomaterials agreement resulting in a release of 0.262 million 2016 nil both of which are shown in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income as separately identifiable items.
The amount of the contingent consideration due to be settled by issue of shares in relation to the Collbio Group as at 31 March 2016 has now been satisfied by issuing shares of 2 million during the year pursuant to our obligations under the sale and purchase agreement dated January 2014.
The total contingent consideration now provided in the accounts at 31 March 2017 is 2.32 million 2016 2.41 million with the unwinding of discount being charged within finance costs and charged to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Gill Black Chief Financial Officer 10 July 2017 EMEA 425269 North America 1924540 Asia 1595978 EMEA 146744 North America 1808103 Asia 1175015 114940G 55837G Sales by geographic region STRATEGIC REPORT 19 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 20 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Board of directors
David has a proven track record in acquiring integrating and growing businesses in the diagnostic area and in value creation exemplified by his role at BBI Holdings Plc where he grew the company through acquisition and organic growth from a value of 4 million to a value of 84 million in 2007 when BBI was sold to Inverness Medical Innovations Inc.
He was chairman of DxS Limited which was sold in 2009 for 82 million.
David was also chairman of Sirigen Group Limited an early stage medical technology company that was sold in 2012 to Becton Dickinson and Company a global medical technology company.
David was previously chairman of Immunodiagnostics Systems Holdings Plc EKF Diagnostics Holdings plc Venn Life Sciences Holdings Plc Scancell Holdings Plc and Epistem Holdings Plc.
Q u al i fi c atio n s David is currently chairman of Omega Diagnostics Group Plc and Integrated Magnetic Systems Limited.
Experience
Jamal has over 20 years experience in the medical device arena specifically within two midsize highgrowth public companies and three successful startups.
He has a track record of building businesses with successful exits and transforming organisations through integration and performance improvement adding value through business development and leadership.
Prior to Collagen Solutions Jamal was a vice president at Tornier Inc.
2007 where he served in various leadership roles in US sales operations global sports medicine and biologics marketing and business and corporate development.
Jamal also played a key role in Torniers successful 2011 initial public offering.
He is currently a director at Arcuro Medical Limited and FocusStart LLC.
Q u al i fi c atio n s Jamal holds an MBA in Finance and Marketing from the Paul Merage School of Business at the University of California and also has a Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California.
David Evans Nonexecutive Chairman Jamal Rushdy
Chief Executive Officer
Experience
Gill brings extensive boardlevel financial experience to the Group having been financial director and company secretary of AandE Russell Ltd and was instrumental in its expansion before taking it through the subsequent acquisition by Bunzl plc in 2008.
After spending two years as head of finance at AKP Scotland Ltd she became head of finance and company secretary of GVA James Barr Ltd a privately owned property consultancy business which merged in 2013 with top five UK independent GVA Grimley.
Previously Gill was a senior manager at KPMG Glasgow where she led a team advising many highgrowth businesses.
Q u al i fi c atio n s Gill holds an MA in Accountancy and Economics from the University of Dundee and is a Chartered Accountant and ICAS member.
Gill Black Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary R A N The Board appreciates the value of good corporate governance and is responsible to shareholders for the proper management of the Group.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 21 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc
Geoff cofounded Southern Lights Biomaterials in 2003 and as CEO was responsible for guiding the company to a dominant position in biomaterials and regenerative medicine.
He has financial and operational experience including previously holding the chief financial role at three publicly traded Canadian companies Pelorus Navigation Systems Inc.
Circle Energy Inc. and Solid State Geophysical Inc. such as InnerVision Medical Technologies Inc. officer and is currently a director.
Q u al i fi c atio n s Geoff holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Alberta and is a member of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants.
Experience
Malcolm is a director in several private companies mostly involved in the healthcare area including Antoxis Limited Plasmox Limited Roadvert Limited Recircle Limited and Ohmedics Limited.
Malcolm was a director of Aircraft Medical until November 2015 when it was sold to Medtronic for 110 million.
He has previously held positions as a nonexecutive director in public companies and was company secretary at AxisShield Plc.
Q u al i fi c atio n s He has a background as a corporate finance lawyer having been a senior partner with Shepherd and Wedderburn.
R R A A N N Geoff Bennett Nonexecutive director Malcolm Gillies Nonexecutive director Remuneration Committee Audit Committee Nomination Committee N 22 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Corporate governance Principles of corporate governance The Board appreciates the value of good corporate governance not only in the areas of accountability and risk management but also as a positive contribution to business prosperity.
It believes that corporate governance involves more than a simple box ticking approach to establish whether a company has met the requirements of a number of specific rules and regulations.
Rather the issue is one of applying corporate governance principles including those set out in the Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies published by the Quoted Companies Alliance in a sensible and pragmatic fashion having regard to the individual circumstances of a particular companys business.
The key objective is to enhance and protect shareholder value.
Board structure The Board is responsible to shareholders for the proper management of the Group.
A Statement of Directors Responsibilities in respect of the financial statements is set out on page 26.
The nonexecutive directors have a particular responsibility to ensure that the strategies proposed by the executive directors are fully considered.
All nonexecutive directors receive a fixed fee for their services.
To enable the Board to discharge its duties all directors have full and timely access to all relevant information and there is a procedure for all directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the expense of the Group.
The
Board is responsible for overall Group strategy approval of major capital expenditure projects and consideration of significant financing matters.
The following Committees which have written terms of reference deal with specific aspects of the Groups affairs Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is responsible for making recommendations to the Board on the Group and the Companys framework of executive remuneration and its cost.
The Committee determines the contract terms remuneration and other benefits for each of the executive directors including performancerelated bonus schemes pension rights and compensation payments.
The
Board itself determines the remuneration of the nonexecutive directors.
The Committee comprises three nonexecutive directors David Evans Malcolm Gillies and Geoff Bennett.
It is chaired by Malcolm Gillies.
Audit and Risk Committee The Audit and Risk Committee comprises three nonexecutive directors David Evans Geoff Bennett and Malcolm Gillies and is chaired by David Evans.
In light of the passing of nonexecutive director Kevin Wilson who previously held the Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee it was considered an appropriate interim measure by the Board to appoint David Evans nonexecutive Chairman as the Chair of this Committee.
Geoff Bennett has taken over from David Evans as the Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee since the year end.
Its prime tasks are to review the scope of the external audit to receive regular reports from RSM UK Audit LLP and to review the half yearly and annual accounts before they are presented to the Board focusing in particular on accounting policies and areas of management judgement and estimation.
The Committee is responsible for monitoring the controls which are in force to ensure the integrity of the information reported to shareholders.
The Committee acts as a forum for discussion of internal control issues and contributes to the Boards review of the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems and processes.
It advises the Board on the appointment of external auditors and on their remuneration for both audit and nonaudit work and discusses the nature and scope of the audit with the external auditors.
It reviews and monitors the independence of the auditors especially with regard to nonaudit work.
The Audit and Risk Committee met to consider the reports of the auditors prior to the submission of the annual financial statements to the Board.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee comprises three nonexecutive directors David Evans Malcolm Gillies and Geoff Bennett and is chaired by Malcolm Gillies.
Its duties include the review of the structure size and composition of the Board including skills knowledge experience and diversity succession planning review of leadership needs and identification evaluation and nomination of candidates to fill Board vacancies as necessary.
Internal control The directors are responsible for the Groups system of internal control and reviewing its effectiveness.
The Board has designed the Groups system of internal control in order to provide the directors with reasonable assurance that its assets are safeguarded that transactions are authorised and properly recorded and that material errors and irregularities are either prevented or would be detected within a timely period.
However no system of internal control can eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives or provide absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The key elements of the control system in operation are the Board meets regularly with a formal schedule of matters for decision and has put in place an organisational structure with clear lines of responsibility defined and with appropriate delegation of authority the subsidiaries boards also meet regularly with a formal schedule of matters for decision and there are procedures for the planning approval and monitoring of capital expenditure and information systems for monitoring the Groups financial performance against approved budgets and forecasts.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 23 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc The Audit and Risk Committee receives reports from the external auditors on a regular basis and from executive directors of the Group.
The Board receives periodic reports from all Committees.
There are no significant issues disclosed in the report and financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 and up to the date of approval of the report and financial statements that have required the Board to deal with any related material internal control issues.
The Board has considered whether the Groups internal control processes would be significantly enhanced by an internal audit function and has taken the view that at the Groups current stage of development this is not a necessity.
The Board will continue to review this matter.
The Group is compliant with industry standard quality assurance measures and undergoes regular external audits to ensure that accreditation is maintained.
Relations with shareholders The Group values its dialogue with both institutional and private investors.
Effective twoway communication with the investment community is actively pursued and this encompasses issues such as performance policy and strategy.
The directors have had meetings with actual and potential investors and they will continue to do so on a regular basis.
The Group maintains an informative website containing information likely to be of interest to existing and new investors.
In addition the Group retains the services of financial PR consultants providing an additional contact point for investors.
There is also an opportunity at the Companys Annual General Meeting for individual shareholders to raise general business matters with the full Board and notice of the Companys Annual General Meeting is circulated to all shareholders before such meeting.
Going concern The directors believe that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is appropriate because they consider that the Group has considerable financial resources together with a robust sales pipeline and commitments from a number of customers.
As such the directors believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully.
The directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
Shareholder engagement calendar VARIOUS Proactive Investors videosaudio interviews throughout year
Results and investor presentation  London Annual Report published
Annual General Meeting
Trading update
Notice of halfyear results presentation
SharesCenkos  Growth and Innovation Forum
Open offer and placing
Hardman research note  ChondroMimetic Investor presentation  London
UK Investor Show conference Fundraising Conferences Meetings Presentations Publications 24 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors remuneration report Remuneration Committee The Company has a Remuneration Committee.
The Committee comprises three nonexecutive directors David Evans Malcolm Gillies and Geoff Bennett.
It is chaired by Malcolm Gillies.
Remuneration policy The policy of the Committee is to reward executive directors in line with the current remuneration of directors in comparable businesses in order to recruit motivate and retain highquality executives within a competitive marketplace thereby enhancing shareholder value.
Directors remuneration The table below summarises all directors emoluments and pension contributions.
2017 2016 Salary bonus Salary bonus and fees Pension and fees Pension D E Evans Dr K W Wilson   8000 M J Gillies 9750  10000 B G Bennett 88430 2580 78786 2364 J D Rushdy 185109 5553 Dr S White 100000 3000 100000 3000 G N Black 90000 2550 85000 2550 473289 13683 281786 7914 Following an HMRC enquiry DE Evans waived his right to his 2017 salary of 9750 and 25000 in respect of prior years and repaid all amounts due as a result of the reclassification of his total fee into salary and consultancy.
Note 19 related party transactions discloses payments made to directors for consultancy services.
Pension payments of 13683 were made on behalf of the directors to the Companys various money purchase schemes in the year ended 31 March 2017 2016 7914.
Directors share options At 31 March 2017 the following directors held options over the shares of the Company At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016 Date exercisable Expiry date D E Evans 4050000 4050000 29 March 2013 28 March 2023 J D Rushdy granted December 2015 3300000 3300000 15 March 2018 14 March 2025 J D Rushdy granted July 2016 2700000  14 July 2016 13 July 2026 G N Black 1000000 1000000 1 January 2017 23 November 2024 Jamal Rushdy who was appointed as a director on 3 May 2016 was granted options over 3300000 shares on 15 December 2015 as an employee.
Details of the share options are covered in notes 18 and 20.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 25 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Directors report The directors submit their report and consolidated financial statements of Collagen Solutions plc for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Principal activities The principal activity of the Company is as a holding company.
The principal activity of the Group is the supply development and manufacture of medicalgrade collagen components and biomaterials for use in regenerative medicine medical devices and invitro diagnostics.
Strategic Report The following matters are dealt with in the Strategic Report on page 13 review of the business corporate social responsibility and employee involvement.
Results and dividends The trading results for the year and the Groups financial position at the end of the year are shown in the attached financial statements.
The directors do not recommend a final dividend.
At the date of acquisition of Southern Lights Biomaterials the Group made a provision of 1.7 million for the contingent consideration payable.
This provision was made on the basis of the best estimate of the outcome of the earnout revenues under the sale and purchase agreement which provides for a maximum payout of 1.97 million on revenues to 31 March 2018 at the exchange rate on acquisition.
The provision is recorded at 1.84 million at 31 March 2017.
Directors
The directors of the Company during the year are listed below David Evans Malcolm Gillies Geoff Bennett Jamal Rushdy appointed 3 May 2016 Dr Stewart White resigned 30 June 2017 and Gill Black.
Directors and officers insurance cover is provided by the Company.
At 31 March 2017 the directors had beneficial interests in the Companys shares as listed below At At 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Class of share Number Number D E Evans Ordinary shares of 1p each 38494554 13888730 B G Bennett Ordinary shares of 1p each 6325988 6325988 J Rushdy Ordinary shares of 1p each 1000000 Dr S White Ordinary shares of 1p each 6574511 3464327 M J Gillies Ordinary shares of 1p each 3653000 1653000 G N Black Ordinary shares of 1p each 857143 357143 There are 500000 deferred shares of 9p in issue at 31 March 2017 and directors interests are held as follows David Evans  125000 and Malcolm Gillies  250000.
The deferred shares do not confer any voting rights.
Substantial shareholdings As at 30 June 2017 other than the directors beneficial interests there were the following substantial shareholdings Class of share Number Seneca Partners Ordinary shares of 1p each 42955000 Calculus Capital Ordinary shares of 1p each 30714000 Rathbone Investment Management Ordinary shares of 1p each 15956250 Livingbridge Ordinary shares of 1p each 15000000 Helium Rising Stars Fund Ordinary shares of 1p each 13014000 NVM Private Equity Ordinary shares of 1p each 12730000 Legal and General Ordinary shares of 1p each 10000000 Share capital On 9 September 2016 217475 ordinary shares were issued to Orthomimetics Limited as part of the consideration paid by the Company for ChondroMimetic assets.
A further 217475 ordinary shares are required to be issued by the Company under the asset purchase agreement to satisfy the consideration of 25353 on 11 September 2017.
On 9 September 2016 8 million ordinary shares were issued as part of the deferred consideration payable to the vendors of Collagen Solutions UK Limited.
A further 8 million ordinary shares were issued on 30 March 2017 as the final deferred consideration payable to these vendors.
On 6 March 2017 136677787 ordinary shares were issued as part of a placing and open offer for up to 159724257 ordinary shares.
The total number of issued ordinary shares at 31 March 2017 was 324299077.
The total number of deferred shares at 31 March 2017 was 500000.
26 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Research and development The Group invests in research and development in the UK the US and New Zealand and collaborates with partners and academia.
In the opinion of the directors continuity of investment in this area is essential for the maintenance of the Groups market position and for future growth.
Supplier payment policy It is Group policy to agree and clearly communicate the terms of payment as part of the commercial arrangements negotiated with suppliers and then to pay according to those terms based upon the timely receipt of an accurate invoice.
At 31 March 2017 average creditor days were 39 days 2016 50 days.
Charitable and political contributions 1393 of charitable donations were made by the Group in the year ended 31 March 2017.
No political donations were made during the period.
Statement as to disclosure of information to auditors The directors who were in office on the date of approval of these financial statements have confirmed that as far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditors are unaware.
Each of the directors have confirmed that they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that it has been communicated to the auditors.
Details of financial risk management objectives and policies including exposure to price risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow risk are shown in the Strategic Report on page 17.
Directors responsibilities in the preparation of the financial statements The directors are responsible for preparing the Strategic Report the Directors Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare Group and Company financial statements for each financial year.
The directors are required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange to prepare Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU and have elected under company law to prepare the Company financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
The financial statements are required by law and IFRSs adopted by the EU to present fairly the financial position of the Group and the Company and the financial performance of the Group.
The
Companies Act 2006 provides in relation to such financial statements that references in the relevant part of that Act to financial statements giving a true and fair view are references to their achieving a fair presentation.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing the Group and Company financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs adopted by the EU and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Collagen Solutions plc website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Annual General Meeting The notice convening the Annual General Meeting to be held at 11.00am on 30 August 2017 at 3 Robroyston Oval Nova Business Park Glasgow G33 1AP can be found on the Companys website.
Auditors
A resolution to reappoint RSM UK Audit LLP as auditors will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
On behalf of the Board Gill Black Chief Financial Officer 10 July 2017 Directors report continued 27 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 28 Independent auditors report Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Consolidated statement of financial position Company statement of financial position Consolidated statement of changes in equity Company statement of changes in equity 34 Consolidated statement of cash flows 35 Company statement of cash flows 36 Notes to the financial statements 61 Notice of Annual General Meeting 64 Officers and professional advisers FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 28 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Independent auditors report to the members of Collagen Solutions plc Opinion on financial statements We have audited the group and parent company financial statements the financial statements on pages 29 to 60.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and the parents affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the groups loss for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at httpwww. rc.
Opinion on other matter prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and based on the work undertaken in the course of our audit the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As more fully explained in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities on page 26 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards APBs Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Alan Aitchison Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of RSM UK Audit LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants Third Floor Centenary House 69 Wellington Street
G2 6HG 10 July 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 29 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Before Separately Before Separately separately identifiable separately identifiable identifiable items Total identifiable items Total items note 4 2017 items note 4 2016
Revenue 3945787  3945787 3129862  3129862 Cost of sales 983632  983632 811327  811327 Gross profit 2962155  2962155 2318535  2318535 Sharebased compensation 50585  50585 35831  35831 Administrative expenses 3596707 227155 3369552 2473689 152365 2321324 Selling and marketing costs 718986  718986 333426  333426 Other income 144762  144762 114395  114395 Operating loss before interest tax depreciation and amortisation 1259361 227155 1032206 410016 152365 257651 Amortisation and depreciation 449427  449427 346569  346569 Finance income 5 2841  2841 10262  10262 Finance expense 5 134958  134958 272332  272332 Loss before taxation 2 1840905 227155 1613750 1018655 152365 866290 Taxation 6 141928  141928 114174  114174 Loss for the year 1982833 227155 1755678 1132829 152365 980464 Attributable to Owners of the parent 1934420 227155 1707265 1132829 152365 980464 Noncontrolling interest 48413  48413 1982833 227155 1755678 1132829 152365 980464 Currency translation difference 1392495  1392495 113585  113585 Other comprehensive incomeloss 1392495  1392495 113585  113585 Total comprehensive loss for the year 590338 227155 363183 1246414 152365 1094049 Attributable to Owners of the parent 554162 227155 327007 1246414 152365 1094049 Noncontrolling interest 36176  36176 590338 227155 363183 1246414 152365 1094049 Basic and diluted loss per share 7 0.95p 0.57p Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 March 2017 30 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 2016
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 8 14581893 12971078 Property plant and equipment 9 1142741 1160852 15724634 14131930 Current assets Inventories 11 313395 264074 Trade and other receivables 12 806566 636044 Cash and cash equivalents 13 8978150 2493146 10098111 3393264 Total assets 25822745 17525194 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent company Share capital 20 3287991 1759038 Share premium 14851092 7892330 Sharebased payment reserve 137809 87224 Shares to be issued reserve 131934 2050706 Merger reserve 4531798 4531798 Translation reserve 1539676 159418 Retained deficit 4291319 2584054 20188981 13896460 Equity attributable to nonequity holders of the parent company Noncontrolling interest reserve 97157 Total equity 20286138 13896460 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax 16 221847 253112 Other financial liabilities 14 1289357 2437100 Borrowings 1419 1879899 62837 3391103 2753049 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 14 1000086 829354 Income tax liabilities 58530 Other financial liabilities 14 1060484 25353 Borrowings 19 26404 20978 2145504 875685 Total liabilities 5536607 3628734 Total liabilities and equity 25822745 17525194 These financial statements were approved by the Board of directors and authorised for issue on 10 July 2017 and are signed on its behalf by Gill Black David Evans Chief Financial Officer
Company number Consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 March 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 31 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Company statement of financial position as at 31 Marchtel
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Financial asset investments 10 12884905 12684905 Intangible assets 8 117789 75399 Property plant and equipment 9 47829 77607 13050523 12837911 Current assets Trade and other receivables 12 4114467 2500560 Cash and cash equivalents 13 7776079 1321938 11890546 3822498 Total assets 24941069 16660409 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent company Share capital 20 3287991 1759038 Share premium 14851092 7892330 Sharebased payment reserve 137809 87224 Shares to be issued reserve 131934 2050706 Merger reserve 4531798 4531798 Retained deficit 2314493 1602290 Total equity 20626131 14718806 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 14 1833419 Other financial liabilities 14 955068 1754665 2788487 1754665 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 14 645913 186938 Other financial liabilities 14 880538 1526451 186938 Total liabilities 4314938 1941603 Total liabilities and equity 24941069 16660409 These financial statements were approved by the Board of directors and authorised for issue on 10 July 2017 and are signed on its behalf by Gill Black David Evans Chief Financial Officer
Company number  32 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Sharebased Shares to Non Share Share payment be issued Merger Translation Retained controlling Total capital premium reserve reserve reserve reserve deficit Total interest equity At 1 April 2015 1754689 7845973 51393  4531798 273003 1603590 12853266  12853266 Issue of shares on acquisition of assets 4349 46357      50706  50706 Total transactions with owners in their capacity as owners 4349 46357      50706  50706
Shares to be issued to Collagen Solutions UK vendors as contingent consideration    2000000    2000000  2000000 Shares to be issued on acquisition of assets    50706    50706  50706 Loss for the year       980464 980464  980464 Currency translation difference      113585  113585  113585 Loss and total comprehensive loss for the year      113585 980464 1094049  1094049 At 1 April 2016 1759038 7892330 87224 2050706 4531798 159418 2584054 13896460  13896460 Issue of shares for cash 1366778 5467111      6833889  6833889 Share issue costs  371527      371527  371527 Issue of shares to Collagen Solutions UK vendors 160000 1840000  2000000 Issue of shares on acquisition of assets 2175 23178  25353 Total transactions with owners in their capacity as owners 1528953 6958762  2025353    6462362  6462362
Norgine warrants to be issued    106581    106581  106581
Loss for the year       1707265 1707265 48413 1755678 Currency translation difference      1380258  1380258 12237 1392495 Loss and total comprehensive loss for the year      1380258 1707265 327007 36176 363183 At 31 March 2017 3287991 14851092 137809 131934 4531798 1539676 4291319 20188981 97157 20286138 Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 March 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 33 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 March 2017 Sharebased Shares to Share Share payment be issued Merger Retained capital premium reserve reserve reserve deficit Total At 1 April 2015 1754689 7845973 51393  4531798 996042 13187811 Issue of shares on acquisition of assets 4349 46357     50706 Total transactions with owners in their capacity as owners 4349 46357     50706 Sharebased compensation   35831    35831 Shares to be issued to Collagen Solutions UK vendors as contingent consideration    2000000   2000000 Shares to be issued on acquisition of assets    50706   50706 Loss and total comprehensive loss for the year      606248 606248 At 1 April 2016 1759038 7892330 87224 2050706 4531798 1602290 14718806 Issue of shares for cash 1366778 5467111     6833889 Share issue costs  371527     371527 Issue of shares to Collagen Solutions UK vendors 160000 1840000  2000000 Issue of shares on acquisition of assets 2175 23178  25353 Total transactions with owners in their capacity as owners 1528953 6958762  2025353   6462362 Sharebased compensation   50585    50585 Norgine warrants to be issued    106581   106581 Loss and total comprehensive loss for the year      712203 712203 At 31 March 2017 3287991 14851092 137809 131934 4531798 2314493 20626131 34 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 2016 Cash flow from operating activities Loss before taxation 1613750 866290 Sharebased compensation 50585 35831 Depreciation 234390 175039 Amortisation 215037 171530 Decrease in contingent consideration 325390 192393 Finance expense 134958 272332 Finance income 2841 10261 Lossgain on sale of property plant and equipment 993 689 Increase in inventories 54345 47773 Increase in trade and other receivables 212571 9954 Increase in trade and other payables 190947 479308 Cash used ingenerated from operations 1381987 6680 Interest paid 7082 7844 Taxation paid 104941 193657 Net cash used in operations 1494010 194821 Investing activities Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 414 746 Payments to acquire property plant and equipment 137324 464327 Payments to acquire licensed IP and patents and development costs 341502 206692 Interest received 2841 10261 Net cash used in investing activities 475571 660012 Financing activities Net proceeds on issue of ordinary shares 6462362 Net proceeds from Bond issue 1940000 Repayment of related party loan 10931 25591 Net cash generated fromused in financing activities 8391431 25591 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 6421850 880424 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on the balance of cash held in foreign currencies 63154 17786 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 6485004 898210 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the financial year 2493146 3391356 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the financial year 8978150 2493146 Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 March 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 35 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Company statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 Marchtel Cash flow from operating activities Loss before taxation 712203 606248 Sharebased compensation 50585 35831 Depreciation 22704 17041 Amortisation 11981 Finance expense 90000 205878 Finance income 2482 8574 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 7996 88219 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 66360 106746 Decrease in contingent consideration 9058 40028 Net cash used in operations 622829 201135 Investing activities Payments to acquire property plant and equipment 8592 80697 Payments to acquire intangibles 38705 14567 Interest received 2482 8574 Investment in Cre8ive Collagen Limited 200000 Net cash used in investing activities 244815 86690 Financing activities Net proceeds on issue of ordinary shares 6462362 Net proceeds from Bond issue 1940000 Movement in Group borrowings 1080577 1370746 Net cash generated fromused in financing activities 7321785 1370746 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 6454141 1658571 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the financial year 1321938 2980509 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the financial year 7776079 1321938 36 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS General information Collagen Solutions plc is incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The locations and principal activities of the subsidiaries are set out in note 10.
The registered office is co Shepherd and Wedderburn LLP Condor House 10 St.
Pauls Churchyard London EC4M 8AL.
The financial statements of Collagen Solutions plc and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 March 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of directors on 10 July 2017.
Accounting policies Basis of preparation The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs including IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRICs interpretations as endorsed by the European Union EU and in accordance with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRSs.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for certain financial liabilities incorporated at fair value.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in sterling which is also the functional currency of the Company.
The principal accounting policies adopted are set out below.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income from the date of their acquisition until their date of disposal.
The Group uses the acquisition method of accounting to account for business combinations.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is the fair values of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred and the equity interests issued by the Group.
The consideration transferred includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
On an acquisition by acquisition basis the Group recognises any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the acquirees net assets.
The excess of the consideration transferred and the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired are recorded as goodwill.
If this is less than the fair value of the net assets of the subsidiary acquired in the case of a bargain purchase the difference is recognised directly in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Intragroup balance transactions and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
The Company Statement of Comprehensive Income has not been disclosed in accordance with section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The loss of the parent company for the year amounted to 712203 2016 606248.
Going concern As part of its going concern review the Board has followed the guidelines published by the Financial Reporting Council entitled Guidance on the Going Concern Basis of Accounting and Reporting on Solvency and Liquidity Risks .
In determining the appropriate basis of preparing the financial statements the directors are required to consider whether the Company can continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future being a period of not less than 12 months from the date of the approval of the financial statements.
As at 31 March 2017 the Group had cash and cash equivalents of 8.98 million and net current assets of 7.95 million.
Management prepares detailed working capital forecasts which are reviewed by the Board on a regular basis.
Cash flow forecasts and projections have been prepared through to 30 September 2018 and take into account sensitivities on revenues and costs.
Having made relevant and appropriate enquiries including consideration of the Companys and the Groups current cash resources and the working capital forecasts the directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group will have adequate cash resources to continue to meet the requirements of the business for at least the next 12 months.
Accordingly the Board continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Revenue
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for goods and services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts and other salesrelated taxes.
Depending on the contractual terms revenue is recognised based on the level of work completed to date in respect of each individual element of the contract.
Laboratory services are recognised on a feeforservice basis.
The difference between the amount of revenue recognised and the amount invoiced on a particular contract is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as deferred income.
Normally amounts become billable in advance on the achievement of certain milestones in accordance with agreed payment schedules included in the contract or on submission of appropriate detail.
Any cash payments received as a result of this advance billing are not representative of revenue earned on the contract as revenues are recognised over the period in which the specified contractual obligations are fulfilled.
Amounts included in deferred income are expected to be recognised within one year and are included within current liabilities.
In the event of contract termination if the value of the work performed and recognised as revenue is greater than aggregate milestone billings at the date of termination cancellation clauses provide that the Group will be paid for all work performed to the termination date.
Notes to the financial statements FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 37 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Accounting policies continued Government grants The Group receives government grants in relation to research and development business development and employment costs.
Government grants receivable for the reimbursement of costs charged to the income statement are credited to the income statement within other income in the year in which the costs are incurred.
Segmental reporting The Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker the Chief Executive Officer is responsible for resource allocation and the assessment of performance.
In the performance of this role the Chief Executive Officer reviews the Groups activities in aggregate.
The Group has therefore determined that it has only one reportable segment under IFRS 8 Operating Segments which is biomaterials.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising on consolidation represents the excess of the consideration transferred and the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities of the acquiree at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is included in intangible assets.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested annually for impairment and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
See note 8 for detailed assumptions and methodology.
Impairment losses are not subsequently reversed.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units for the purpose of impairment testing.
The allocation is made to those cashgenerating units or groups of cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the business combination in which the goodwill arose identified according to operating segment irrespective of whether other assets or liabilities of the acquiree are assigned to those units.
Each unit or group of units to which the goodwill is allocated shall represent the lowest level within the entity at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes and not be larger than an operating segment.
Contingent consideration is measured at its acquisitiondate fair value and is included as part of the consideration transferred.
Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration that qualify as measurement adjustments are adjusted retrospectively with corresponding adjustments against goodwill.
The subsequent accounting for changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration that do not qualify as measurement period adjustments depends on how the contingent consideration is classified.
Contingent consideration that is classified as an asset or a liability is remeasured at subsequent reporting dates with the corresponding gain or loss being recognised in profit or loss for the relevant financial period.
Purchased goodwill arising on the acquisition of a business and its net assets represents the excess of the consideration and the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities of that business at the date of acquisition.
It is included within intangible assets and subject to annual impairment reviews noted above.
Intangible assets Intangible assets acquired as part of a business combination are recognised outside goodwill if the asset is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights and its fair value can be measured reliably.
Intangible assets are stated at cost net of any amortisation and any provision for impairment.
Amortisation is calculated so as to write off the cost of an asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Customer contracts and relationships  over two to ten years depending on terms of contract on a straightline basis Licensed IP and patents  over estimated useful lives of ten to 25 years Expenditure on research or on the research phase of an internal project is recognised as an expense when it is incurred.
Expenditure arising from the Groups development is recognised only if all of the following conditions are met an asset is created that can be identified such as new processes or products it is probable that the asset created will generate future economic benefits the development cost of the asset can be measured reliably the Group has the intention to complete the asset and the ability and intention to use or sell it the product or process is technically and commercially feasible and sufficient resources are available to complete the development and to either sell or use the asset.
Where no internally generated intangible asset can be recognised development expenditure is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
38 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Cost comprises purchase price and other directly attributable costs.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the cost or valuation of assets to their residual values over their estimated useful lives using the straightline method or diminishing value over the following estimated useful lives Leasehold property improvements  over life of lease Plant equipment and machinery  8%60% The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each reporting date.
An assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Impairment
At each reporting date the Group reviews the carrying amounts of its property plant and equipment and intangibles including goodwill to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit CGU to which the asset belongs.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or CGU is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset or CGU is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised as an expense immediately.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset or CGU is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset or CGU in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised as income immediately.
Detailed assumptions with regard to discount growth and inflation rates are set out in note 8 to the accounts.
Investments
Investments are initially recorded at cost.
The subsequent measurement of contingent consideration is recognised through the income statement.
The fair value of the contingent consideration is recognised by discounting the estimated sums payable by the discount rate of equity financing.
Unwinding of the discount is charged to finance costs over the relevant period.
The fair value of the share price at date of acquisition for shares issued as part of the consideration is reflected in the cost of the investment.
Investments are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value after making due allowance for obsolete and slowmoving items.
Inventories comprise completed products raw materials and work in process.
The cost of inventories is calculated on a weighted average cost method.
The cost included within inventories comprises direct materials and where applicable direct labour costs and an attributable portion of production overheads in bringing them to their present location and condition.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs of completion and selling expenses.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised when the Group has become a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Trade receivables Trade receivables classified as loans and receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of receivables.
The amount of provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the effective interest rate.
Trade payables Trade payables classified as other liabilities are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 39 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Accounting policies continued Financial instruments continued Financial liabilities Financial liabilities are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An instrument will be classified as a financial liability when there is a contractual obligation to deliver cash or another financial asset to another enterprise.
Instruments that are settled through the delivery of a variable number of equity shares are classified as financial liabilities.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at bank and in hand deposits held at call with banks and other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
For the purposes of the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as defined above net of any outstanding bank overdraft when it forms an integral part of the Groups cash management.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at the fair value of proceeds received net of transaction costs incurred.
Borrowings are subsequently carried at amortised cost.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the balance sheet date.
Borrowing costs are expensed in the consolidated Group income statement under the heading finance costs.
Arrangement and facility fees together with bank charges are charged to the income statement under the heading administrative expenses.
Contingent consideration Contingent consideration amounts arising from acquisitions are recorded at fair value having regard to the relevant discount rate of equity capital.
The finance costs arising from unwinding the instrument over the period are charged through the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Amounts are reviewed annually against criteria for payment set out within the relevant sale and purchase agreements.
Derecognition of financial instruments The derecognition of financial assets takes place when the Group no longer controls the contractual rights that comprise the financial instrument which is normally the case when the instrument is sold or all of the cash flows attributable to the instrument are passed through to an independent third party.
Leasing commitments Rentals payable under operating leases where substantially all the benefits and risks remain with the lessor are charged to income on a straightline basis over the term of the relevant lease except where another more systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic benefits from the lease asset are consumed.
Foreign currencies Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in sterling which is the Companys functional and the Groups presentation currency.
Amounts included within noncurrent assets in respect of amounts loaned to foreign subsidiaries have no fixed terms of repayment and there is no intention or expectation that repayment of such amounts will be demanded.
Transactions in overseas currencies are translated at the exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The results and financial position of subsidiaries that have a functional currency different from the presentation currency are translated into the presentation currency as follows assets and liabilities for each reporting date are translated at the closing rate at that date and income and expenses are translated at average exchange rates unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses are translated at the rate on the dates of the transactions.
All resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income in the translation reserve.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign entity are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entity and translated at the closing rate.
40 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued
Current tax is the expected corporation tax payable or receivable in respect of the taxable profitloss for the financial period using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date less any adjustments to tax payable or receivable in respect of previous periods.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities included in the financial statements and the amounts used for tax purposes that will result in an obligation to pay more or a right to pay less or to receive more tax with the following exceptions No provision is made relating to the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit other than those acquired as part of a business combination.
Provision is made for deferred tax that would arise on all taxable temporary differences associated with investments except where the Group can control the reversal of the temporary differences.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that the directors consider that it is probable that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying temporary differences and unused tax losses and credits can be deducted.
Deferred tax is measured on an undiscounted basis at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the asset is realised or liability is settled based on tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that it will result in an outflow of economic benefits that can be reliably estimated.
Sharebased payment transactions The Group has applied the requirements of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment.
The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payment transactions to certain employees directors and suppliers.
Equitysettled sharebased payment transactions are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of equitysettled sharebased payment transactions takes into account any nonvesting conditions and is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of share options that will eventually vest and a corresponding amount is credited to the sharebased payment reserve.
Nonvesting conditions which are not satisfied during the vesting period are treated as cancellations and any remaining expense is accelerated in the period of failure.
Sharebased payments associated with share options granted to employees of subsidiaries of the parent company are treated as an expense of the subsidiary company to be settled by equity of the parent company.
The sharebased payment expense increases the value of the parent companys investment in the subsidiaries and is credited to the sharebased payment reserve.
The proceeds received on exercise of share options are credited to share capital for the nominal value and the share premium account for the excess over nominal value.
Fair value is measured by use of the Trinomial Barrier Option and BlackScholes models.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effect of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
New standards amendments and interpretations adopted by the Group The following standards have been adopted by the Group for the first time for the financial year beginning on or after 1 April 2016 they do not materially impact the Group results Annual improvements 20102012 Annual improvements 20122014 Amendment to IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements on acquisition of an interest in a joint operation Amendment to IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets on depreciation and amortisation and Amendments to IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements and IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 41 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Accounting policies continued New standards amendments and interpretations issued but not effective for the financial year beginning 1 April 2016 and not early adopted A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations have been endorsed for annual periods beginning after 1 January 2017 noted below and have not been early adopted in preparing these consolidated financial statements IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
None of these are expected to have a significant effect on the consolidated financial statements of the Group however we are undertaking a review of the Groups contracts with customers in preparation of the adoption of IFRS 15.
A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations have been issued but are not yet endorsed for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017 noted below and have not been adopted in preparing these consolidated financial statements Annual improvements 20142016 cycle Amendment to IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments on classification and measurement of sharebased payment transactions Amendment to IFRS 7 Statement of Cash Flows on disclosure initiative Amendment to IAS 12 Income Taxes on recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses Amendments to IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements and IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures on the sale or contribution of assets postponed and IFRS 16 Leases.
With the exception of IFRS 16 none of these amendments are expected to have a significant effect on the consolidated financial statements of the Group.
To prepare for the adoption of IFRS 16 we are undertaking a review of the Groups leasing arrangements.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements The preparation of the financial information in conformity with IFRSs requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities income and expenses.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances the results of which form the basis of making the judgements about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are both readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
These assumptions include but are not limited to the following areas Contingent consideration Contingent consideration is measured at its acquisitiondate fair value and is included as part of the consideration transferred.
Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration that qualify as measurement adjustments are adjusted retrospectively with corresponding adjustments against goodwill.
The subsequent accounting for changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration that do not qualify as measurement period adjustments depends on how the contingent consideration is classified.
Contingent consideration that is classified as an asset or a liability is remeasured at subsequent reporting dates with the corresponding gain or loss being recognised in profit or loss for the relevant financial period.
Amounts provided represent managements best estimate of the likely outcome to be paid out under the individual earnout provisions.
Unwinding discount costs applied to the contingent considerations in relation to acquisitions made are charged through the income statement and included within finance costs.
42 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Critical accounting estimates and judgements continued Impairment of goodwill The amount of goodwill initially recognised is dependent on the allocation of the purchase price to the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
The determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities is based to a considerable extent on managements judgement.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment.
The test considers future cash flow projections of cashgenerating units that give rise to the goodwill.
Where the discounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of goodwill an impairment charge is recognised for the difference.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding the discount rates growth rates and expected changes to revenue and direct costs during the period.
These are detailed in note 8.
Fair values of acquired intangibles In respect of business combinations the purchase price is allocated to the identifiable assets and liabilities of the acquired entity.
The Group makes judgements and estimates in relation to the fair value allocation of the purchase price and whether any value should be attributable to assets and liabilities not recognised in the acquirees individual financial statements such as customer contracts and relationships.
If any unallocated portion is positive it is recognised as goodwill.
The recognition criteria in IAS 38 are applied to intangibles before allocating to goodwill in relation to development expenditure.
Managements significant judgements in relation to customer contracts and relationships and patents as intangible assets are set out in note 8.
Managements judgement is also required to estimate the useful lives of intangible assets having reference to future economic benefits expected to be derived from the use of the asset.
Economic benefits are based on the fair values of estimated future cash flows.
Deferred tax Taxation management judgement is required to determine the amount of tax assets that can be recognised based upon the likely timing and level of future taxable profits together with an assessment of future tax planning strategies.
Research and development Careful judgement by the directors is applied when deciding whether the recognition requirements for development costs have been met.
This is necessary as the economic success of any product development is uncertain until such time as technical viability has been proven and commercialisation is likely to be achieved.
Judgements are based on the information available at each reporting date which includes progress with testing and data and commercial feasibility.
Activities in relation to research and development are continuously monitored by the directors.
1 Segmental reporting 2017 2016 Revenue information by geographical location Europe Middle East and Africa 425269 146744 North America 1924540 1808103 Asia 1595978 1175015 3945787 3129862 Major customers Three customers individually represented more than 10% of Group revenue at 25% and 11% in Asia and 18% in North America 2016 three customers  30% in Asia and 18% and 11% in North America.
These revenues arise from the only operating segment which is biomaterials.
The Group does not manage its business by reference to separate geographical locations.
Consequently an analysis of net assets and operating profit by location is not monitored and is therefore not provided.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 43 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 2 Loss from operations Loss from operations is stated after charging 2017 2016 Amortisation 215037 171530 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 234390 175039 Lossgain on sale of fixed assets 993 689 Auditors remuneration as auditors 43950 40965 other services 18585 11710 Operating lease costs land and buildings property plant and equipment 209707 169125 Foreign exchange lossesgains 190739 99527 Research and development 593986 367496 Amounts payable to RSM UK Audit LLP and their associates in respect of both audit and nonaudit services Audit services audit of Company 16900 16525 audit of subsidiary undertakings 27050 24440 43950 40965 Nonaudit services Fees payable to the Companys auditors and their associates for other services tax advisory services 14425 6750 tax compliance services 4160 4960 18585 11710 3 Particulars of employees The average number of staff employed by the Group including directors during the financial year amounted to 2017 2016 Number Number Operations 23 18 Administration 12 8 Management The aggregate payroll costs including directors emoluments of the above were 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 2180394 1358399 Social security costs 123118 104972 Pension costs 57399 33739 Sharebased compensation 50585 35830 2411496 1532940 44 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3 Particulars of employees continued Directors emoluments The directors aggregate emoluments in respect of qualifying services were 2017 2016 Emoluments receivable 473289 263786 Fees paid to third parties  90000 Pension costs 13683 7914 486972 361700 There were four directors accruing retirement benefits with money purchase schemes during the year 2016 three.
The emoluments of the highest paid director were 2017 2016 Emoluments 185109 100000 Contributions to defined contribution pension scheme 5553 3000 Total emoluments 190662 103000 There were no share options exercised at 31 March 2017.
4 Separately identifiable items 2017 2016 Included within administrative expenses Release of contingent consideration provision 553063 152365 Foreign exchange loss Legal costs  Bond facility arrangement 227155 152365 The release of the contingent consideration provision in the year ended 31 March 2017 relates to the reassessment of the earnouts payable for the acquisitions of Collagen Solutions LLC and Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited.
The release in the year ended 31 March 2016 relates to the reassessment of the earnouts payable for the acquisition of Collagen Solutions LLC.
The foreign exchange translation loss relates to the translation of the earnout payable in New Zealand dollars to sterling for the acquisition of Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited.
The legal costs in relation to setting up the Norgine Bond facility arrangement during the year ended 31 March 2017 have been expensed in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income and are shown as a separately identifiable item.
The issue costs in relation to the drawdown of tranche A of the Bond facility on 31 March 2017 have been netted off against the proceeds of the Bond received and its carrying value as disclosed in note 14.
5 Finance expenseincome 2017 2016 Unwinding of discount  contingent consideration 127876 264488 Interest charged on related party loan note 19 6915 7143 Other interest expense 167 701 134958 272332 Interest income on cash deposits 2841 10262 132117 262070 Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 45 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 6 Taxation 2017 2016 Current tax Current tax on profit arising in overseas subsidiary 171291 146tel Deferred tax note 16 Deferred tax credit associated with amortisation of fair value intangibles 30304 30304 Origination and reversal of temporary differences 941 2115 Total deferred tax credit 29363 32419 Total tax charge 141928 114174 The charge for the year can be reconciled to the loss per the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income as follows 2017 2016 Loss on ordinary activities before tax 1613750 866290 Tax at the UK corporation tax rate of 20% 2016 20% 322750 173258 Impact of different tax rates in other jurisdictions 53072 41092 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 102814 12978 Amortisation of goodwill deductible for tax purposes  US 36201 32566 Prior period adjustments 76379 27040 Income not assessed for tax purposes 130650 47780 Tax losses not recognised as a deferred tax asset 399264 286668 Tax charge for the period 141928 114174 Unrecognised deferred tax asset 399264 286668 The unrecognised deferred tax asset relates to losses.
Whilst the directors consider that there is a significant stream of income in the pipeline that may come to fruition they consider that there is sufficient uncertainty surrounding the timing of those cash flows to warrant not recognising a deferred tax asset.
During the years ended 31 March 2017 and 31 March 2016 Collagen Solutions UK Limited created and surrendered tax losses under research and development expenditure claims.
A payment of 60534 in relation to the year ended 31 March 2016 was received during the year ended 31 March 2017 and has been included in other revenues in accordance with IAS 20 Accounting for Government Grants.
Payments of 43168 for the year ended 31 March 2015 and 28699 for the period ended 31 March 2014 were receivable at 31 March 2016.
7 Loss per share The calculation of basic loss attributable to the equity holders of the parent is based on losses of 1755678 2016 980464 and 185776383 2016 171210108 ordinary shares being the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year.
The loss for the year and the weighted average number of ordinary shares for calculating the diluted loss per share for the year ended 31 March 2017 are identical to those for the basic loss per share.
This is because the outstanding share options would have the effect of reducing the loss per ordinary share and would therefore not be dilutive under the terms of IAS 33.
46 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 8 Intangible assets
Goodwill on Purchased contracts and Patents and acquisition goodwill relationships licensed IP
Group
Cost
At 1 April 2015 7998015 3278477 1391145 310255 12977892 Additions    257398 257398 Currency translation 90210 94687 30258 6453 32234 At 31 March 2016 7907805 3373164 1360887 561200 13203056
At 1 April 2015   55477 3504 58981 Charge for the year   152912 18618 171530 Currency translation   3425 4892 1467 At 31 March 2016   204964 27014 231978 Net book value At 31 March 2016 7907805 3373164 1155923 534186 12971078 Included in patents and licensed IP additions during the year ended 31 March 2016 are 105132 of ChondroMimetic assets acquired from Cambridge Enterprise
54425 was settled in cash on the signing of the asset purchase agreement 25353 was settled in September 2016 and 25353 is included in current deferred consideration payments due.
Customer
Goodwill on Purchased contracts and Patents and Other acquisition goodwill relationships licensed IP intangibles
Group
Cost
At 1 April 2016 7907805 3373164 1360887 561200  13203056 Transfers     38474 38474 Additions 133333   103362 238140 474835 Disposals     1407 1407 Currency translation 632244 496880 212064 55107 2698 1398993 At 31 March 2017 8673382 3870044 1572951 719669 277905 15113951
At 1 April 2016   204964 27014  231978 Transfers     16560 16560 Charge for the year   152913 45151 16973 215037 Currency translation   59090 6583 2810 68483 At 31 March 2017   416967 78748 36343 532058 Net book value At 31 March 2017 8673382 3870044 1155984 640921 241562 14581893 Other intangibles include computer software and website and ChondroMimetic development.
Impairment review Total goodwill of 12543426 comprises goodwill arising on acquisition of subsidiary undertakings of 8673382 and goodwill arising on the purchase of a business of 3870044.
Goodwill relates to the acquisition of Collagen Solutions UK Limited the purchase of the assets of Collagen Solutions LLC in January 2014 the acquisition of Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited in December 2014 and the investment in Cre8ive Collagen Limited in July 2016.
This goodwill has been allocated to the combined Group as a single CGU for the purposes of the impairment review since this is the lowest level within the entity at which management monitors goodwill for internal purposes.
The whole Group is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combinations through crossselling opportunities market reputation cost savings and surety of supply.
Synergies are represented by those unrecognised assets of the acquired entities that are effectively transferred to the CGU rather than by the recognised assets.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 47 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 8 Intangible assets continued Impairment review continued The impairment review involves a value in use calculation which is based on the present value of expected future cash flows of the CGU to be generated.
The key assumptions underlying the cash flow projections within the impairment review are revenue growth margins and the level of operating expenditure.
The cash flow projections are based on formally approved management cash flow projections for a fouryear period.
A terminal value is calculated based on estimated real growth rate in perpetuity of 3.6% 2016 3.5% and rate of inflation in perpetuity of 2.2% 2016 2.5% together with a pretax discount rate of 11.0% 2016 11.0%.
Key assumptions used in the growth calculations for years ended 2017 to 2019 are Gross margins between 70% and 73% Annual revenue growth  between 37% and 53% Increase in operating costs  between 2% and 11% The recoverable amount of the CGU exceeds the carrying amount of the CGU by 422.9%.
The directors consider the revenues to be the most sensitive assumption used in the impairment reviews.
A reduction in revenues in excess of 26.4% would result in the recoverable amount of the CGU being equal to its carrying amount.
Patents and licensed IP
Cost
At 1 April 2015 60832 Additions 14567 At 31 March 2016 75399
At 1 April 2015 and 31 March 2016 Net book value At 31 March 2016 75399 Patents and Other licensed IP intangibles
Company
Cost
At 1 April 2016 75399  75399 Transfers  22050 22050 Additions 5741 32964 38705 At 31 March 2017 81140 55014 136154
At 1 April 2016 Charge for the year  11981 11981 Transfers  6384 6384 At 31 March 2017  18365 18365 Net book value At 31 March 2017 81140 36649 117789 Other intangibles include computer software and website development.
48 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 9 Property plant and equipment
Leasehold equipment improvements and machinery Total
Cost
At 1 April 2015 295871 582864 878735 Additions 174369 391371 Disposals  57 57 Currency translation 14727 8763 23490 At 31 March 2016 455513 965415 1420928
At 1 April 2015 10896 74114 85010 Charge for the year 45418 129621 175039 Currency translation  27 27 At 31 March 2016 56314 203762 260076 Net book value At 31 March 2016 399199 761653 1160852
At 1 April 2016 455513 965415 1420928 Transfers  38474 38474 Additions 32635 104689 137324 Currency translation 66905 49083 115988 At 31 March 2017 555053 1080713 1635766
At 1 April 2016 56314 203762 260076 Transfers  16560 16560 Charge for the year 73696 160694 234390 Currency translation 9328 5791 15119 At 31 March 2017 139338 353687 493025 Net book value At 31 March 2017 415715 727026 1142741 Included in plant equipment and machinery additions during the year ended 31 March 2016 are 112632 of ChondroMimetic assets acquired from Orthomimetics Limited.
11220 was settled in cash and 50706 was settled in ordinary shares on the signing of the asset purchase agreement.
25353 of shares were issued in September 2016 and a further 25353 is included in the shares to be issued reserve as future shares to be issued.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 49 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 9 Property plant and equipment continued
Leasehold equipment improvements and machinery Total
Cost
At 1 April 2015  17257 17257 Additions 33662 47035 80697 At 31 March 2016 33662 64292 97954
At 1 April 2015  3306 3306 Charge for the year 5533 11508 17041 At 31 March 2016 5533 14814 20347 Net book value At 31 March 2016 28129 49478 77607
At 1 April 2016 33662 64292 97954 Additions 6507 2085 8592 Transfers  22050 22050 At 31 March 2017 40169 44327 84496
At 1 April 2016 5533 14814 20347 Transfers  6384 6384 Charge for the year 12486 10218 22704 At 31 March 2017 18019 18648 36667 Net book value At 31 March 2017 22150 25679 47829 10 Financial asset investments 2017 2016
Investments in subsidiaries Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited 6121427 6121427 ChondroMimetics Limited 100 100 Collagen Solutions UK Limited 4102122 4102122 Cre8ive Collagen Limited 200000 10423649 10223649 Loans to subsidiary undertakings 2461256 2461256 12884905 12684905 50 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 10 Financial asset investments continued Details of subsidiaries included in the consolidated financial statements are as follows
Country of rights and incorporation Holding shares held Nature of business Collagen Solutions UK Limited England Ordinary shares 100% Collagen manufacture Collagen Solutions US Inc.
ChondroMimetics Limited England Ordinary shares 100% Medical device development and manufacture Cre8ive Collagen Limited Hong Kong Ordinary shares 60% Marketing and sale of collagen products Cre8ive Collagen BioTech Beijing Co Limited held indirectly Peoples Republic of China Ordinary shares 60% Marketing and sale of collagen products Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited New Zealand Ordinary shares 100% Collagen manufacture and supply Impairment review The recoverable amount of investments is determined from value in use calculations when there is an indication of impairment.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding the discount rates growth rates and future expected changes to revenue and direct costs in relation to the particular investment and are set out in note 8.
Management estimates that there has been no impairment.
The Group prepares forecasts derived from the most recent financial budgets.
Changes in revenue and direct costs are based on managements plans to crosssell the Groups expanded range of current and pipeline products into existing customers and markets and also to exploit opportunities with new customers including extending into new market territories.
These are approved by management and cash flows are extrapolated thereafter in perpetuity.
Based on the assumptions and estimates discussed above and in note 8 management believes that no impairment provision is required.
11 Inventories 2017 2016
Raw materials 34455 42118 Work in progress 11410 73172 Consumables and finished goods for resale 267530 148784 313395 264074 Inventories expensed in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income are shown within cost of sales.
All inventories are carried at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Inventories consumed in cost of sales amounted to 791113 2016 728557.
12 Trade and other receivables Group Company Group Companytel 2016
Trade receivables 678244  403699 Other receivables 66002 41841 70516 22280 Amounts owed by Group undertakings note 19  4035288  2429377 Prepayments and accrued income 62320 37338 161829 48903 806566 4114467 636044 2500560 Included within trade receivables is 537942 2016 303765 denominated in US dollars and nil 2016 60364 denominated in NZ dollars.
140302 2016 39570 is denominated in GBP sterling.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 51 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 12 Trade and other receivables continued The amounts presented in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position are net of impairment allowances.
The ageing profile of trade receivables is shown below.
2017 2016 Current 581276 317340 3160 days old 34440 65296 6090 days old 6083 6560 Over 90 days 56445 14503 678244 403699 The directors are of the opinion that no overdue debts require impairment.
13 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash held by the Group as noted.
The carrying amount of the asset approximates the fair value.
Group balances are held in the following currencies 2017 2016 GBP sterling 8019503 1406149 Euro 402875 255197 US dollar 508471 742356 NZ dollar 29030 89444 South Korean won 18240 Hong Kong dollar 31 8978150 2493146 Cash and cash equivalents held by the Company were 7776079 2016 1321938.
Balances were held in GBP sterling of 7756651 2016 1321938 US dollar 1188 2016 nil and South Korean won 18240 2016 nil.
14 Liabilities Current liabilities Group Company Group Companytel 2016 Trade and other payables Trade payables 305988 62027 352356 113120 Amounts owed to Group undertakings note 19  525334 Social security and other taxes 21187  18478 Accruals and deferred income 672911 58552 458520 73818 1000086 645913 829354 186938 The carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair values.
Group Company Group Companytel 2016 Other financial liabilities Contingent consideration 1035131 880538 Deferred consideration 25353  25353 1060484 880538 25353  52 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 14 Liabilities continued Noncurrent liabilities Group Company Group Companytel 2016 Other financial liabilities Contingent consideration 1289357 955068 2411747 1754665 Deferred consideration   25353 1289357 955068 2437100 1754665 The movements in the contingent consideration provision for the years are as follows Group Company At 1 April 2015 4319891 3588815 Release of contingent consideration provision  Collagen Solutions LLC 152365 Unwinding of discount 264488 205878 Transfer of shares to be issued to Collagen Solutions UK vendors to reserves 2000000 2000000 Translation movement gain 20267 40028 At 31 March 2016 2411747 1754665 Release of contingent consideration provision  Collagen Solutions LLC 290977 Release of contingent consideration provision  Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited 262086 262086 Unwinding of discount 127876 90000 Translation movement loss 337928 253027 At 31 March 2017 2324488 1835606 Current portion 1035131 880538 Noncurrent portion 1289357 955068 Elements of the contingent consideration become payable if certain sales targets are reached over the course of the period to 31 March 2018.
There are three separate sets of earnout conditions relating to the acquisitions of Collagen Solutions UK Limited Collagen Solutions LLC and Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 management reviewed the probability that relevant targets will be achieved.
Based on current information it was considered that the full Collagen Solutions LLC and Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited contingent consideration payments in 2017 and 2018 would not be likely and a reversal of 553062 in relation to this provision has been included in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The amounts recognised as of the date of relevant acquisitions are as follows Collagen Solutions UK Limited  1782122 Collagen Solutions LLC  627113 and Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited  1704693.
The terms for Collagen Solutions UK Limited required the Group to pay the vendors two tranches of up to 1 million in ordinary shares based on a 12.5p strike price i.
8 million ordinary shares dependent on Group turnover reaching 2.25 million and securing three manufacturing contracts respectively.
The expected shares to be issued under this arrangement were included in the shares to be issued reserve at 31 March 2016.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 both tranches of 8 million ordinary shares were issued under this arrangement.
The terms for Collagen Solutions LLC require the Group to pay the vendors two tranches of up to 0.625 million in cash dependent on sales of certain deferred consideration products and sales to certain deferred consideration customers reaching 3.5 million in any two consecutive years ending before 31 December 2017.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 53 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 14 Liabilities continued Noncurrent liabilities continued The terms for Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited require the Group to pay the vendors two tranches of NZ2 million in cash dependent on turnover for any two years ending before 31 March 2018.
The maximum amount is payable if turnover of NZ6.5 million is achieved.
In the case of both Collagen Solutions LLC and Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited prorata amounts will be payable if the maximum turnover levels are not achieved.
The deferred consideration relates to the purchase of ChondroMimetic assets.
Under the asset purchase agreement 25353 has been paid to Cambridge Enterprise Limited in September 2016 and 25353 is due in September 2017.
Group Company Group Companytel 2016
Alberta loan note 19 46480  62837 Bond 1833419 1833419 1879899 1833419 62837 Borrowings  Bond On 14 February 2017 the Company entered into a Bond Subscription Agreement with Norgine Ventures Fund I SCA SICAR for up to 4000000 in private senior secured bonds.
Subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions these can be drawn down in three tranches.
Tranche A of 2000000 of the Bond Subscription Agreement was drawn down on 31 March 2017 and is carried net of issue costs.
The term of this tranche of the Bond is 42 months with principal payments commencing in April 2018 in monthly instalments.
The interest rate is 10% and the Group is not exposed to interest rate changes or contractual repricing dates at the end of the reporting period as the borrowings are fixed in nature.
The fair value of these borrowings equals their carrying amount as the impact of discounting is not significant.
The Bonds are secured against certain assets of the Group.
Collagen Solutions plc Collagen Solutions UK Limited and ChondroMimetics Limited have granted first fixed and floating charges over all property and assets to Norgine Ventures Fund I SCA SICAR.
Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited has granted security to Norgine Ventures Fund I SCA SICAR over all its assets apart from those covered by the Alberta security refer to note 19 and security granted to the vendors for the additional consideration owing.
The maturity profile of these Bond borrowings is as follows Group Company Group Companytel 2016 Amounts falling due Within 1 year Between 1 and 2 years 740816 740816 Between 2 and 5 years 1259184 1259184 2000000 2000000   54 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 15 Financial liabilities and assets The Groups treasury policy and management of financial instruments which form part of these financial statements are set out in the
Financial Review.
Group 2017 Group 2016 Cash Cash and cash Loans and Other and cash Loans and Other equivalents receivables liabilities equivalents receivables liabilities Contingent and deferred consideration   2349841   2462453 Trade and other receivables  806566   636044 Cash and cash equivalents 8978150   2493146 Borrowings  related party loan   72884   83815 Borrowings  Bond   1833419 Trade and other payables   978899   810876 Total 8978150 806566 5235043 2493146 636044 3357144 Company 2017 Company 2016 Cash Cash and cash Loans and Other and cash Loans and Other equivalents receivables liabilities equivalents receivables liabilities Contingent consideration   1835606   1754665 Trade and other receivables  4114467   2500560 Cash and cash equivalents 7776079   1321938 Borrowings  Bond   1833419 Trade and other payables   645914   186938 Total 7776079 4114467 4314939 1321938 2500560 1941603 Currency derivatives The Group and the Company have not utilised forward contracts to hedge future purchase transactions and cash flows in the financial year.
Credit risk The Group and the Companys credit risk is primarily attributable to trade receivables and cash and cash equivalents although all cash is held on deposit with highly reputable financial institutions.
Credit risk with respect to trade receivables is due to the Group and Company trading with a limited number of companies which are generally large listed or bluechip medical device companies.
Therefore the Group and the Company do not expect in the normal course of events that these debts are at significant risk.
Where there is perceived to be a greater risk a standby letter of credit or similar is sought.
The Groups and the Companys maximum exposure to credit risk is reflected in the carrying amounts of their financial assets as set out in the table above.
The Group and the Company have no significant concentration of credit risk in respect of their trade receivables as the exposure is spread over a number of customers.
Interest rate risk The Groups and the Companys interest rate exposure is limited to their cash and cash equivalents.
Cash and cash equivalents are held on shortterm depositattracting variable rates of interest.
Liquidity risk The Group and Company manage liquidity risk to ensure that they will have sufficient liquidity to meet their liabilities as they fall due.
All trade and other payables contracted at the reporting date have a settlement date of less than 12 months.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 55 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 15 Financial liabilities and assets continued Contingent consideration The contingent consideration relating to the purchase consideration on the acquisitions made has been discounted to reflect the fair value of the future cash outflows based on the directors best estimate of when such sums will become payable under the terms of the agreement.
Interest rate risk profile of financial assets The Groups and the Companys financial assets at 31 March 2017 comprised cash and trade receivables.
The cash balances of 8978150 2016 2493146 Group and 7776079 2016 1321938 Company are floating rate financial assets.
Trade receivables are noninterest bearing.
Fair values of financial liabilities and financial assets The fair values based upon the market value or discounted cash flows of financial liabilities and financial assets held in the Group and the Company were not materially different from their book values.
Finance and interest rate risk Where appropriate the Group and the Company manage their exposure to interest rate fluctuations on their borrowings to reduce the impact of adverse variations in the market rates on the Groups profit and cash flow.
Currency risk The Group and the Companys activities expose it primarily to currency risk as overseas revenues are primarily in US dollars.
This risk is mitigated by the requirement to settle the costs including salary and fixed overheads of operations in the US in US dollars.
The Group is required to settle salary costs and cover overheads of the NZ facility in NZ dollars which presents a currency risk as revenues are primarily denominated in US dollars.
Management monitors these risks on an ongoing basis and would use foreign exchange forward contracts if required to hedge this exposure.
There were no forward exchange rate contracts at the balance sheet date.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
The use of financial derivatives is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board of directors which provide written principles for the use of financial derivatives.
16 Deferred tax liabilities
At 1 April 2015 285022 Translation movement 509 Accelerated capital allowances 49269 Utilisation of tax losses 49269 Credited to income statement 32419 At 31 March 2016 253112 Translation movement 1902 Accelerated capital allowances 8790 Utilisation of tax losses 8790 Credited to income statement 29363 At 31 March 2017 221847 At the reporting date the Group has unused tax losses of 4673415 2016 2766985 available for offset against profits.
A cumulative deferred tax asset of 794481 2016 553397 has not been recognised in respect of such losses.
56 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 17 Commitments under operating leases At 31 March 2017 the Group and the Company had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under non cancellable operating leases which fall due as follows Group Company Group Companytel 2016 Land and buildings Within one year 173250 101845 134699 87574 Between one and five years 325255 130392 236440 231745 498505 232237 371139 319319
Within one year 65telBetween one and five years 987 987 1645 1645 1645 1645 2303 2303 Operating lease charges for the year amounted to 209707 2016 169125.
The remaining lease term for property is between two and five years.
18 Sharebased payment transactions The Company has granted equitysettled share options to seven employees three of whom are directors.
The Company has also granted warrants to its Bond provider Norgine Ventures Fund I SCA SICAR.
David Evans options The exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 10p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The first vesting criterion has been achieved and the second criterion is for the share price to reach 20p.
Gill Blacks options The exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 7.75p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criterion is either for the share price to reach 27p or EPS to reach 1p.
Jamal Rushdys options On 15 December 2015 options were granted where the exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 8.89p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
The options were granted in three equal tranches with different vesting conditions.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criteria for each tranche are as follows i 1100000 options exercisable if either the share price reaches 27p or EPS reaches 1p ii 1100000 options exercisable if the share price reaches 58p and iii 1100000 options exercisable if nonmarketbased performance conditions relating to the creation and realisation of value in the business are achieved.
On 14 July 2016 options were granted where the exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 8.125p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criterion is for the share price to reach 30p.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 57 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 18 Sharebased payment transactions continued Employee options granted 31 July 2014 The exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 7.88p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criteria are as follows i 64724 options exercisable after 2 January 2016  no performance conditions apply ii 64725 options exercisable after 2 January 2018  no performance conditions apply iii 64725 options exercisable if either the share price reaches 27p or EPS reaches 1p iv 64725 options exercisable if annual sales reach 2.25 million and three new manufacturing contracts are entered into before 31 March 2017 v 64725 options exercisable if 90% of operational targets are met for two consecutive years and vi 64725 options exercisable if 90% of operational targets are met for four consecutive years.
Employee options granted 1 April 2015 The exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 9.63p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criterion is either for the share price to reach 27p or EPS to reach 1p.
Employee options granted 15 February 2017 The exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 5.625p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criterion is either for the share price to reach 27p or EPS to reach 1p.
Employee options granted 3 March 2017 The exercise price is the market value of the shares at the date of grant of 5.75p.
The vesting period is up to ten years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
The vesting criterion is either for the share price to reach 27p or EPS to reach 1p.
Norgine Ventures warrants granted 31 March 2017 As a condition of the issue of the Bonds the Company has agreed to issue Norgine Ventures Fund I SCA SICAR tenyear warrants to purchase ordinary shares comprising warrants for 5075283 shares granted on the subscription date of tranche A 31 March 2017 and an additional 1691761 shares if the Company draws down tranche C of the Bond in all cases exercisable at 5.911p per ordinary share over the ten years from drawdown or if earlier on sale of the whole share capital of the Company after which they shall lapse.
A reconciliation of option and warrant movements over the year to 31 March 2017 is shown below 2017 2016 Weighted Weighted Number average Number average of share exercise of share exercise options and price options and price warrants in p warrants in p Outstanding at the beginning of the year 9238349 9.25 5438349 9.43 Granted during the year 8775283 6.57 3800000 8.98 Outstanding at the end of the year 18013632 8.21 9238349 9.25 Exercisable at 31 March 2017 129448 7.88 64724 7.88 The Group recognised the following expense in relation to sharebased payment transactions 2017 2016 Charged to Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 50585 35831 The options and warrants outstanding at 31 March 2017 had a weighted average exercise price of 8.21p and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 8.5 years.
The range of exercise prices of outstanding options and warrants at 31 March 2017 was 5.63p to 10p 2016 7.88p to 30p.
58 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 18 Sharebased payment transactions continued The fair value of options granted under the scheme and the warrants granted is measured by use of the Trinomial Barrier Option and BlackScholes models.
The inputs into the models for options and warrants granted during the year are as follows Director Employee Employee option option option Warrant Grant date 14072016 15022017 07032017 31032017 Share price at grant date 8.13p 5.63p 5.75p 4.87p Exercise price 8.13p 5.63p 5.75p 5.91p Number of employeesfinance providers Share optionswarrants granted 2700000 500000 500000 5075283 Vesting period years 110 110 110 110 Expected volatility 30% 30% 30% 30% Optionwarrant life years Expected life years 110 110 110 110 Risk free rate 1.5% 4.25% 4.25% 4.25% Expected dividends expressed as a dividend yield 0% 0% 0% 0% Fair value per optionwarrant 2.1p 1.5p 1.5p 2.1p Expected volatility was based upon the historical volatility over the expected life of the schemes.
The expected life is based upon historical data and has been adjusted based on managements best estimates for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
19 Related party transactions Transactions with key management Key management personnel compensation comprised 2017 2016 Equitysettled share options 46440 28147 Shortterm benefits including NIC 511067 395526 Pension costs 13683 7914 Total remuneration 571190 431587 At 31 March 2017 three of the directors participated in a share option arrangement as noted in the Directors Report and note 18.
Group Group 2017 2016 Related party loan Borrowings  current 26404 20978 Borrowings  noncurrent 46480 62837 72884 83tel Alberta Limited is a minority shareholder of Collagen Solutions plc.
The Alberta loan is secured over equipment with a fixed interest rate of 8.2% per annum and a repayment term of five years.
The total amount outstanding at 31 March 2017 was 78884 2016 83815.
The fair value of these borrowings represents their carrying value as the effect of discounting is not significant.
The terms and conditions of the transactions with key management personnel and their related parties were no more favourable than those available or which might reasonably be expected to be available on similar transactions to nonkey management personnelrelated entities on an arms length basis.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 59 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc 19 Related party transactions continued Transactions between Group companies Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation.
The transactions during the year were management charges of 909386 2016 626144.
In addition the Company provided net funding of 961828 2016 815863.
The outstanding balance due to the Company from its subsidiaries as at 31 March 2017 was 6496544 2016 4789220.
The outstanding balance due from the Company to its subsidiaries at 31 March 2017 was 525334 2016 nil.
Investment
The Company holds a 3.97% investment in ordinary 1p shares in Jellagen Pty Limited at 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 5.34% a company involved in the production of jellyfish collagen.
No value is carried on the balance sheet.
Collagen Solutions UK Limited provided development services amounting to 150 2016 9960 to Jellagen Pty Limited under terms in the normal course of business.
Call option A call option has been granted to Norgine Ventures Fund I SCA SICAR by the Companys Chairman David Evans exercisable at an aggregate cost of 1 over a maximum number of 20000000 of his ordinary shares.
The call option is only exercisable following any further fundraising having raised over 2000000 during the term of the Bonds at a price per share lower than 5.911p with the number of options capable of exercise increasing the greater the difference between the price per ordinary share at which the further funding is conducted and 5.911p.
Nonexecutive director consultancy fees Nonexecutive directors charged the Company the following consultancy fees during the year ended 31 March 2017 David Evans through his business MBA Consultancy 30000 2016 30000 Kevin Wilson nil 2016 12000 Malcolm Gillies 17750 2016 20000 and Geoff Bennett 7562 2016 nil.
Other transactions The Company received 8000 2016 5000 from Taragenyx Limited in relation to services provided by director Stewart White who is also nonexecutive director of Taragenyx Limited.
20 Share capitaltel 2016 Number  Number Issued and fully paid Issued ordinary shares of 1p 324299077 3242991 171403815 1714038 Issued deferred shares of 9p 500000 45000 500000 45000 Balance at the end of the year 324799077 3287991 171903815 1759038 Ordinary shares The total number of issued shares at 31 March 2017 was 324299077 2016 171403815.
On 9 September 2016 217475 ordinary shares were issued to Orthomimetics Limited as part of the consideration paid by the Company for ChondroMimetic assets.
A further 217475 ordinary shares are required to be issued by the Company under the asset purchase agreement to satisfy the consideration of 25353 on 11 September 2017.
On 9 September 2016 8 million ordinary shares were issued as part of the deferred consideration payable to the vendors of Collagen Solutions UK Limited.
A further 8 million ordinary shares were issued on 30 March 2017 as the final deferred consideration payable to these vendors.
On 6 March 2017 136677787 ordinary shares were issued as part of a placing and open offer for up to 159724257 ordinary shares.
Deferred shares The total number of deferred shares at 31 March 2017 was 500000 2016 500000.
The deferred shares do not confer any voting rights.
60 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 20 Share capital continued Options and warrants At 31 March 2017 the Company had 18013632 2016 9238349 unissued ordinary shares of 1p each under the Companys share option and warrant schemes details of which are as follows Option Date price from which Expiry Grant date Number in p exercisable date 29 March 2013 4050000 10 29 March 2013 28 March 2023 31 July 2014 388349 7.88 2 January 2016 30 July 2024 24 November 2014 1000000 7.75 1 January 2017 23 November 2024 1 April 2015 500000 9.63 1 April 2018 31 March 2025 15 December 2015 3300000 8.89 15 December 2018 14 December 2025 14 July 2016 2700000 8.13 14 July 2016 13 July 2026 15 February 2017 500000 5.63 26 October 2019 14 February 2027 7 March 2017 500000 5.75 7 March 2020 6 March 2027 31 March 2017 5075283 5.91 31 March 2017 30 March 2027 Details of share options and warrants are disclosed in note 18 of the accounts.
Capital management The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
Both share capital and the share premium account arise on the issue of shares.
The retained deficit reflects losses incurred to date.
Sharebased payment reserve This reserve is the result of the Companys grant of equitysettled share options to selected employees and is measured in accordance with IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment.
Shares to be issued reserve This reserve arises from ordinary shares that are due to be issued under deferred and contingent consideration arrangements.
The fair value of the warrants granted to Norgine Ventures to be issued in connection with the Bond facility has also been accounted for in this reserve.
Translation reserve The translation reserve arises from the retranslation of the foreign subsidiaries to the presentational currency of the Group on consolidation.
Merger reserve This reserve arises from the premium on the difference between the fair value share price of Collagen Solutions plc shares issued as consideration shares on 2 January 2014 and 10 December 2014 and the nominal value of those shares.
Consideration shares were issued to satisfy part of the consideration in the acquisition of Collagen Solutions UK Limited the acquisition of the business and assets of Collagen Solutions LLC and the acquisition of Collagen Solutions NZ Limited formerly Southern Lights Ventures 2002 Limited.
Noncontrolling interest reserve This reserve represents 40% of the net assets of Cre8ive Collagen Limited and Cre8ive Collagen BioTech Beijing Co Limited not held by the Group.
21 Contingent liabilities Group and Company At 31 March 2017 there were no known contingent liabilities 2016 nil.
Notes to the financial statements continued FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 61 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Notice of Annual General Meeting Collagen Solutions plc registered number Notice is hereby given that an Annual General Meeting of Collagen Solutions plc the Company will be held at 3 Robroyston Oval Nova Business Park Glasgow G33 1AP at 11.00am on 30 August 2017 for the following purposes To consider and if thought fit pass the following as ordinary resolutions To receive and adopt the Companys accounts for the financial year ended 31 March 2017 together with the Directors Report and the Auditors Report on those accounts.
To reelect David Evans who retires by rotation as a director of the Company.
To reelect Malcolm Gillies who retires by rotation as a director of the Company.
To reelect Gill Black who retires by rotation as a director of the Company.
To reappoint RSM UK Audit LLP as auditors of the Company.
To authorise the directors to fix the auditors remuneration.
That the directors be generally and unconditionally authorised to allot shares in the Company or to grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company up to a maximum nominal amount of 1080997 in addition to the authority contained in subparagraph A of this resolution the directors be authorised to allot shares in the Company or to grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company comprising equity securities within the meaning of section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Act up to a maximum nominal amount of 1080997 in connection with a PreEmptive Offer undertaken by means of a rights issue the authorities given in this resolution are given pursuant to section 551 of the Act and shall be in substitution for all preexisting authorities under that section and unless renewed revoked or varied in accordance with the Act shall expire on 30 September 2018 or if earlier at the end of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held in 2018 save that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require the allotment of shares in the Company or the grant of rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company after such expiry and for the purpose of this resolution PreEmptive Offer means an offer of equity securities to holders of ordinary shares other than the Company on a fixed record date in proportion to their respective holdings of such shares and other persons entitled to participate in such offer by virtue of and in accordance with the rights attaching to any other equity securities held by them in each case subject to such exclusions or other arrangements as the directors may deem necessary or appropriate in relation to fractional entitlements or legal regulatory or practical problems under the laws or the requirements of any regulatory body or stock exchange of any territory or otherwise.
To consider and if thought fit pass the following as a special resolution
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued B the power given in this resolution shall be in substitution for all preexisting powers under section 570 of the Act and unless renewed in accordance with the Act shall expire at the same time as the Allotment Authority save that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry.
By order of the Board Gill Black Registered office Company Secretary co Shepherd and Wedderburn LLP 3 August 2017 Condor House 10 St.
Pauls Churchyard
EC4M 8AL
Notes
A member of the Company entitled to attend and vote at the meeting convened by this notice is entitled to appoint one or more proxies to exercise any of hisher rights to attend speak and vote at that meeting on hisher behalf.
If a member appoints more than one proxy each proxy must be entitled to exercise the rights attached to different shares.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
A proxy may only be appointed using the procedures set out in these notes and the notes to the proxy form.
To appoint a proxy a member may complete sign and date the enclosed proxy form and deposit it at the office of the Companys registrars Capita Asset Services at The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4TU by 11.00am on 28 August 2017.
Any power of attorney or any other authority under which the proxy form is signed or a duly certified copy of such power or authority must be enclosed with the proxy form.
In order to revoke a proxy appointment a member must sign and date a notice clearly stating hisher intention to revoke hisher proxy appointment and deposit it at the office of the Companys registrars Capita Asset Services at The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4TU prior to the commencement of the meeting.
Any corporation which is a member of the Company may authorise one or more persons who need not be a member of the Company to attend speak and vote at the meeting as the representative of that corporation.
A certified copy of the board resolution of the corporation appointing the relevant person as the representative of that corporation in connection with the meeting must be deposited at the office of the Companys registrars prior to the commencement of the meeting.
The right to vote at the meeting shall be determined by reference to the register of members of the Company.
Only those persons whose names are entered on the register of members of the Company at close of business on 28 August 2017 shall be entitled to attend and vote in respect of the number of shares registered in their names at that time.
Changes to entries on the register of members after that time shall be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend andor vote at the meeting.
Notice of Annual General Meeting continued Collagen Solutions plc registered number  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 63 Annual report and accounts 2017 Collagen Solutions plc Explanatory notes to the Notice of Annual General Meeting These notes give an explanation of the proposed resolutions.
Resolutions 1 to 7 are proposed as ordinary resolutions.
This means that for each of those resolutions to be passed more than half of the votes cast must be in favour of the resolution.
Resolution 8 is proposed as a special resolution.
This means that for resolution 8 to be passed at least threequarters of the votes cast must be in favour of the resolution.
Resolution 1  Annual report and accounts The directors must lay the Companys accounts the Directors Report and the Auditors Report before the shareholders in a general meeting.
This is a legal requirement after the directors have approved the accounts and the Directors Report and the auditors have prepared their report.
Resolutions 2 to 4  Reelection of directors The Companys Articles of Association require that at the Annual General Meeting of the Company any directors who have been appointed since the last Annual General Meeting or any who were not appointed or reappointed at one of the preceding two Annual General Meetings must retire from office.
Accordingly David Evans Malcolm Gillies and Gill Black will offer themselves for reelection at the Annual General Meeting.
Biographical details of the directors are set out on pages 20 and 21 of the annual report and accounts.
Resolutions 5 and 6  Reappointment and remuneration of auditors The Company is required to appoint auditors for each financial year of the Company.
Resolution 5 proposes the reappointment of RSM UK Audit LLP as the Companys auditors for the current financial year of the Company ending on 31 March 2018.
Resolution 6 seeks authority for the directors to decide the auditors remuneration.
Resolution 7  Renewal of authority to allot shares The purpose of this resolution is to renew the directors power to allot shares.
Section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act provides that the directors may not allot new shares other than for employee share schemes without shareholder approval.
This resolution proposes that authority be granted in substitution of the existing authority to allot securities up to a maximum amount of 1080997.
This amount represents approximately onethird of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital as at 3 August 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to publication of this document.
In addition following guidance issued by the ABI in December 2008 and updated in November 2009 the Company is seeking additional authority to allot securities in connection with a fully preemptive rights issue up to a maximum amount of 1080997 representing approximately onethird of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital as at 3 August 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to publication of this document.
The benefit to the Company of obtaining such authority on an annual basis is that it would allow the Company to implement a rights issue of an amount equal to twothirds of the issued ordinary share capital without the need to call an additional general meeting.
This would shorten the implementation timetable of such a rights issue.
The directors consider that the authorities sought pursuant to resolution 7 are desirable to allow the Company to retain flexibility although they have no present intention of exercising these authorities.
The authorities will expire at the end of the 2018 Annual General Meeting or if earlier on 30 September 2018 unless previously cancelled or varied by the Company in general meeting.
Resolution 8  Disapplication of preemption rights Section  of the Act provides that if the directors wish to allot any equity securities or sell any treasury shares if it holds any for cash it must first offer them to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing shareholdings.
Section 561 does not apply in connection with an employee share scheme.
The purpose of this resolution is to allow the directors to allot equity securities for cash as if section of the Act did not apply in connection with rights issues open offers and other preemption offers pursuant to the authority granted by resolution 7 and otherwise up to a total amount of 324299 representing approximately 10% of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital as at 3 August 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to publication of this document.
This power is being sought in order to give the Company the flexibility to raise funds in the future should it choose to do so.
The authority will expire at the end of the 2018 Annual General Meeting or if earlier on 30 September 2018 unless previously cancelled or varied by the Company in general meeting.
64 Collagen Solutions plc Annual report and accounts 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Officers and professional advisers
David Evans  nonexecutive Chairman Malcolm Gillies  nonexecutive director Geoff Bennett  nonexecutive director
Jamal Rushdy  Chief Executive Officer
Gill Black  Chief Financial Officer Company Secretary Gill Black Registered office co Shepherd and Wedderburn LLP Condor House 10 St.
Pauls Churchyard
EC4M 8AL Nominated adviser and broker Cenkos Securities plc 6.7.8 Tokenhouse Yard
EC2R 7AS
RSM UK Audit LLP Chartered Accountants Third Floor Centenary House 69 Wellington Street
G2 6HG
Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU
Walbrook PR Limited 4 Lombard Street
EC3V 9HD co Shepherd and Wedderburn LLP Condor House 10 St.
Paulsitesite
