HAYWARD TYLER GROUP PLC REPORT and ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2017 POISED FOR GROWTH Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC HTG AT A GLANCE HTG includes both the Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood businesses together providing over 350 years of engineering experience heritage and pedigree.
HTG is focused on delivering performancecritical solutions for the most demanding requirements to meet current and future global energy needs. www. tg.
Who we are HTG is the name of the Group which includes both the Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood businesses.
Each of these businesses has an enviable reputation and strong brand within their chosen market niches.
The Group through both Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood has real practical experience to provide technically reliable and costeffective solutions to our customers through original equipment manufacturing and aftermarket services.
With over 500 employees globally and facilities in the UK USA China and India HTG has worldclass skills in design engineering manufacturing servicing and support and a proven reputation for providing innovative reliable engineered solutions.
Markets we serve Power Generation Oil and Gas Water and Industrial Defence Fossil Upstream Water Submarine Fleet
Downstream Industrial
Hydro Tidal Wind
Hayward Tyler With a pedigree stretching back over 200 years Hayward Tyler is a market leader in the design manufacture and servicing of performancecritical motors and pumps for the harshest of environments.
We are a trusted supplier for the markets we serve with bases in the UK the USA China and India.
We have made a multimillion pound investment in a new Centre of
This significantly enhances our existing capabilities and creates the worlds most advanced facility for specialist motor manufacture based at our headquarters in Luton as well as providing significant additional support for RandD and the training and development of our workforce.
FY2017 Revenue 46.5 million FY2017 Gross Profit Margin 10% Peter Brotherhood Peter Brotherhood has been providing engineering solutions for 150 years and is a market leader in the design manufacture and servicing of performancecritical steam turbines turbo gensets compressors gear boxes and combined heat and power systems.
Peter
Brotherhoods expertise covers a range of industries with over 1500 units sold to over 100 countries globally.
FY2017 Revenue 16.2 million FY2017 Gross Profit Margin 34% GROUP REVENUE 80% REVENUE FROM OUTSIDE UK LOCATIONS GLOBALLY EMPLOYEES GLOBALLY WORLDCLASS PRODUCTS TECHNOLOGYLED ENGINEERING DIVERSE END MARKETS GLOBAL REACH 1 Average number in FY2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
POISED FOR GROWTH In FY2017 HTG experienced a mixed performance against challenging market conditions.
Revenue was too low to cover the fixed cost base that had been gearedup to service significantly higher revenue.
However the Group is now poised for growth based on entering FY2018 with a record order book significant investments already made and the proposed acquisition by Avingtrans plc.
Record Order Book The Group had a record order book of 49.8 million at 31 March 2017 FY2016 36.1 million Investment in the Business The Group has completed the major investment in its worldclass Centre of Excellence for specialist motor manufacture has continued to rebuild accreditations and customer relationships at Peter Brotherhood and further invested in the continuous improvement of its people processes and products Acquisition by Avingtrans plc The proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc gives the Group access to a strong balance sheet and a supportive shareholder base to be able to continue to invest in both Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood and support the Groups longer term growth plans Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Strategic Report Key Headlines 3 Our Vision 4 Our Strategy for Growth 5 Our Strategy in Action 6 Our Markets 7
Chairmans Statement 16
Chief Executives Business Review 18
KPIs 23
Financial Review 25
Principal Risks and Uncertainties 31 Corporate Social Responsibility 36
Board of Directors 43 Corporate Governance 46 Audit Committee Report 50 Directors Report on Remuneration 53 Report of the Directors 58 Statement of Directors Responsibilities 60
Independent Auditors Report 61
Financial Statements Statements of Financial Position 63 Consolidated Income Statement 65 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 66 Consolidated Statement of Changes In Equity 67 Company Statement of Changes In Equity Cash Flow Statement 69 Notes to the Financial Statements 70 Contacts 124 Glossary of Terms 125 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 SECTION 1 STRATEGIC REPORT An overview of our performance in FY2017 a focus on our strategy and a review of the businesses underpinning our strategy.
Contents
Key Headlines Our Vision Our Strategy for Growth Our Strategy in Action Our Markets
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Business Review
KPIs
Financial Review
Principal Risks and Uncertainties Corporate Social Responsibility Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Key Headlines Revenue was 62.7 million FY2016 61.6 million Underlying gross profit margin was 43% FY2016 41%
EBITDA was 5000 FY2016 7.2 million
Loss per share was 7.07 pence FY2016 earnings per share 4.89 pence Capital expenditure was 6.4 million FY2016 11.6 million Net debt was 22.1 million FY2016 8.6 million Order intake was 68.3 million FY2016 61.4 million Order book was 49.8 million FY2016 36.1 million 1 Trading represents the underlying performance of the Group Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Our Vision Energy in motion With the worlds population forecast to exceed 9 billion people by 2050 demand for food clean water and energy continues to grow.
From an energy perspective this is creating even greater challenges across all energy sources and a growing demand for clean energy too.
The energy industry needs solutions to answer these global challenges  venturing into evermore extreme and harsh environments further offshore and deeper underwater and into even more remote and inhospitable locations.
HTG is responding to these challenges.
We are working to transform existing technologies and innovate new technologies.
To develop new products and solutions to generate new ideas and new thinking.
We call this energy in motion.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Our Strategy for Growth Delivering performancecritical solutions for the most demanding requirements to meet current and future global energy needs
Deliver value to our customers through innovation and excellence in design manufacture and service.
Professional development of our workforce across the business upskilling them and providing the environment for collaboration and knowledge sharing.
Enhance product performance and capabilities through investment in RandD and improved design test and manufacturing capabilities.
Provide the platform for growth by optimising our existing business and maximising the potential within our niche markets whilst opening up new product and market opportunities.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Strategy in Action
Working together succeeding together.
The development of our people is providing the foundation for improved collaboration and knowledge sharing increasing our agility and responsiveness.
PROCESSES
Worldclass quality delivery and customer experience.
We are constantly driving operating efficiencies both internally and in supply chain partnerships  to deliver against our key metrics of right first time RFT and on time in full OTIF to our customers.
PRODUCTS
Providing peace of mind through the reliability quality and durability of our performance critical products and innovative solutions in the harshest environments.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Our rich heritage expert knowledge innovative designs and worldclass engineering and manufacturing capabilities position HTG to support a wide range of performance critical applications across the energy industrial and defence markets.
Supporting critical infrastructure from conceptual design to end of operation with highly engineered solutions and full through life support.
Power Generation Oil and Gas Water and Industrial Defence
Nuclear
Renewables including Solar Hydro  Tidal  Wind
Downstream
Chemical
Municipal Water General Industrial UK Submarine
FY2017
Order Intake 72% Revenue 70%
Order Intake 15% Revenue 15%
Order Intake 12% Revenue 11%
Order Intake 1% Revenue 4% Energy Overview Market studies project an increasing demand for energy World GDP is projected to almost double in the period to 2035 driven by fastgrowing emerging economies as more than two billion people are lifted from low incomes This rising prosperity is predicted to drive an increase in global energy demand by around 30% The fuel mix is expected to continue to adjust although oil and gas together with coal remain dominant Renewables including nuclear is predicted to provide half of the additional energy required out to 2035 Gas is projected to grow more quickly than oil and coal led by US shale gas and a rapid expansion of LNG is likely to lead to a globally integrated gas market anchored by US gas prices Global coal consumption looks set to peak as the continuing reform of Chinas economy causes growth in its demand for coal and energy to slow sharply although China is expected to remain the largest growth market for energy Renewables are projected to be the fastest growing fuel source quadrupling over the next 20 years supported by continuing gains in competitiveness and Source BP Energy Outlook 2017 Edition January 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The world economy is expected to continue to electrify with nearly twothirds of the increase in global energy going into the power sector.
Power Generation  Centralised and Localised As a result of this electrification the share of energy used for power generation is predicted to rise from 42% in 2015 to 47% by 2035.
It also reflects a strong catchup process with energy consumption per head in developing economies expected to increase rapidly towards OECD levels as prosperity rises.
It is estimated that over one billion people currently do not have access to electricity mainly in Africa India and other parts of developing Asia.
Source BP Energy Outlook 2017 Edition January 2017 Power Generation  Centralised  Fossil Fuels Gas is expected to be the fastest growing fuel 1.6% p. increasing as it overtakes coal to be the secondlargest fuel source by 2035.
The growth of coal is projected to decline sharply 0.2% p. compared with 2.7% p. coal consumption is expected to peak in the mid2020s.
Power Generation  Centralised  Fossil Fuels Coal and Oil Key market drivers include the continued pursuit of larger more efficient coalfired plant and use of economisers to enhance the economic viability of ageing plants while also helping to meet emission targets.
Market studies project an increasing demand for coal China is expected to remain the worlds largest market for coal accounting for nearly half of global coal consumption in India is predicted to be the largest growth market with its share of world coal demand doubling from around 10% in 2015 to 20% in 2035.
Over twothirds of Indias projected increased demand for coal is anticipated to feed into the power sector and Coal consumption in the OECD is predicted to fall by over 40% as the share of coal within the power sector is crowded out by renewables and natural gas.
Source BP Energy Outlook 2017 Edition January 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Hayward Tyler operates in the large scale power market of 300MW and above with the largest installed base of boiler circulating pumps BCPs worldwide with more than 2300 units supplied mainly to coalfired power stations.
With coal plants typically operating for 40 years from an original design life of 25 years opportunities arise from renewing and upgrading of equipment to extending the operating life of existing power plants.
Power Generation  Centralised  Fossil Fuels Gas Key market drivers include the price of natural gas the speed and ease of construction of gas fired power plants reduced carbon emissions relative to coal and oil and the need to fill the gap as the zero carbon energy sources nuclear and renewables continue to face economic challenges.
Market studies project an increasing demand for gas Natural gas use across all sectors is predicted to grow faster than both oil and coal growing by 1.6% p.
The main centres of demand growth are expected to be China with gas gaining share in industry and power the Middle East and the USA where increased availability of gas is anticipated to help boost demand within the power sector.
Peter Brotherhood operates in the natural gas market through reciprocating compressors for applications like fuel gas boosting as well as steam turbines for both power generation on small plants of less than 50MW and drivers for equipment like boiler feed pumps on the larger combined cycle plants.
With gas plants typically operating for 40 years from an original design life of 25 years opportunities arise from renewing and upgrading of equipment to extend the operating life of existing power plants.
Power Generation  Centralised  Renewables Renewables are expected to be the fastest growing fuel source quadrupling over the next 20 years supported by continuing gains in competitiveness.
Driven by commitments from COP21 it is predicted that carbon emissions from energy grow at less than a third of the rate of the past 20 years reflecting gains in energy efficiency and the changing fuel mix.
Renewables are projected to account for 40% of the growth in power generation causing their share of global power to increase from 7% in 2015 to nearly 20% by 2035.
The EU is expected to continue to lead the way in terms of the penetration of renewables with the share of renewables within the EU power sector doubling over the next 20 years to reach almost 40% by 2035.
However China is predicted to show the highest growth over the next 20 years adding more renewable power than the EU and US combined.
Source BP Energy Outlook 2017 Edition January 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Power Generation  Centralised  Renewables Solar  Wind Growth in solar is driven primarily by photovoltaic PV technology and wind is being driven by large wind turbines both onshore and offshore.
HTG does not currently have a competitive product offering in either of these technologies however concentrated solar plant CSP technology has been demonstrated successfully and is set to take a share of the renewable market for example
2025.
Federal Government initiatives including tax rebate financial assistance and net metering will complement the industry outlook Chile concentrated solar power market revenue is set to witness strong growth of over 25% over the forecast timeframe.
Favourable climatic conditions with strong pipeline projects will boost the business.
Morocco is set to exceed USD5 billion by 2025 Spain concentrated solar power market size was valued at over USD15 billion in 2015.
The Spanish Governments policy to replace conventional fossil fuel technology with efficient clean energy technology will augment the industry landscape and China concentrated solar power market is predicted to exceed 7GW by 2025.
The Government of China in its thirteenth five year plan aims to install 110GW of solar power plants of which 5GW is expected to be provided by CSP.
Hayward Tylers BCP technology is readily adaptable to the CSP market.
With China taking a prominent role in wide scale deployment of the technology Hayward Tyler with its footprint in China and longestablished product expertise is well placed to secure market share.
Power Generation  Centralised  Renewables Hydro Hydropower generates the largest share of electricity from renewable energy sources.
The overall share is currently about 40%.
Of this greater than 95% comes from large scale hydropower plants with the balance from tidal wave and other sources.
The UK Government estimates that wave and tidal stream energy combined has the potential to deliver around 20 per cent of the UKs current electricity needs which equates to an installed capacity of around 30GW to 50GW.
Although the market is at the early development stage Hayward Tylers submersible motor expertise is ideal to develop reliable submersible generator technologies for wave and tidal schemes.
Hayward Tyler is currently working in partnership with several universities and private developers to position itself as an industry leader in this growing technology space and its recent announcement on the CGen Neptune generator project is testament to this.
Power Generation  Centralised  Nuclear EIAs International Energy Outlook projects that total global nuclear generation will increase by 73% through 2040 from 2.6 trillion kilowatthours in 2015 to 4.5 trillion kilowatthours in 2040.
Countries that are not a part of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development Source US Energy Information Association International Energy Outlook 2016 May 2016 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 nonOECD countries account for 86% of this increase with China alone making up more than 54% of total growth.
Chinas growing nuclear fleet is expected to produce more than 1.2 trillion kilowatthours of electricity annually by 2040.
Outside of Asia the most significant nuclear new build programme is in the UK where 16GW of new nuclear power is planned with funding and developers from France Japan USA and
The Hinkley Point C project is now fully funded and has begun construction whereas the subsequent projects are at various stages of approval and planning.
After much uncertainty it is now clear that the UK nuclear new build programme is moving ahead to address potential energy shortfalls and to support carbon emission targets.
Small Modular Reactors SMR Generation IV Gen IV reactors and Fusion reactor technologies are all also under development to support a global shift from high carbon technologies and to make nuclear more affordable safer and accessible to a wider range of countries other than the established nuclear nations.
As of April 2017 30 countries worldwide are operating 449 nuclear reactors for electricity generation and 60 new nuclear plants are under construction in 15 countries.
Nuclear power plants provided 11 per cent of the worlds electricity production in 2014.
In 2016 13 countries relied on nuclear energy to supply at least onequarter of their total electricity.
Hayward Tyler continues to enjoy a stable position in the nuclear supply chain servicing its existing installed base as well as taking orders for new units both of which result from the key accreditations of our US and UK businesses.
With 75% of the 438 operational reactors worldwide currently over 25 years old growth opportunities for aftermarket parts and services will continue to be realised in the European South Korean and USA markets.
Our Hayward Tyler Colchester facility holds the ASME BandPV N NPT and NA stamps as well as the NS certificate all key accreditations in the nuclear market that represent significant barriers to entry for other businesses.
Hayward Tylers canned motor technology provides nuclear plants with a robust product for increased life cycle and reduced maintenance costs.
Hayward Tyler Colchester continues to support its significant installed base as well as to provide new units and in addition it is leveraging its technology for opportunities on Fusion SMR and Gen IV technologies in both the USA France UK and
Hayward Tyler Luton continues its development as a strategic supplier to the UK nuclear new build programme having achieved Fit for Nuclear in FY2017 and working towards ISO19443 in FY2018.
With a blend of technology some transferred from Hayward Tyler Colchester and some heritage Luton product each large scale reactor design represents on average 5 million to 15 million of potential sales.
With three opportunities at the later stages of Source Nuclear Energy Institute World Statistics Nuclear Energy Around the World www. ei.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 negotiation for Hinkley Point C and early engagement on the subsequent projects Hayward Tyler is well placed to capitalise on these opportunities.
Strategic partnering for the UK and Chinese nuclear markets will play a major role in Hayward Tylers step change position in this sector and ongoing dialogue with complementary businesses will develop through the first half of FY2018.
Building off the expertise of manufacturing steam turbines for the nuclear submarine fleet Peter Brotherhood is well placed to support a subset of the SMR market such as the NuScale technology which could see twelve modular 50MW reactors being built on one site.
NuScale are in the process of applying for a Design Certificate from the US NRC and are one of the companies in discussion with the UK Government for the 250 million of funding to support SMR localisation and deployment in the UK.
Power Generation  Distributed Distributed generation is typified by systems which are smallscale power generation or storage technologies typically in the range of 1kW to 10000kW used to provide an alternative to or an enhancement of the traditional electric power system.
Peter Brotherhood offers two solutions into this market place Combined Heat and Power CHP and Gas to Power GTP.
CHP is an efficient means of producing electric power and useful thermal energy from a single fuel source.
It uses less fuel than the alternative methods of separately generating heat by conventional boilers and power stations.
With a significant pedigree in this field Peter Brotherhood has positioned itself to reenter the UK CHP market which is expected to grow to 18GW by 2020.
On a typical day inputs to the UK national grid need to meet a demand of around 38.3GW. power stations are taken offline and renewables are unable to provide an ondemand service.
As part of an overall strategy aimed at bridging the gap the UK Government is promoting a Short Term Operating Reserve STOR market to add 2.5GW additional capacity by 2020.
Peter Brotherhoods GTP packaged 1MW units are designed specifically to address the STOR market.
Oil and Gas  Upstream and Downstream Much of the oil and gas industry has survived an especially tough few years with weak demand and low prices.
Accordingly for businesses operating in the sector it has been difficult to make strategic decisions and plan for the future.
Only now is the sector beginning to emerge from its upheaval.
In the near future the recent oil price gains  which are due to a rebalancing of supply and demand fundamentals partly accelerated by OPECs decision to cut production  are expected to remain in place.
That expectation lies behind a number of positive industry forecasts.
For example according to Barclayss latest EandP Spending Survey oil and gas industry capital expenditures are expected to increase by as much as 7% in 2017.
In addition global rig counts particularly in the USA have been on the rise since the middle of 2016 according to Baker Hughes.
Sourcesite May 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Oil and Gas  Upstream Global liquids demand oil biofuels and other liquid fuels is projected to increase by around 15Mbd to reach 110Mbd by 2035.
All of this demand growth is expected to come from emerging economies as rising prosperity leads to increased oil demand with China expected to account for half of the growth.
In contrast OECD oil demand is projected to continue its trend decline 8Mbd.
The upstream sector exploration and production is expected to be most buoyant in the Middle East and in Europe with visible capital expenditure approaching USD900 billion either in the planning phase or currently active.
Hayward Tyler provides reliable motor solutions to the topside and subsea offshore oil and gas market whilst Peter Brotherhood offers offshore power generation units including those on FPSO FLNG and FSRU.
Hayward Tyler provides a complete range of submersible seawater lift and firewater motors to customers as part of an integrated pump package.
Whilst shortterm demand for this product group remains fairly flat ten units were secured in conjunction with our strategic partner Eureka Pumps AS and with an installed base of more than 250 highpower motors offshore there are additional aftermarket opportunities across key markets.
Oil majors see subsea processing as a means of improving the economics of oil recovery by reducing hardware costs by around 50% through standardisation and extending an oilfields life estimated to be 56 years in the case of the North
Accordingly spending on subsea trees is expected to increase by around 12% yearonyear to 2018.
This demand is driven by the need of over 1000 Source 2017 Oil and Gas Trends  Strategy  PwC January 2017 Source EIC Datastream May 2017 Source Douglas  Westwood analysis 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 candidate fields to either optimise production or minimise the topside investment burden for multiple wellheads.
It is also driven by the need to find an alternative to oilfilled subsea systems and ElectroSubmersible Pumps inwell artificial lift systems with their inherent constraints and reliability concerns.
Hayward Tyler is well placed to capitalise on this trend as it is one of only a handful of motor suppliers worldwide that have the required wet wound motor expertise global standards capability existing approvals and operational reference list.
This is evidenced by the strategic production alliance with TechnipFMC plc that resulted in five additional units that are currently being manufactured in the Centre of Excellence.
The market for FPSOs appears to have bottomed in 2016 during which no orders were placed globally and it is expected to recover in 2017 although at a much lower level than in the past.
The Peter Brotherhood steam turbine generators are well positioned for this market and work continued through the year to support early engineering and project engagement for opportunities in Singapore that will close in FY2018.
Oil and Gas  Downstream Downstream operations are oil and gas operations that take place after the production phase through to the point of sale.
Downstream operations can include refining crude oil and distributing the byproducts such as gasoline natural gas liquids diesel and a variety of other energy sources.
The downstream sector is most buoyant in the Middle East Asia and North America with visible capital expenditure approaching USD1.2 trillion either in the planning phase or currently active.
Peter Brotherhood supplies steam turbine generators and steam turbine drivers to various applications in the downstream market and in FY2017 delivered a steam turbine generator to an SOil refinery in South Korea.
The 22.6MW extraction backpressure steam turbine generator was designed manufactured and tested in accordance with American Petroleum Institute API 612 standards.
In addition the reciprocating gas compressors offered by Peter Brotherhood have a wide application in the downstream market.
New equipment opportunities are focused mainly in the Middle East however there are significant upgrade opportunities based on the global installed base as many refineries respond to new operational requirements or changing regulations.
Water and Industrial  Municipal Water General Industrial and Chemical The water and industrial sector in all its forms is the largest consumer of energy globally and although energy consumption in this sector softened slightly in recent years continued steady growth is predicted.
The Companys continued growth in the wider industrial markets reflects the Companys strategic plan to diversify and maximise the potential for all of its products in the future.
Water and Industrial  Municipal Water Hayward Tyler was successful in delivering its first order for a highdemand water management project in the USA through its collaboration with Japanese pump manufacturer Ebara Corporation.
This is the first opportunity to utilise the highvoltage highpower submersible motor previously used in the oil and gas market for a different application.
Source BP Energy Outlook 2017 Edition January 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Water and Industrial  Industrial Hayward Tyler Group provides engineered solutions for applications across a wide range of other industrial sectors to provide longer life and superior performance as well as to reduce the lifetime cost of ownership a key feature for our customers.
The Peter Brotherhood steam turbines have applications beyond the energy markets.
In choosing a steam turbine either as a generator or as a driver key considerations for customers are safety availability reliability and maintainability.
This generates a wide range of applications which include process industries such as sugar refining.
With both ongoing original equipment opportunities and a constant demand for through life support the industrial markets in all their forms present good opportunities.
Water and Industrial  Chemical Hayward Tylers technologies are satisfying the needs of many processes in the chemical industry including Butanediol.
With an established brand and proven products in China and South Korea respectively these technologies provide additional growth opportunities.
Hayward Tyler canned motor pumps and retrofits are used extensively for high pressure high temperature and difficult to handle fluid applications.
The sealless design eliminates the need for a dynamic seal and utilises the process fluid as a coolant with no need for an external fan.
Industrial chemical plants see this technology as a safer and more reliable alternative to traditional products and the trend is to use canned motor retrofits to replace these products.
Hayward Tylers reputation and experience has positioned the business as a key supplier for these applications.
The Peter Brotherhood steam turbines and reciprocating gas compressors also have a range of applications in the chemical markets.
Defence  UK Submarine Programme Dreadnought is the replacement programme for the Royal Navys Trident missile Vanguard class submarines which form the UKs nuclear deterrent.
The continuous at sea deterrent CASD has provided the United Kingdoms ultimate security insurance policy every day for the last 46 years.
As part of the UK Ministry of Defence 178 billion equipment plan the programme will be supported by a defence budget that will rise every year until the end of the decade meeting the commitment to NATO to spend two per cent of GDP on defence.
Since
1992 the four boats of the Vanguardclass have maintained CASD ensuring that at least one submarine is deployed at all times.
As the Vanguardclass submarines progress to the end of their lifespan the UK is building the next generation of submarines to carry forward the vital role.
Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood have supported the UK nuclear submarine programme since the first boat Dreadnought launched 56 years ago.
Since then the submarine programme has provided both original equipment opportunities and secure aftermarket business which is critical to maintaining CASD.
Currently both Peter Brotherhood and Hayward Tyler are completing contracts for the Astuteclass submarine programme.
Source UK Government Ministry of Defence sitegovernmentorganisationsministryofdefence Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Chairmans Statement
A DEMANDING YEAR The second half provides the platform for growth A mixed performance against challenging market conditions The Group had a mixed trading year based on a weak first half being offset by a strong second half performance and record order book entering the new financial year The Board Key areas of focus for the Board in FY2018 These areas include inter alia Evolution of our marketing and sales strategy Further development of our people Utilising the Centre of Excellence to its full potential Enhancing the position of Peter Brotherhood in its end markets and Completion of the announced transaction with Avingtrans plc.
Dear Shareholder I am sorry to report on a mixed trading year albeit mitigated by a record order book as we move into the new financial year FY2018.
Acknowledging the demanding trading period I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Executive Directors and all the team on your behalf for their contribution in a very challenging market and their tireless devotion in ensuring the longterm security of both Hayward Tyler and Peter
Results Overview The results for the year reflect a steady performance from the Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood businesses at the gross contribution level but a lack of revenue particularly in the first half of FY2017 ultimately meant that we only achieved breakeven at the trading profit of 2.4 million.
Against a backdrop of challenging end markets and continuing uncertain economic times Hayward Tylers performance was dampened in 1H2017 before recovering strongly in 2H2017 and we expect it to strengthen in FY2018.
This strengthening will come from amongst other things the improving prospects for Peter Brotherhood and the beneficial impact of the Centre of Excellence which when utilised more fully will drive greater profitability.
The major focus for HTG looking forward continues to be the development of the order pipeline and order book to create a significantly higher revenue business.
Further details of the trading performance are set out in the Chief Executives Business
Review and the Financial Review.
Dividend
Given the announced proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc we do not intend to recommend the payment of a final dividend for FY2017.
We understand that Avingtrans plc has a progressive dividend policy.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Corporate Governance Please refer to the section on Corporate Governance.
Risk Management
Please refer to the section on Principal Risks and Uncertainties for details of how we manage risk.
Outlook
The expansion of the Group through the acquisition of Peter Brotherhood together with the continued focus on developing our Hayward Tyler business by expanding our production capabilities and investing in research and development means that the Group remains well placed to achieve the Boards growth ambitions provided it has the right capital structure in place.
This external driven growth is dependent inter alia on positive market conditions which we anticipate will improve during the current year.
With a record order book as we enter FY2018 the Board remains confident in the underlying profitability our ability to take excess cost out of the Group and the longer term prospects for the business.
It is clear that these prospects are well understood and appreciated by the directors of Avingtrans plc who have now made an offer to acquire the entire share capital of the
Yours faithfully John May NonExecutive Chairman 19 July 2017 1 Trading represents the underlying performance of the Group Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Chief Executives Business Review
Investing through the cycle for the longterm With the investments made this is now a business poised for growth With the benefit of another years worth of investment in Peter Brotherhood the completion of our Centre of Excellence and the early signs of improvements in our end markets the Group is well positioned to capitalise on potential growth opportunities Setting HTGs priorities Our FY2017 focus Continue to focus on implementing our strategy for growth through product and market development Continue to increase order intake through improvements to the winorder process across all markets Reestablish Peter Brotherhood and embed the business in the Group and Continue to look for wider opportunities to develop and grow the Group.
Achievements
Ended the year with a record order book and a clear strategy of how to drive further growth in order intake going into the new fiscal year Continued to rebuild accreditations and customer relationships at Peter Brotherhood with our first major order won and first significant order shipped Created a new Group Commercial role recruited a new person to the role and put in place a new structure to support the winorder process Completed the major investment in our worldclass Centre of Excellence for specialist motor manufacture and Welcomed the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to open our new facility and present us with the Queens Award for Export International Trade.
Priorities for FY2018 Secure a suitable funding structure to support the longterm future of the Group to take advantage of the opportunities for both Peter Brotherhood and Hayward Tyler Drive further growth in order intake reflecting the improving market conditions and the Groups competitiveness Cut the Groups cost base to support a more flexible and profitable business and Continue to deliver the operational improvements supported by the increased order book.
Introduction
When I wrote in last years review that provided recent economic and political uncertainty does not affect general industrial activity the outlook for HTG is positive I perhaps did not appreciate how prescient that comment might be.
From a financial perspective the year can be characterised using the sporting analogy a game of two halves.
The first half was disappointing but our second half was much more in Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 line with previous periods and more representative of the underlying Group and its future prospects.
We increased the run rate on an annualised basis to over 80.0 million of revenues and over 8.0 million of EBITDA and achieved a record order book entering the current fiscal year.
However the loss in the first half combined with the order intake not happening quick enough to be fully reflected in second half revenue and profit meant that for the first time as Hayward Tyler Group PLC we were not able to either meet or beat market expectations.
WinOrder Process  Ready to Deliver Looking beyond the numbers the Group continued to make significant progress in positioning itself for the anticipated improvement in its end markets.
A huge amount of time effort and investment has gone into the frontend of the business focused on marketing sales and the winorder process.
Key to this action was the appointment of Dr Colin Elcoate to the newly created position of Chief Commercial Officer with responsibility for global commercial activity across the Group.
Colin joined from Clyde Union Pumps and has previously held senior positions at Babcock and Rolls Royce.
He is a Fellow of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers and a nuclear expert with over 25 years experience so it is great to have him on board at such an important time.
Already positive changes have been made to the organisational and commercial structure to support our growth plans including Specific roles for sales business development product management and marketing communications Tightened bidnobid and contract review processes and site rollout and linking to our ERP systems.
The resurrection of the Peter Brotherhood name and brand has continued apace during the year with the reengagement of past customers and the identification of our installed base being key.
There is no doubt that the removal of the Peter Brotherhood name from the market and associated approved vendor lists by the previous owner of the business has made the challenge of resurrection more difficult but it is a gradual process and one to which the employees and wider stakeholders are responding well.
In the past 12 months over forty customer approvals have been achieved the first major order won and first significant order shipped so there is no doubt that the former pedigree of Peter Brotherhood is being brought back to life.
Peter Brotherhood still has an enviable reputation in specific market niches and the challenge is to strengthen and broaden it.
As an example in the floating vessels market Peter Brotherhood has more steam turbine gensets on FPSOs than all of its competition combined.
This clearly stands Peter Brotherhood in good stead when the anticipated pickup in the floating vessels new buildretrofit market recovers.
Peter Brotherhood also remains a key strategic supplier to Rolls Royce and ultimately the Royal Navy in the UK having provided all of the steam turbine gensets to the Astute boats.
One of Peter Brotherhoods advantages is that it remains an independent supplier and as such can be more flexible in terms of product offering and response times than its larger global rivals.
The Group has continued to invest in numerous exhibitions globally to broaden the reach particularly of Peter Brotherhood to try to expand the brand to a wider global population.
Over the past twelve months this has resulted in exhibitions and conferences in South Africa the USA China India and the UK.
Order Intake and Order Book Order intake increased by 11% to 68.3 million helped by a full years contribution from Peter Brotherhood which contributed 16.2 million thus meaning that overall our order intake KPI target of 1.1x ratio of order intake to historical revenue was achieved.
Hayward Tylers order intake actually declined slightly by 4% to 52.1 million reflecting a slowdown in its end markets both in terms of new units but also in particular a slowdown in the shopservice activities of our US business as outages were postponed.
The strong second half order intake contributed to a record order book as at 31 March 2017 which stood at 49.8 million an increase of 38% over the prior year.
This represented an increase in both Hayward Tyler of 36% from 26.7 million to 36.2 million and Peter Brotherhood of 45% from 9.4 million to 13.6 million.
So despite the downturn in the Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Groups end markets there was still a healthy split between both geography and sector.
Key order wins for the period included KHNP in South Korea for nuclear replacement units Eureka for submersible motors for offshore topside deployment numerous power contract wins with key customers in China and India and strategically important contracts with new customers in Peter Brotherhood.
Pipeline
Whilst the Group achieved its KPI target for order intake during the year the key challenge looking forward is how to maintain develop and grow a greater level of order intake to feed the newly invested and improved facilities.
Part of the investment made in the winorder process highlighted above has been to pull together a universal and consistent approach to the pipeline of opportunities across the Group both in terms of customer market segment and geography.
This has highlighted a pipeline of over 500 million worth of opportunities which has been ranked according to whether it is at the research prebid bid or negotiation stage.
To support this constantly evolving pipeline specific opportunities are then highlighted and an active accountbased marketing approach applied aimed at increasing the chances of conversion from pipeline to order intake.
Development and Future Growth We continued to invest in research and development RandD during the year spending 0.6 million of which 0.3 million was capitalised.
Our focus has been on the development of the next generation of products and services in order to expand the potential addressable markets into which both Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood can sell.
Numerous projects are therefore ongoing across both businesses but simplistically they can be split into the following growth categories Product development  looking at opportunities to provide a motor above pump package to increase our scope of supply to the offshore oil industry Market development  developing and extending our range of compressors for the downstream refining market and Diversification  developing our wetwound motors to provide a generator for tidal applications.
Analysis of the expansion into new markets new products and a combination of both opens up further opportunities for the Groups niche offerings by a significant factor representing billions of pounds worth of opportunity addressable over the medium to longterm.
Specific examples include Partnership with the University of Edinburgh Hayward Tyler has been working with the University of Edinburgh to develop a generator to harness wave energy and convert it to power.
The CGen Neptune generator has been developed to a working prototype and Hayward Tyler has now secured over 0.7 million of funding to support the manufacture and development of this technology at the recently completed Centre of Excellence.
Development of alliance agreement with FSubsea Hayward Tylers motor and qualified penetrator technology has been selected for adoption to support the subsea deployment of the FSubsea Omnirise system.
The prototype won this years OTC Spotlight on New Technology Award and is due to be tested as a fullscale prototype of the worlds most autonomous boosting system.
This system has the potential to unlock single and multiphase boosting solutions for a far wider number of subsea wells than can currently be economically accessed using existing technologies thus creating significant opportunities for Hayward Tyler.
The Smart Factory Operationally we continued to drive improvements through all our facilities focused on the key headline metrics of right first time RFT and on time in full OTIF.
Our Peter Brotherhood facility in Peterborough is worldclass and primed ready to support the anticipated uptick in the FPSO and steam turbine mechanical drive market.
Our facility in Hayward Tyler Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Colchester has made significant strides along its lean journey over the past five years driving down lead times in its service value stream from over 25 weeks to less than 7 weeks whilst doubling ontime delivery to over 90%.
In our Lutonbased Centre of Excellence we were particularly proud to have recently won the UK prestigious Smart Factory of the year award having already been shortlisted for WorldClass Manufacturing ahead of the likes of Ricardo UK Ltd and Siemens plc.
This is testament to the significant investment made in our ability to ship OTIF and RFT once we have won the orders.
The Smart Factory represents the twenty first century approach to linking seamlessly marketing and sales and operational planning.
The linking of the process from customer order through design manufacture engineering assembly test despatch and back through support monitoring and full lifecycle maintenance and management will continue to provide a real differentiator for the Group going forward.
Working Together Succeeding Together In addition to the focus on winorder and operational improvements the Group has also had a busy year in terms of gaining recognition amongst its peer group for its longterm development plans.
At the recent Manufacturer MX Awards supported by the UKs Institution of Mechanical Engineers Hayward Tyler was shortlisted for the Apprentice of the Year for People and Skills and for WorldClass Manufacturing and was successful in winning both the Smart Factory Award as mentioned above and also the Leadership and Strategy Award.
We were also delighted to welcome the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in August 2016 to open the Centre of Excellence and formally present the Queens Award for Enterprise International Trade.
Over 350 employees family members customers and local dignitaries joined us for this very prestigious and historic occasion and it marked another milestone in Hayward Tylers long and rich history.
Against some challenging market conditions these successes underpin the strength of the Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood businesses both of whom compete against some much larger corporations on a global scale.
Their respective abilities to punch above their weight is testament to the employees we have and our shared set of values which are Pride Innovation Pace and Excellence see Corporate Social Responsibility.
These shared values go to the heart of what unites us as an ever expanding Group.
For this and for our employees continued fortitude good humour and patience I thankyou with all sincerity for being part of two great engineering brands.
Outlook
Ive written previously about the longterm nature of our growth plans and the market conditions which weve witnessed over the past year highlight how important it is to be able to invest through the cycle.
Over the past five years weve seen the Group grow both organically and through the acquisition of the Peter Brotherhood operations from a revenue run rate of 32 million to over 80 million and increase in size to over 500 highly skilled educated and motivated employees.
Weve seen the transformation of the main Luton facility into a worldclass Centre of Excellence the resurrection of the Peter Brotherhood name into a business that is getting back its mojo and is hungry for growth and increased investment in our apprentice graduate and employee training schemes.
This is why it is great to be able to confirm the recommended acquisition of the Group by Avingtrans plc another UK AIMlisted engineering group that has the balance sheet strength and supportive shareholder base to be able to continue to invest in both Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood and support the Groups longer term growth plans.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The last few years have been incredibly exciting and Im delighted to now pass on the baton to a group that is looking to significantly increase shareholder value over the medium to long term using Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood as its springboard.
Thank you Ewan LloydBaker
Chief Executive Officer
19 July 2017 1 Trading represents the underlying performance of the Group 2 Order intake represents contracts for which purchase orders were received from customers in the year to 31 March 2017 3 Order book represents contracts that had yet to be shipped to customers as at 31 March 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
We use various internal and external measures to assess our performance against our strategy.
The Key Performance Indicators KPIs set out below help determine how successful we have been in strengthening our business increasing profitability and generating a positive return to shareholders.
In addition to the financial KPIs measured below we have a range of nonfinancial KPIs that tiein seamlessly with our management information system dashboard mechanism.
Taken together these KPIs are cascaded down up and across the organisation to ensure a consistent approach and one based on fact and transparency.
They cover a variety of subjects including delivery execution lead time supply chain performance and safety as well as financial matters.
The financial measures for 201213 in the charts below are measured for the 15 month period to 31 March 2013 except for net debt to EBITDA which was measured at 31 March 2013 and assumed EBITDA had been earned evenly over the 15 month period.
To align the interests of senior management with those of shareholders the remuneration of the Executive Directors is linked to a number of these KPIs.
For further details see the
Directors Report on Remuneration.
Definitions
201213 15 month period to 31 March 2013 or as at 31 March 2013 Order Intake Contracts for which purchase orders have been received from customers in a period.
Cash Conversion Ratio of a Trading EBITDA plus movement in working capital to b Trading EBITDA.
Net Debt Cash less borrowings.
Trading
EBIT Trading earnings before interest and tax before exceptional items.
Trading
EBITDA Trading earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation before exceptional items.
Gross Profit % Gross profit margin represents ratio of a revenue less cost of sales to b revenue.
Trading EPS Trading diluted earnings per share.
All KPIs are presented on a likeforlike basis i. exclude nonrecurring items.
1 Trading represents the underlying performance of the Group Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Objective KPI FY2017 Performance ORDER INTAKE TO HISTORICAL REVENUE The ratio of order intake in the current financial year to revenue in the previous year.
Target 1.1x Order intake to historical revenue ratio Order intake in line with target at 1.1x historical revenue driven by improving Nuclear order intake.
CASH CONVERSION Ratio of trading EBITDA plus movement in working capital to trading
Target 85%
Cash conversion % In FY2017 the Group was breakeven at the EBITDA level and accordingly the ratio is not applicable in the financial year.
NET DEBT TO TRADING EBITDA Ratio of Trading EBITDA to Net Debt Target 2x
Net debt to EBITDA ratio In FY2017 the Group was breakeven at the EBITDA level and accordingly the ratio is not applicable in the financial year.
Net debt has risen in FY2017 mainly driven by breakeven EBITDA capital expenditure and an increase in working capital.
GROSS PROFIT% Ratio of revenue less cost of sales to revenue Target 35% 28% Gross profit % The Group fell short of its target in FY2017 due to low revenue in 1H2017.
1H2017 Gross profit% 14% 2H2017 Gross profit% 35% TRADING EBIT% Ratio of trading earnings before interest and tax to revenue Target 10% 4% Trading EBITDA % The Group fell short of its target in FY2017 due to low revenue in 1H2017.
1H2017 Trading EBIT% 24% 2H2017 Trading EBIT% 8% TRADING EPS
Trading diluted earnings per share growth Target 10% 196% Trading earnings per share Trading diluted earnings per share was negative in FY2017 due to low revenue in 1H2017
FY2016
FY2015
FY2014
FY2013
NA
FY2017
FY2016
FY2015
FY2014
FY2013
NA
FY2017
FY2016
FY2015
FY2014
FYFY2017
FY2016
FY2015
FY2014
FY2013
FY2017
FY2016
FY2015
FY2014
FY2013
FY2017
FY2016
FY2015
FY2014
FY2013
Grow the business Maintain a balance between growth and borrowings
Increase
Improve
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Financial Review
CASHFLOW AND FUNDING REMAIN THE KEY
We can support our growth aspirations with a reduced cost base Our key priorities remain cash generation and the longterm funding of the Group for the benefit of all stakeholders Our Focus and Achievements Our FY2017 focus Continue to manage working capital and borrowings whilst growing and investing in the business Continue to ensure that the Group has access to flexible and sufficient funding arrangements Enhance systems and processes to roll out a common IT platform across the group facilities to enhance collaboration knowledge sharing and communication and Continue to develop risk management processes within the Group with a particular focus on contract risk and reestablishing the position of Peter Brotherhood.
Achievements
Maintained supportive banking relationship during difficult working capital constrained times Continued the development of a common IT platform across the Group to enhance visibility and the speed of decision making and Tightened bidnobid and contract review processes.
Priorities for FY2018 Complete the proposed acquisition by Avingtrans plc Continue to manage working capital borrowings and access to sufficient funding arrangements Reduce fixed costs and Further development of the common IT platform across the Group to provide seamless sales and operational planning.
Introduction
Revenue in FY2017 was too low to cover all of our fixed cost base which had been geared up to service significantly higher revenue.
That led to breakeven trading EBITDA and a reported loss of 3.9 million FY2016 profit of 2.4 million.
That loss together with major capital expenditure and an increase in working capital led to substantially higher net debt which has been a significant challenge to the Group despite a strong recovery in EBITDA in the second half of the year.
Basis of Reporting The Group financial statements in this report have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Trading Operating Results
We continue to operate two service lines within Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood to deliver our products and services.
These lines are original equipment manufacturing OE and aftermarket services AM.
OE revenue was lower across Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood however there was a strong increase in AM revenue from Hayward Tyler Colchester driven by the Nuclear market and Peter Brotherhood driven by a fullyear contribution and the reinvigoration of the brand.
These changes generated a revenue mix from OE and AM in FY2017 of 30%70% FY2016 44%56%.
Overall Group revenue was slightly higher at 62.7 million FY2016 61.6 million with the increase due to a fullyears contribution from Peter Brotherhood.
Our broad geographical coverage and diversity of markets whilst providing us with a degree of resilience were not enough to offset the adverse market conditions in Oil and Gas the US aftermarket for Power and the China and India new build Power markets which led to lower than expected order intake and thereby lower revenue.
Hayward Tyler revenue was 46.5 million FY2016 49.1 million and Peter Brotherhood revenue was 16.2 million FY2016 12.5 million the increase resulting from a full years contribution from Peter Brotherhood.
In terms of the total Group Power was the largest sector at 44% of revenue FY2016 51% down on prior year due to lower revenue from China whilst both Nuclear and Oil and Gas were stronger.
Nuclear represented 26% of revenue FY2016 21% driven by OE and AM revenue from KHNP in South Korea and Oil and Gas was 15% of revenue FY2016 11% reflecting turnover from Peter Brotherhood and Hayward Tylers subsea units.
Revenue from other markets that include chemical defence industrial and renewables was more or less level at 16% FY2016 17%.
The largest geographical market was Asia Pacific excluding China at 32% of revenue FY2016 25% of which South Korea was the single largest market reflecting Nuclear sales.
China was 6% FY2016 13% reflecting sales of BCP new units and aftermarket services.
The USA accounted for 24% of revenue FY2016 22% followed by the UK at 13% of revenue FY2016 19% and Europe excluding the UK 12% FY2016 10%.
Profit and Profit Margin We increased the size of the Group in anticipation of achieving significantly higher revenues however revenue of 62.7 million for the year was too low to cover all of our factory overheads including labour rent and utilities.
This led to a gross profit margin of 28% FY2016 33%.
See Table 1.
Table 1 Reported Gross Profit Margin However I am encouraged to report that the underlying gross profit margin was strong at 43% FY2016 41% noticeably ahead of our KPI target of 35% indicating that we are maintaining or improving our underlying profit margins.
The underlying gross profit margin of Hayward Tylers OE business was 34% continuing the upward trend of the last few years and a testament to the process of continuous improvement particularly in operations implemented throughout the Group.
Peter Brotherhoods OE business delivered an underlying gross loss margin of 7% as a result of a lack of work and therefore the tendency to over burden a small number of contracts with excess cost.
The underlying gross profit margin in the AM business of Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood were strong at 52% and 51% respectively.
See Table 2.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Table 2 Underlying Gross Profit Margin
1.2 million and Hayward Tyler was 14.5 million FY2016 12.0 million.
The increased charges in Peter Brotherhood were driven by the inclusion of a fullyear of costs whilst the increase in Hayward Tyler in FY2017 mainly reflects increased payroll costs travel expenses and foreign exchange losses on cash flow hedges established prior to the Brexit vote and the resulting weakening of sterling.
Taken together with the gross profit of 17.3 million that delivered an overall breakeven trading EBITDA earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation in FY2017 FY2016 7.2 million.
Depreciation and amortisation was higher at 2.5 million FY2016 1.4 million reflecting inclusion of a fullyear of Peter Brotherhood and the start of depreciation on the Centre of Excellence following the opening of the manufacturing facility in August 2016.
As a result there was a trading operating loss of 2.5 million FY2016 profit of 5.8 million.
Trading loss before tax was 3.7 million FY2016 profit of 5.1 million.
The Group is exposed to the US Dollar through its operating business in the USA and from UK exports to China.
On a constant exchange rate basis revenue and operating profit in FY2016 would have been higher by 4.4 million and 1.9 million respectively.
NonTrading
Operating Results Nontrading other income was 0.5 million FY2016 nil which resulted from a positive legal settlement relating to the building contractor in Luton and nontrading operating charges were 0.1 million FY2016 1.8 million which represent the amortisation of the Peter Brotherhood order book and the final costs arising from the acquisition of that business.
Finance Charges Trading finance costs in the year were 1.2 million FY2016 0.6 million mainly reflecting higher debt levels during the year.
Nontrading finance costs were nil FY2016 0.4 million.
Tax
There was a trading tax charge for the year of 0.2 million FY2016 0.6 million which represents tax payable on profits in the USA and China of 1.2 million FY2016 0.7 million offset by 1.0 million tax credit on losses in the UK.
The tax credit in the UK includes an additional benefit from research and development tax incentives together with the annual investment allowance deduction granted by HMRC.
There was a nontrading tax charge of 0.4 million FY2016 41000 representing a reduction in the deferred tax asset following the change in UK corporation tax rate from 18% to 17% 292000 together with a tax charge on the nontrading other income and operating charges 75000.
Net Profit The loss for the year was 3.9 million FY2016 profit of 2.4 million which delivered a basic loss per share of 7.07 pence per share FY2016 earnings per share of 4.89 pence and diluted loss per share of 6.93 pence FY2016 earning per share of 4.89 pence.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
The Group paid its interim dividend of 0.58 pence per share in February 2017 at a total cost of 0.3 million.
Given the announced proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc we do not intend to recommend the payment of a final dividend for FY2017.
Capital Expenditure Purchase of fixed assets and investment in research and development was 6.4 million in the year FY2016 11.6 million of which 3.7 million FY2016 9.8 million was invested in the Centre of Excellence 1.7million FY2016 0.7 million relates to expenditure in HT Colchester on new plant and equipment together with a revised layout of the shop floor to increase capacity and 0.3 million FY2016 0.8 million relates to capitalised development costs.
In addition the net expense on the Centre of Excellence was 1.6 million FY2016 0.9 million representing costs of 1.9 million FY2016 1.2 million which mainly related to depreciation and lease interest relating to the capital expenditure together with research development and training offset by RGF grant income of 0.3 million FY2016 0.3 million.
Further details of the accounting treatment of the RGF programme are given in note 2.24 to these financial statements.
Peter Brotherhood Acquisition On 30 October 2015 the Group acquired the trade and assets of Peter Brotherhood for a total consideration of 10.1 million USD15.4 million following an adjustment for working capital.
Under IFRS 3 Business Combinations a buyer is required to consider the fair value of the assets and liabilities that it purchased during the first 12 months of ownership and in the case of Peter Brotherhood the provisional fair value was determined to be 9.8 million which gave rise to goodwill on acquisition of over 0.3 million.
The final fair value was confirmed as 9.8 million during FY2017.
Cash Generation and Working Capital Net cash used in operating activities was 5.4 million FY2016 net cash generated 5.1 million.
This use mainly reflects the net change in working capital.
Net working capital increased from 7.2 million at 31 March 2016 to 12.0 million at 31 March 2017 driven by high revenues in March that led to an increase of 3.5 million in trade receivables.
This together with capital expenditure in the year of 6.4 million led to a reduction in undrawn borrowing facilities to 1.7 million FY2016 5.1 million.
Details of cash borrowings and related interest rates are given in notes 23 and 29 to these financial statements.
Funding
During FY2017 we arranged a number of borrowing and ancillary facilities to support the Groups ongoing business including A 2.4 million shortterm increase to the UK committed revolving credit facility A 3.0 million increase in equipment finance leases to help fund the purchase of new plant and machinery and A 2.7 million increase in drawings under the loan note programme to replace short term borrowings that had been used to fund the completion of the Centre of
The relationship that we have with our banking partners and the support that they have given the Group have been very valuable.
The Group continues to have constructive discussions with its bank Royal Bank of Scotland RBS regarding a suitable longterm financing structure to support the prospects of the business.
RBS has granted four 30day extensions with respect to repayment of the 2.4 million shortterm increase in facilities noted above and the annualised measurement of the financial covenants both of which have most recently been extended from 30 June 2017 to 28 July 2017.
The Directors have therefore been seeking a longer term funding solution that can deliver the record order book and underpin the longer term prospects for the Group and remove the shortterm uncertainty surrounding the capital structure.
Accordingly it is encouraging to report that the proposed acquisition of Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group by Avingtrans plc provides the balance sheet strength and funding capacity to support the future growth of the Group.
Borrowings
Net debt increased from 8.6 million at 31 March 2016 to 22.1 million at 31 March 2017 mainly driven by breakeven EBITDA capital expenditure and the increase in working capital.
At 31 March 2017 net debt comprised Term borrowings of 8.2 million FY2016 5.9 million Finance leases of 3.6 million FY2016 1.6 million and Drawings under revolving credit facilities of 11.5 million FY2016 6.2 million offset by cash 1.2 million FY2016 5.1 million.
Going Concern The Directors have considered The Groups budget for the coming year and its projections through to 2020 The likelihood that the proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc the Avingtrans Transaction will complete The Groups longterm financing arrangements as part of an enlarged group following the Avingtrans Transaction and In the unlikely event that the Avingtrans Transaction does not complete the alternative funding solutions available to the Group and the Company the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly the Company continues to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017.
More detail on Going Concern is contained in Note 2.1 of the financial statements.
Pensions
Within the UK the Group operates a defined benefit plan with benefits linked to final salary and a defined contribution plan DCP.
With effect from 1 June 2003 the defined benefit plan was closed to future service accruals and new UK employees offered membership of the
A full actuarial valuation of the defined benefit plan is produced every three years the last one being as at 1 January 2014.
The next full actuarial valuation as at 1 January 2017 is due by 31 March 2018 at the latest.
A valuation is prepared at each financial year end for the purposes of the report and accounts by independent qualified actuaries.
The net surplus increased during the financial year to 1.0 million at 31 March 2017 FY2016 0.2 million mainly due to higher investment returns and contributions by the Company exceeding the increase in scheme liabilities as a result of actuarial assumptions.
Details of pensions and employee obligations are given in note 28 to the financial statements.
Statement of Financial Position Total equity reduced by 3.4 million to 22.4 million mainly as a result of the loss of 3.9 million and the payment of dividends in the year of 0.8 million offset by the gain on the translation of overseas subsidiaries of 0.8 million and the net gain in value of the pension scheme of 0.5 million.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
I would mirror Ewans view that the last few years have been very fulfilling as we have led the transformation of the business into a Group capable of achieving a considerable role in its chosen markets.
With that in mind I am encouraged by the proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc the strength of whose balance sheet presents the opportunity for significant growth in shareholder value based on the performance of Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood as well as being in the interests of all our stakeholders.
Nick Flanagan Chief Financial Officer 19 July 2017 1 FY2016 Five months contribution trade and assets acquired on 30 October 2015 2 Underlying gross profit margin represents the gross profit margin directly associated with the contracts that makeup the revenue that has been recognised 3 Trading represents the underlying performance of the Group 4 Constant exchange rate is calculated by rebasing prior year figures at current year rates 5 Nontrading represents nonrecurring items Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Principal Risks and Uncertainties The Group is exposed to a number of risks and uncertainties that could have a material impact on its performance and financial position.
Our approach to risk is intended to protect the interests of our shareholders and other stakeholders whilst allowing sensible risk taking that is critical to growth.
Managing Risk Identifying assessing and managing risk is the responsibility of the Board.
Our
Our risk appetite depends on the nature of an individual risk and it is considered in Board discussions as the need arises but also as part of our regular risk review process in the Audit
From time to time we obtain advice from third party experts in a cost effective manner to complement and supplement inhouse knowledge.
The longterm success of the Group relies in part on managing the risks to our business.
Whilst the Group has longestablished risk management policies and practices in place which address and monitor risk we endeavour to develop those practices each year.
The Chief Financial Officer is responsible for risk management on behalf of the Board and the Audit Committee reviews the risk register on a regular basis.
Ultimately our aim is to ensure that risk management is embedded within the core processes of our business units.
Risk Management Process
The Group uses a risk register to help coordinate its risk management process.
The risk register identifies the key business risks and documents the policies and practices in place to mitigate those risks.
In addition the risks are assessed as to their probability and their impact in order to determine a risk score.
Principal Risks We classify the risks to the business into three groups namely strategic risk operational risk and financial risk.
The principal risks identified by the Directors under these groups are set out in the table below.
The risks considered during the Groupwide risk management process cover a wider range of issues than the top 10 that are listed in this table.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Strategic Risk
Growth Strategy and Competition Part 1  Growth A fundamental part of the Groups strategy is growth from both OE and AM and as part of that strategy the Group has gearedup its fixed cost base to be able to turnover 80 million or more in a year.
The growth is reliant on our markets.
These markets demonstrate longterm growth but remain highly competitive.
Failure to generate sufficient order intake and revenue to cover the fixed cost base could give rise to lower profit and cash generation that constrains the
Failure to keepup with technological change could give rise to the Groups products services and technologies becoming less competitive.
The Group is a specialist business providing niche engineering solutions for the global energy sector.
It has an excellent market profile quality reliability and customer relationships which results in inclusion on sector bidquote opportunities.
The Group has invested and is investing in key aspects to maintain and improve the Groups competitive position including employees see E below including appointment of a Chief Commercial Officer with significant experience in the sector on 1 January 2017 supply chain see F below developing and maintaining strong relationships with key customers capital expenditure on the Centre of Excellence and plant and equipment research and development of products and processes see Strategy in Action and aftermarket initiatives including supporting end oflife extension programmes.
Following the result for FY2017 the Group is implementing a programme to reduce its fixed cost base to lower its operational gearing.
B.
Growth Strategy and Competition Part 2 Acquisition Risk The Group acquired a new subsidiary on 30 October 2015 Peter Brotherhood PBL the former Peterborough operations of DresserRand.
Failure to reestablish this business could 1 absorb a disproportionate part of management resource at the expense of other parts of the Group and 2 reduce the Groups profitability.
The Group completed the following actions to mitigate this risk predeal due diligence achieving a balance between attractive purchase price and business purchase agreement terms and conditions appropriate funding of the acquisition and on going business followed by deleveraging the business establishing a senior management team complemented by experienced executives from Hayward Tyler development of employees focusing on marketing and sales including growing its AM business and reorganising the business on the basis of process flow lines.
C.
Execution
The Group designs manufactures and services highly technical products that are mission critical to the end user.
Failure to satisfy contractual obligations could give rise to significant losses e. on the Groups reputation.
The Group continues to invest heavily in its people processes and products to maintain and improve lead times and product innovation.
These steps include inter alia enhanced customer relationship management sales and operational planning process flow mapping increased research and development product standardisation and enhancing process capability.
The Group also seeks to minimise the impact of execution risk through its terms of trade such as 1 limiting the undertakings it gives to pay liquidated damages and 2 avoiding consequential damages altogether.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Strategic Risk
Global Economic
The Group operates in global energy industrial and defence markets.
A slowdown in those markets including the possible impact from ongoing economic and political uncertainty may adversely impact order intake liquidity needs terms of trade and the financial performance of the Group.
For the year being reported local senior management were responsible for monitoring and responding to changes in their markets.
From 1 April 2017 this responsibility has transferred to the Chief Commercial
The Group has a diversified geographical and sector spread that reduces the impact of localised economic trends and activities.
In addition the Group is investing in research and development to develop new products or adapt existing products for use in other applications in order to broaden its product offering to reduce the risk.
E.
Employees
Attracting and retaining our talented people is a Group priority to ensure our continued success.
The Group prides itself on the skilled and highly trained and qualified employees who demonstrate their commitment to the Group through the continuous improvement of our products processes and procedures which impacts on the Groups performance.
Failure to attract the right talent including highly trained and qualified engineering staff could inhibit the rate of product and process development as well as impact on the Groups performance.
Recruitment and retention of employees remains a key focus for the Group to ensure its continued success.
Group mitigating actions include continuing the significant investment in training and development personal development reviews career path and mobility conversations to support individuals career aspirations and enhance the Groups secondment opportunities succession planning outreach to Universities Colleges and Local offset the absence of key personnel.
Operational Risk
Supply Chain The Group has an increasing dependence on its supply chain as part of its aim to improve throughput and minimise stock.
Failure of that supply chain can result in operational disruption and delays to shipments to customers leading to potential loss of profit and damage to customer relationships.
A strategic sourcing policy was implemented in
As part of the Groups programme of continuous improvement the implementation of this policy is being reinvigorated.
Mitigating actions include sourcing strategies to avoid single point dependence for any key commodity and standardisation to support possible stock holdings identifying inhouse capability and focused investment in related capital expenditure exception reporting daily operational planning and review processes support the early identification of risk and where necessary action monitoring of supplier performance a reduced number of suppliers with strategic longterm partnerships on key components strengthening of supply chain teams and continuous supply chain benchmarking and development.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Financial Risk
Funding
The Group is dependent on its ability to service its debts and refinance existing borrowings when they fall due as well as to fund working capital capital expenditure and research and development.
If the Group fails to generate profits and cash it could face funding constraints that impact the business cycle.
The Group manages its capital to continue as a going concern and maintain its liquidity.
The Group continually reforecasts its borrowing requirements which include an 8week rolling cash flow forecast produced each day a 15week cash flow forecast produced each month and a 12month rolling profit and loss balance sheet and cash flow forecast each quarter to ensure that funding is available to support its operations and its compliance with borrowing covenants.
The Group maintains committed UK bank credit facilities augmented by specific funding to support the investment in the Centre of Excellence and a bonding facility.
In addition the Group maintains an active bank relationship programme and close relationship with UK Export Finance to help to safeguard its ability to fund its needs.
New funding arrangements were established during FY2017 to support the Groups working capital needs including a temporary 2.4 million extension to the UK revolving credit facility and a 2.7 million increase to the loan note programme however lower revenue profit and cash generation has constrained the Group in 2H2017.
H.
Working
Capital
As a fundamental part of the Groups strategy is growth the Group is exposed to a potential increase in its working capital requirement that absorbs cash.
If
The Group is seeking to mitigate this risk through the following means standard terms and conditions of manufacturing contracts require a customer to make stage payments to fund working capital on the contract.
Where stage payments cannot be achieved by the Group it may be possible to augment borrowing and bonding lines through use of the shortterm funding schemes provided by UK Export Finance with whom the Group has a close relationship a Groupwide initiative to reduce stock increased manufacturing velocity through workflow reengineering to reduce working capital requirements per unit of revenue through active management of accounts receivable and accounts payable and linking employee remuneration to the control of cash and working capital.
I.
Currency
The Group operates and sells in overseas markets that may utilise currencies other than those in which its principal costs are denominated.
The exposure to foreign exchange rate fluctuations may as a result affect the Groups cash flow.
The principal risk is US Dollar income.
The Groups policy is to hedge its transaction exposures i. contracted flows in the 12 to 24 month period.
As at 31 March 2017 76% of estimated USD net inflows into the UK over the following 12 months were hedged.
Currency hedging lines are available from two providers.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Potential Impact Mitigation Financial Risk
Pension
Scheme
The Group maintains a defined benefit pension scheme.
The Group could be required to increase its contributions to cover funding shortfalls caused by poor investment performance of scheme assets a deterioration in the discount rate or inflation rate applied and changes in life expectancy of members of the scheme.
The scheme is closed to new members and to future benefit improvements.
The performance of the investment advisers is monitored closely by the Company and pension trustees and action taken where that is not satisfactory.
The assumptions used to determine the pension deficitsurplus are based on recommendations of the actuary to the scheme.
The
Directors discuss the pension scheme at each Board meeting and there is regular contact with the pension fund trustees.
The aim is to strengthen the financial position of Hayward Tyler Ltd the sponsor company through its underlying performance which assures stakeholders and helps to maintain or reduce contributions to cover any funding shortfall.
The plan trustees have selected a liability driven investment strategy and glide path aimed at reducing interest and inflation rate risks and providing a return that matches or exceeds the growth in projected pension plan liabilities.
Mapping our Principal Risks The principal risks outlined in this section have been assessed in light of the current environment and summarised in the adjacent diagrams.
A.
Growth Strategy and Competition Part 1
B.
Growth Strategy and Competition Part 2 Acquisition Risk
Execution
D.
Global Economic Activity
Employees
F.
Supply Chain
Funding
H.
Working Capital
Currency
J.
Pension Scheme Table 1 Measure of the principal risks Table 1 assesses the degree of risk arising from the principal risks.
The vertical axis plots the probability that a principal risk will occur and the horizontal axis plots its impact.
The diagram gives a measure of the risk.
Principal risks have been colour coded to show our assessment of the direction of change and provides a focus for mitigating actions.
The Group undertakes additional work to address those risks that it considers to be potentially heightened.
Change in risk
Stable
Decreasing
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Corporate Social Responsibility We lead our business responsibly to meet our stakeholders needs and we are driving improvements to our corporate social responsibility as part of our programme of continuous improvement.
We are rightly proud of our long history of working with and supporting our local communities both directly and indirectly through the actions of our employees Leadership on corporate social responsibility CSR matters is provided by the
CSR is managed by our business units and it forms an integral part of their day today operations.
Our key areas of focus As an employer and manufacturer HTG focuses on five key areas Our People and Values
Environment
Society
Celebrating Our Success The year to 31 March 2017 continued to see increased focus on these key areas with a number of new initiatives aimed at enhancing existing and developing new activities and procedures.
A shared set of values PRIDE in what we do INNOVATION in thought process and product PACE getting things done EXCELLENCE in everything we do People and Values The success of the Group is linked to the vision performance and success of our people.
We look at every new hire strategically as an opportunity to continuously develop a pipeline of talented individuals and ensure we have succession plans in place to support our peoples career aspirations.
We provide an environment that encourages innovation and supports internal career progression.
We continue to work in partnership with local Schools Colleges and Universities developing constructive working relationships.
Hayward Tyler Luton has been collaborating with the University of Bedfordshire supporting approximately 120 MBA students providing live business projects that the students work on as part of their MBA programme.
Peter
Brotherhood welcomed a number of the MBA students to its Peterborough site to see how the projects were being implemented and supporting our business strategies.
Hayward Tyler Colchester has further nurtured its relationship with Universities especially the University of Vermont by leading tours of the facility and giving presentations on campus.
We know the importance of continued professional development CPD to enhance our peoples knowledge skills and experience and we provide technical and soft skills training on the job development mentoring and coaching from senior management to improve their performance and prepare our people for career progression.
We invest in our people and Peter Brotherhood have already undertaken 2200 hours of personal development to give them new tools skills and competencies to enhance their productivity and performance which has been welcomed by our Peter Brotherhood employees.
Hayward Tyler Luton has undertaken a further 9000 hours of development during 2016 building upon a significant investment in our peoples continued professional development.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 In December 2016 we invited 48 of our long service award employees to a celebratory lunch at a local hotel the Luton Hoo.
We have many employees who have remained loyal to Hayward Tyler or Peter Brotherhood with 20 30 and even 40 years continuous service and this event recognised their commitment and provided an opportunity to reward our employees and celebrate in their success.
We know a healthy workforce is a productive workforce and our employees wellbeing is as important to us providing competitive salaries and an exceptional benefits plan and we encourage our employees to take advantage of discounted gym membership in the UK and free gym membership in the USA.
We operate the Bike2Work scheme and our employees engage in many social activities such as golf football cycling and fishing events coordinated through our active Social Clubs.
Additionally our USA employees enjoy a Wellness bonus of 100 to spend on any healthy activity or product of their choosing such as running shoes race entries snowshoes etc.
Teamwork is an important aspect of our company culture and you will find a near constant stream of employeeled events such as company parties celebrations chili and barbecue cookoff competitions and celebrations of everything from National Pizza day to National Sundae day.
As highlighted above we operate with a shared set of values across the Group.
Referred to as PIPE Pride Innovation Pace and Excellence their purpose is to further develop our culture of customer service and continuous improvement underpinned by these values.
Integrity forms an important part of these values which encompass our dealings with all our stakeholders including inter alia customers suppliers and each other.
These values are promoted in our employee handbook contracts of employment internal policies such as compliance with the UK Bribery Act 2010 and is fundamental to our performance development review programme.
Safety
The Group prioritises the safety of its employees above all else.
Safety is managed and reported on visual display boards including relevant KPIs so that all employees are aware of the safety performance and the personal impact that they have both individually and collectively.
We lead our business responsibly to meet our stakeholders needs and we are driving improvements to our corporate social responsibility as part of our programme of continuous improvement.
All employees are encouraged to report any accident near miss or safety observation across all sites.
All relevant information is recorded daily and displayed on visual display boards located in each production area as well as in officebased departments.
Safety is discussed in daily production meetings as well as at managements monthly review meetings with each business unit and at each monthly board meeting.
This commitment to health and safety has seen a reduction in incidents which can be attributed to the vast amount of work carried out over the past year to enhance our health and safety procedures from risk assessments to accident reporting as part of our continuous improvement programme.
For example the introduction of a groundlevel dynamic and moveable workstations capable of carrying loads of up to 15 tonnes known as Cruser trolleys in the Hayward Tyler Luton production line have drastically reduced crane and forklift truck usage.
That step has resulted in 60% less craneusage and the elimination of forklift trucks thereby reducing risks significantly.
The plan is to rollout Crusers around the whole of the Group.
Further evidence of our commitment to health and safety is that Hayward Tyler Colchester received the Governors Award for Outstanding Workplace Safety in 2016 an award which shines a light on this commitment to continuously improving our safety culture.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
At HTG we have a commitment to comply with regulatory statutes and requirements and to drive towards a minimal environmental impact.
This commitment has included among other things the following Hayward Tyler Colchester Luton and Peter Brotherhood replaced their lighting with energy efficient longlasting LED bulbs and installed motion sensors Hayward Tyler Colchester has instituted a programme by which scrap copper is sold and the proceeds are utilised to help with emergency personal or family needs as part of an employee assistance programme Hayward Tyler Luton has a new gas heating system installed in the factory which should see a reduction in total usage in excess of 10% and the installation of 50kw solar panels across the factory should generate a 100000 saving during their lifetime Hayward Tyler Luton removed over 200 skips of scrap from the site thereby creating a more ergonomic work environment and reinvested the proceeds from its sale in further process improvements.
The Finance department has achieved a paperless environment saving in excess of 15000 sheets of paper a year and other business units are now striving to operate in a paperless environment to create a leaner and more productive work environment.
Similarly an employee suggestion at Hayward Tyler Colchester to change printer default settings to print double sided has resulted in saving multiple thousands of sheets of paper and other sites have implemented this initiative to further reduce our environmental footprint.
In addition Hayward Tyler Luton is recladding the walls and replacing the roof of its existing building as well as installing 0.5MW of solar panels on the roof as part of the development of the Centre of Excellence.
These steps will improve the environmental footprint of the business and reduce its energy usage substantially Peter Brotherhood has a longterm plan in place to reduce its environmental impact.
This plan includes a continued commitment to tracking its environmental impact for example annual reduction in paper usage and have recently installed a new water heater system designed by Peter Brotherhood staff that saves nearly 50000kWh per annum.
That saving equates to around a 40% cost reduction.
From 2015 no waste has been sent to landfill rather it is being recycled reused or sent for energy regeneration Combining the values of responsibility for the environment and society employees of Hayward Tyler Colchester volunteered to organise a local greenup day.
As part of this day over 20 employees have cleanedup four miles of local roads as an annual spring event Hayward Tyler East Kilbride holds both ISO 9001 and ISO 14001 certification which have contributed to a significant reduction in the business units impact on the environment from projects such as reducing landfill waste improving energy efficiency on site and manufacturing without using hazardous toxic or scarce materials.
In addition Hayward Tyler East Kilbride is currently working on projects to meet the new requirements of both these standards prior to their introduction in 2018 Hayward Tyler East Kilbride worked tirelessly to ensure ongoing compliance with all relevant health and safety legislation and related standards culminating in a successful Lloyds audit and certification to OHSAS 18001.
Hayward Tyler Colchester and Peter Brotherhood have also both achieved OHSAS 18001 certification Hayward Tyler East Kilbride is undertaking a Transformation Project to achieve ISO9 and Fit4Nuclear status supported by Scottish Enterprise.
This transformation project will ensure our systems processes procedures infrastructure machinery and our people are prepared for future growth.
Rhona Alison Head of Business Development at Scottish Enterprise joined the team for a Mega 5S event and acknowledged the commitment from the senior leadership team to transform the capability of Hayward Tyler East Kilbride.
Already through consolidation of all traditional manufacturing techniques into bays 1 and 2 the business has brought bays 3 and 4 up to ISO9 and Fit4Nuclear particulate level compliance.
This will enable Hayward Tyler East Kilbride to provide parts for subsea nuclear and oil and gas components to the same standard as the Centre of Excellence.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
As part of our Employee Well Being programme we continue to support our employees in their charitable contributions to the local community and this year we have matched donations to charities such as Peter Brotherhood celebrated its 150 th anniversary and will be hosting a number of events throughout 2017 including an Open Day for current and past employees and their families with local dignitaries and the press in attendance.
Peter Brotherhood began in 1867 and a cycle ride is planned commencing on the original premises and finishing at our modern facility in Peterborough to raise money for a number of charitable causes Hayward Tyler Colchester has a long history of supporting community events such as Colchester High Schools Project Graduation and the Colchester Community Winter Carnival.
One particular tradition that continues at Hayward Tyler Colchester is our annual GreenUp Day.
This year more than a third of our employees volunteered their time to pick up roadside litter in and around our local community Hayward Tyler Luton provided Christmas hampers to the homeless and continues to be active each week supporting our homeless community.
Charitable activities such as fund raising casino nights and running the marathon as well as sponsoring the Luton food bank means we remain active within our local area.
We are proud of relationships with partners such as the Chamber of Commerce the EEF Regional Advisory Board Engineering Development Trust Luton Borough Council various universities to mention a small number where we support local initiatives such as Women in Engineering and Widening Participation schemes We have a policy of matching employee donations to charities giving our ongoing support to causes such as Special Olympics a local childrens charity British Heart Foundation The Lullaby Trust CHUMS Bereavement Macmillan Cancer Support Alzheimers Society The American Heart Association The American Cancer Society the Rotary Club and Human Relief Foundation.
In addition amongst other good causes we have sponsored a local little league baseball team Hayward Tyler Colchester employees continue to mentor the STEMNova group in the local scout pack discussing topics in science technology engineering and maths.
This engagement includes welcoming the scouts to visit the facility to see engineering in action.
Additionally we are proud to have the first ever Hayward Tyler Robotics Lego League take home the grand prize in a local competition.
We also have given several tours of our facilities and discussed the nature of our work with university and high school groups.
In addition we donate to various groups such as Technology for Tomorrow which helps local underserved communities with technology access and training and The Group continues to maintain strong links with a growing network of local and national universities attending careers fairs sponsoring project awards and running a mentoring scheme with both university students and final year school pupils.
Celebrating Our Success On 24 August 2016 Hayward Tyler was delighted to welcome the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to its Centre of Excellence to formally open the facility and to present Hayward Tyler with the most prestigious Queens Award for Enterprise International Trade.
It was a pleasure to have many of our customers stakeholders and employees and their families witness the Royal visit and see the outcome of all the hard work we have delivered over the past few years.
It was an honour to showcase our new facility to our strategic partners and loyal customers who will benefit from our enhanced capabilities.
In addition Hayward Tylers achievements were recognised by its peers at The Manufacturer MX Awards in 2016 with recognition for Dr Ewan LloydBaker Dave Murray and Michael Williams receiving the Top 100 UK role models award.
The annual awards which are delivered by The Manufacturer magazine in association with the Institution of Mechanical Engineers inspire recognise and reward the best of UK manufacturing.
They are the biggest annual celebration in the industrys calendar attracting more than 1000 attendees to a gala ceremony and represent the culmination of a rigorous judging programme designed to provide valuable business improvement advice and feedback from an expert panel of judges.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The award categories range from innovation and sustainability through to apprenticeships leadership and staff engagement for businesses of all sizes and sectors.
The competition is remarkable in its diversity and the shortlist for The Manufacturer MX Awards 2016 included over 50 companies with finalists from nearly every sector of manufacturing  automotive food and drink engineering defence contractors aerospace beauty products and precision components.
Hayward Tyler achieved some notable successes Finalist  Apprentice of the Year Finalist  People and Skills Finalist  WorldClass Manufacturing Winner  Leadership and Strategy
SMART Factory Hayward Tylers success at the MX Awards reflects our philosophy of Working Together Succeeding Together Ross Meikle our Manufacturing Systems Manager was nominated for and was a winner of the Forbes 30 Under30 Europe Class of 2017 for being one of Europes most promising young gamechangers.
Rosss further celebrated as he was promoted to General Manager Operations of Hayward Tyler Luton.
A former winner of the Young Manufacturer of the Year Ross demonstrates how individuals can achieve their career aspirations with drive and energy at Hayward Tyler within a relatively short period of time.
Ross joined Hayward Tyler Luton on our graduate programme in 2011 and has worked tirelessly to support the continuous improvement programme during his time with us and we are of course delighted he has taken on the challenge of his new role and we look forward to celebrating further success in the future.
Ewan LloydBaker
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Working Together Succeeding Together We are proud of our people and we provide a wide variety of opportunities for individuals to progress within our organisation Kyle Blackwell joined Hayward Tyler in August 2008 on a four year apprenticeship as a Craft
On completion of his apprenticeship in 2012 Kyle progressed into a role as a Trainee Production Engineer focused on the AM business whilst learning about new unit products and applications.
At the end of 2012 Kyle was promoted to Production and Manufacturing Engineering Manager and he continued his professional development by enrolling on a HNCHND course which he plans to complete by the end of 2017.
In addition Kyle has worked on an NVQ programme through the NAMRC and recently successfully completed his NVQ Level II.
I have received mentoring and coaching throughout my time with Hayward Tyler Luton from my current manager colleagues and our senior team and I have had brilliant coaching and mentoring experience which has made a significant impact on my personal and professional development.
Kyle Blackwell June 2017 Shak Choudhury first came across Hayward Tyler in 2015 at Brunel Universitys Engineering Showcase where he was presenting his third year thesis.
He remained in contact with the business and was offered an 8week work experience opportunity following which Hayward Tyler offered Shak a position as a Design Engineer and he is now a Technical Specialist.
Shak enrolled onto the IMECHE MPDS programme which is a mentorbased plan aimed at helping engineers attain chartered status.
This has allowed Shak to agree targets and objectives based on competences set by the IMECHE board and regularly receive advice from his mentor.
In addition Shak has recently started his Masters at Cranfield University which Hayward Tyler are sponsoring.
The support I have received at Hayward Tyler has enabled me to plan my future I intend to finish both my Masters at Cranfield and my MPDS programme to become a Chartered
This will allow me to support the growth of our department and build the capabilities to start providing consultancy based projects to our customers.
I owe a lot to Hayward Tyler and I am grateful for the position I am in now.
I believe I would not have gained this much support if I had not been with Hayward Tyler.
Our business provides a challenging supportive and caring atmosphere which has the capability of fully developing graduates and employees.
Shak Choudhury June 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 SECTION 2
Our corporate governance processes and the role that they play in supporting the delivery of our strategy including reports from the Chairman and each Board Committee.
Contents
Board of Directors Corporate Governance Audit Committee Report
Directors Report on Remuneration
Report of The Directors Statement of Directors Responsibilities
Independent Auditors Report
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Board of Directors The Board is responsible for delivering corporate governance within the Group.
Our
Key to ensuring our success is to provide leadership including our values and standards and proper management of the
Ewan LloydBaker
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director
Length of service 11 years appointed to the Board in 2010 following the reverse into the AIM listed PLC
Ewan LloydBaker has been involved in the manufacturing industry for over 20 years.
He started his career at Arthur Andersen working in corporate recovery and corporate turnaround with a number of privately owned and publicly listed companies across a wide range of sectors.
As a principal he was part of the management team in a venture capital backed software startup which was ultimately sold to Reuters.
He then helped set up a FTSE100 corporate incubator focused on technology businesses before completing his Masters of Business Administration and working as an intrepreneur consultant for a number of bluechip companies.
Ewan was granted an honorary doctorate by the University of Bedfordshire in 2016 in recognition of his achievements to the manufacturing industry.
Ewan is a partner in LloydBaker and Associates LLP a merger and acquisition boutique focused on finding interesting opportunities for its acquisitive clients to buy in deal sizes ranging from 1 million to 20 million with a particular focus on the engineering and manufacturing sectors.
It was through this route that Ewan was responsible for finding the original Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood opportunities.
Key areas of expertise Strategic leadership and planning including operational turnaround and change management.
Commercial and business development across a wide range of geographies and markets.
Corporate finance including startups MBO MBI and IPO MandA secondary placings rights issues and managing investor relationships.
Committee membership By invitation Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Nick Flanagan Chief Financial Officer and Executive Director Length of service 9 years appointed to the Board in 2010 following the reverse into the AIM listed PLC
Nick Flanagan is a graduate engineer from Imperial College and a Chartered Accountant having qualified with PwC in 1987.
Before joining the Company in 2008 he spent the previous 14 years in the engineering and manufacturing sectors where he held a number of senior financial roles initially with Trafalgar House PLC followed by Kvaerner ASA and Jeyes Group
Prior to that he spent six years in corporate treasury with Saatchi and Saatchi Company
Nick jointly led the reverse into the AIM listed PLC in January 2010 subsequent equity placings and the acquisition of Peter Brotherhood.
In addition he led the refinancing of the Groups debt in 2014 and loan note issues.
Key areas of expertise Extensive industry experience in engineering and manufacturing strategic development financial planning and development commercial and operational support capital raising including equity and debt debt restructuring change management reporting MandA and all aspects of treasury management.
Committee membership By invitation John May NonExecutive Chairman Length of service 11 years appointed to the Board in 2010 following the reverse into the AIM listed PLC
John May is the managing partner of City and Westminster Corporate Finance LLP a FCA registered company that focuses on advising companies on raising finance mergers and acquisitions business strategies and entry on to listed markets such as AIM.
He was previously a senior partner at Crowe Clark Whitehill a UK accountancy firm for 17 years from 1977 to 1994 including eight years on the managing board.
John is the chairman of the Small Business Bureau Limited and the Genesis Initiative Limited which are lobbying groups to Government on behalf of small businesses.
He is chairman of Red Leopard Holdings PLC a mining company listed on AIM and a nonexecutive director of Pires Investments PLC also an AIM company.
He was a Conservative Borough Councillor until 2015 and past Mayor of the Borough of Surrey Heath from May 2010 to May 2011.
John qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 1974 having previously gained his DIA at the University of Bath Management School in 1970 and his BA from the University of London in 1969.
Key areas of expertise Extensive experience in corporate finance legal accounting and governance matters in particular relating to those that impact small and medium sized companies.
Committee membership Audit Committee Chairman Remuneration Committee Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Maurice Critchley NonExecutive Director Length of service 3 years appointed to the Board in 2014
Maurice Critchley is a Chartered Accountant.
After qualifying in 1969 he worked for five years as Chief Accountant for a subsidiary of Spillers PLC between 1970 and 1975.
In 1975 at the age of 26 he was appointed General Manager of the European and South East Asia Fine Chemicals division of Mallinckrodt Inc a large listed US Corporation.
In 1989 Maurice purchased a control valve company and he has continued to grow the business organically and through acquisition into Severn Glocon Group PLC of which he is CEO.
The group which serves the international oil and gas LNG and power industries has sales of around 120 million and employs around 900 people across all continents.
Key areas of expertise Extensive industry experience in engineering and manufacturing for the international oil and gas and power markets strategic development finance sales and marketing operations and
Committee membership Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Chairman Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Corporate Governance Structure of the report This report sets out how HTG is governed and the key activities of the Board of Directors in promoting effective governance during FY2017.
In this report I set out the work and operation of the Board of Directors of the Company and the governance framework that we use to lead manage and control the Group and report on its performance.
The Directors recognise the value of the principles of good corporate governance as set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code and the QCA Corporate Governance Code for Smaller Quoted Companies.
We do not comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code but we are committed to applying and maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance so far as is practicable and appropriate for a public company quoted on AIM of the size and nature of the Company.
We believe that such standards are in the best interests of all shareholders and stakeholders as outlined in later sections of this report.
Set out below is a summary of how at 31 March 2017 the Group was dealing with corporate governance issues.
The Board The Board is responsible for delivering corporate governance within the Group.
Our objective is to create sustained shareholder value.
Key to ensuring our success is to provide leadership including our values and standards and proper management of the Group.
This approach includes setting our strategic objectives providing the resources to enable the Group to achieve those objectives managing risk establishing an effective control framework and holding the Executive Directors to account.
The Boards key responsibilities include inter alia determination of Group strategy approval of reported financial statements and budget setting risk management strategy funding and MandA activity.
Setting Hayward Tylers Priorities for Corporate Governance The key achievements of the Board in FY2017 were We continued to extend our risk management processes with a focus on contract risk in relation to suppliers We maintained our corporate governance in line with or ahead of best practice for smaller quoted companies and We maintained an active investor relations programme.
The Boards key priorities for FY2018 are Appoint an additional NonExecutive Director which we had planned to do in
Further the implementation of a more formal performance evaluation programme for the Directors the Board and each committee of the Board and Maintain the investor relations programme.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The roles of the Chairman and Executive Directors The Chairmans role and that of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer are separate.
I am responsible for Leading the Board Ensuring that the Board operates effectively in the interests of all shareholders and stakeholders and with the contribution from all members of the Board and Corporate Governance in the Group.
The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for Leading the business Establishing and implementing the strategy Managing the business and Leading and maintaining the investor relations programme.
The Chief Financial Officer is responsible for Recording and reporting of past performance Budgeting forecasting and planning Establishing and maintaining the internal control framework Tax planning Establishing and maintaining the debt policy which includes funding the Group and managing the bank relationship programme Risk management including treasury and insurance Supporting the Chairman on matters of corporate governance and
Supporting the Chief Executive Officer.
The Executive Directors report to the Board.
Directors and Directors Independence The Board comprises the NonExecutive Chairman one NonExecutive Director and two Executive Directors.
The Chairman and NonExecutive Director are not employees of the
From time to time I meet the NonExecutive Director for onetoone discussions.
The names of the Directors are set out in Board of Directors together with their biographical details which identify the diverse skills and experience that the Directors bring to the Board.
Maurice Critchley who joined us in early 2014 does not meet the test of independence under the UK Corporate Governance Code in view of his shareholding in the Company however the Board considers that he is independent in character and judgement.
In particular Maurice has extensive experience in manufacturing marketing and sales and international markets in a larger company together with knowledge of the offshore oil and gas market.
This experience provides him with the objectivity to challenge and inspire the Board.
We have previously indicated our intention to appoint an additional NonExecutive Director at the appropriate time to provide greater diversity and independence without overburdening the Company with additional overhead.
Our intention was to commence the appointment process during FY2017.
The Board have discussed the possibility of another NonExecutive Director joining the during the year but have not formally implemented a selection and appointment procedure.
This still remains a target for the Board for FY2018 albeit with the announced proposed acquisition by Avingtrans plc this will no longer be necessary.
Information and Meetings The Board meets regularly to review performance and to determine strategy.
Ad hoc meetings are arranged where an issue arises that requires attention.
In advance of each meeting the Board is supplied with an agenda and information on financial business and corporate matters to be considered at the meeting.
The financial information includes a report against the Groups budget which is set at the start of the year and the forecast for the year which is updated each quarter.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Twelve regular Board meetings were held during the year all of which were attended by the whole Board.
A number of additional meetings were held to consider and to approve other matters including funding arrangements and the Royal visit in the year by HRH the Duke of Cambridge and HRH the Duchess of Cambridge.
From time to time senior management from the operating businesses of the Group attend the Board meetings to present matters of strategic importance their annual budgets and actual performance.
In addition the Companys advisers may attend a meeting to brief the Board on a matter of law market guideline or corporate finance.
As and when required appropriate training is given to Board members and there are also procedures in place for a Non Executive Director to obtain independent legal or other professional advice at the Companys expense.
Conflicts
A Director has a duty to avoid a situation in which he has or can have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or may conflict with the interests of the Company.
The Board considers each Directors conflicts of interest and only those Directors that have no interest in the matter under consideration take the relevant decision.
Committees
The Board has established an Audit Committee and a Remuneration Committee.
For further details of these committees see the Audit Committee Report and Directors Report on
At present given the Groups size the Board has decided not to delegate responsibility for considering the composition and structure of the Board to a separate nominations committee.
The Board has retained responsibility for developing further the corporate governance policy and practices in the Group rather than forming a separate committee for this purpose.
Relations with Shareholders The Board remains fully committed to maintaining regular communication with its shareholders.
Communication is achieved through press releases interviews information posted on its website www. tg. lobal and through the Interim and Annual Reports.
The Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer hold regular meetings with major shareholders analysts and the financial press in particular following the announcements of the interim and full year results.
From time to time the Company hosts an investor day at one of its operating units for analysts and shareholders to see the business at first hand and to meet operational management.
The Board receives a briefing from its broker of each major shareholders view of the Company and the effectiveness of the Executive Directors.
The major concern raised by shareholders during the period under review related to the slow down in orders being placed that could be shipped in the year and the subsequent negative impact on trading.
The Board welcomes shareholders to attend its annual general meeting at the Groups Luton facility which in particular provides an opportunity to communicate with private investors.
This gives shareholders an opportunity to ask questions and to discuss issues with the Directors after the formal proceedings have concluded.
Performance Evaluation In the past performance evaluation of the Directors has been carried out in determining the Executive Directors bonus entitlement against performance related targets.
Internal Control and Risk Management The Board has the responsibility for establishing and maintaining the Groups system of internal controls and reviewing its effectiveness.
Such a system however is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The procedures which include inter alia financial operational and compliance matters and risk management are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
The Board approves the annual budget and performance against budget is monitored and reported to the Board.
The Board has Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 considered the guidance published by the Institute of Chartered Accounts in England and Wales concerning the internal control requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code and has established an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the Group.
Further details of the management of risk are set out in Principal Risks and Uncertainties.
Business Conduct The Board is responsible for setting the values and standards in the Group.
The Board requires that the Directors senior executives and employees maintain a high ethical standard and conduct themselves with the utmost integrity.
This approach to business is set out in the staff handbooks and employment contracts.
Another aspect of Groups conduct of business is to ensure that all affected employees understand and comply with the UK Bribery Act 2010 the Act.
Affected employees receive an initial briefing on the Act and an update from time to time.
In addition each affected employee is required to certify their compliance on an annual basis.
John May NonExecutive Chairman 19 July 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Audit Committee Report The Audit Committee members Chairman of the Audit Committee John May NonExecutive Director Maurice Critchley The Audit Committee responsibilities The responsibilities of the Audit Committee include To monitor the integrity of the financial statements of the Group and any formal announcements relating to the Groups financial performance reviewing significant financial reporting judgements contained in them and ensuring that the accounts present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Companys position and prospects To make recommendations to the Board for it to put to the shareholders for their approval in general meeting relating to the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor and to approve the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditor and to develop and implement policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services To discuss and agree on the nature and scope of the annual audit and interim review with the external auditor To review and monitor the external auditors independence and objectivity together with the effectiveness and quality of the audit process taking into consideration relevant UK professional and regulatory requirements To review arrangements by which employees may in confidence raise concerns about specified matters that are in the public interest and ensure that arrangements are in place for proportionate independent and immediate investigation of such matters To review the Groups internal control and risk management systems which includes 1 meeting the external auditor and reviewing the reports from the external auditor relating to accounts and internal control systems and 2 reviewing the risk register and agreeing on further actions where relevant to help mitigate risk To report to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities and To communicate effectively to shareholders the extent of the Audit Committees activities.
Composition and Governance The Board established an Audit Committee 1 to apply corporate reporting risk management and internal control principles and 2 to maintain an appropriate relationship with the Companys external auditor.
The Audit Committee comprises the NonExecutive Director Maurice Critchley together with the NonExecutive Chairman John May who serves as Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Collectively the members of the committee have the experience and skills to fulfil the duties of the Audit Committee.
In particular both John May and Maurice Critchley satisfy the requirement of recent and relevant financial experience from past and current roles.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 In general the Chief Financial Officer is invited to join all or part of the Audit Committee meetings.
The external auditor has direct access to the Chairman of the Audit Committee outside of formal meetings.
The external auditor provides a written report of their findings and recommendations from the annual audit.
Fees for audit and nonaudit work are preapproved by the Audit Committee.
Activities in FY2017 The Audit Committee met formally two times during the financial year.
The purpose of these meetings included To consider the findings from last years audit including the adequacy of the internal control systems To consider any significant issues relating to the report and accounts for the year ended 31 March 2016 of which there were none To determine that the report and accounts for that period were fair balanced and understandable To discuss matters relating to the review of the interim statement for the six months ended 30 September 2016 with the external auditor and To consider the risk register and agree on further actions to mitigate risk.
In addition to the formal meetings of the Audit Committee the members held a number of discussions.
These discussions included agreeing on the audit approach for FY2017 the scope of the review by the external auditor of the interim results and various matters relating to the external auditor which covered the external auditors independence and objectivity re appointment and fees.
External Auditor The Audit Committee is responsible for ensuring that an appropriate relationship is maintained between the Company and the external auditor including the provision of non audit services.
In late 2011 a separate firm was appointed to provide taxation compliance services to the Group.
From time to time at the Companys request the external auditor provided informal advice relating to financial accounting and capital structuring matters.
Grant Thornton were first appointed as external auditor to the original Group headed by Southbank UK PLC in 2006.
Following the reverse acquisition in 2010 Grant Thornton were also appointed as the external auditor to the Group headed by Hayward Tyler Group PLC.
In line with its policy to ensure continued independence Grant Thornton routinely confirms the position of all team members as part of each audit process having taken account of appropriate ethical guidance.
Paul Naylor is our engagement partner and we would like to thank Paul and his team for their guidance and support over the last 12 months.
Any decision to open the audit to tender is taken on recommendation of the committee.
The
Audit Committee will recommend to shareholders at the Annual General Meeting that Grant Thornton be reappointed as the external auditor for a further year.
Internal Audit Given the Groups size and the nature of its business the Board does not consider it would be appropriate for the Group to have its own internal audit function.
The audit of internal financial controls forms part of the responsibilities of the Groups finance function.
This work includes inter alia quarterly balance sheet reviews completion of internal control questionnaires with business unit management and followup of external audit review points.
Risk
The Group does not have a designated risk committee.
The Audit Committee addresses all aspects of risk through its review of the risk register internal control systems and regular review of financial information.
This approach helps to determine the nature and scope of the external audit and review work to be undertaken by Grant Thornton.
The Audit Committee reviews the risk register with the Executive Directors which includes a discussion of the risks the actions being taken to mitigate the risk and where relevant further proposed actions to address the risks.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Details of the risk register are discussed in more detail in Principal Risks and Uncertainties.
Activities in FY2018 Since 31 March 2017 the Audit Committee has determined and agreed 1 the scope of the audit for the year ended 31 March 2017 and 2 the fees payable to the external auditor therefor.
In addition the Audit Committee has reviewed the outcome of the audit of the Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017.
John May Maurice Critchley 19 July 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Directors Report on Remuneration
Annual Statement and Policy Report The Remuneration Committee members Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Maurice Critchley NonExecutive Chairman John May The Remuneration Committee responsibilities The Remuneration Committee having due regard to the interests of shareholders is responsible for Reviewing the performance of the Executive Directors and senior employees and Setting the scale of their remuneration including performance related bonus and longterm incentive plans.
Directors Report on Remuneration
This report describes how the Board has applied the principles of good governance relating to a Directors remuneration.
The report is split into three sections Annual Statement which sets out the scope and makeup of the Remuneration Committee and its activities in the year Policy Report which sets out the Groups policy for the remuneration of the Executive Directors and Annual Remuneration Report which sets out the implementation of the policy in FY2017 and the plans for FY2018.
Composition and Governance The Remuneration Committee comprises the NonExecutive Chairman John May together with the NonExecutive Director Maurice Critchley who serves as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
The Remuneration Committee is authorised to seek external advice and to secure the attendance of third parties with relevant expertise if considered necessary but shall ensure that all its activities are cost effective for the Company with the preapproval of the Board.
Activities in FY2017 The Remuneration Committee met formally two times during the year to set the scale of the remuneration of the Executive Directors and to implement the longterm incentive plan discussed in last years report.
In addition the members of the Remuneration Committee held a number of discussions to consider remuneration related matters.
Remuneration Policy Report
Policy Objectives The policy for the remuneration of the Executive Directors includes three key objectives To provide remuneration to attract retain and motivate Executive Directors and senior management of the calibre to run the Company successfully To ensure that there is a strong link between such remuneration and the Companys strategy and To align the Executive Directors interest with those of shareholders.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Remuneration Components The remuneration of the Executive Directors has three components which are A base salary including any benefits and pension An annual performance related bonus nonpensionable and A longterm incentive plan LTIP.
This policy is summarised in the adjacent table.
Purpose Operation Maximum Performance target
Reflects the role responsibilities and experience of the Executive Director Reviewed annually Paid in cash each month No maximum designed to attract motivate and retain high quality individuals whilst continuing to control costs
Bonus Incentivises delivery of the Groups objectives of growth increased profitability and enhanced financial strength see KPIs and in the case of the Chief Financial Officer
risk management
Aligns Executive Directors interest with those of shareholders Reviewed annually Paid in cash following announcement of results for FY2017
The Remuneration Committee is satisfied that the current mix of fixed and variable remuneration does not inadvertently encourage undue risk taking Up to 50% of salary One year performance period Group financial targets which include revenue EBIT net debt to EBITDA and order intake and in the case of the Chief Financial Officer certain risk management criteria TSR LTIP Incentivises delivery of longterm value creation Aligns Executive Directors interest with those of shareholders Encourages share ownership Initial grant made following announcement of results for FY2015 Share award vests subject to continued service and performance target Up to 200% of salary at date of award Three year performance period Total shareholder return TSR relative to comparator group of companies Clawback provisions will apply PBL LTIP Incentivises delivery of longterm value creation Aligns Executive Directors interest with those of shareholders Encourages share ownership Initial grant made following announcement of acquisition of Peter
Share award vests subject to continued service and performance target Ewan LloydBaker 250000 restricted shares Nick Flanagan 110000 share options One year performance period Peter Brotherhood Limited to deliver at or above revenue or operating profit targets for year ended 31 March 2017 Clawback provisions will apply
Incentivises delivery of longterm value creation Aligns Executive Directors interest with those of shareholders Encourages share ownership Initial grant made following announcement of results for FY2016 Share award vests subject to continued service Ewan LloydBaker 37735 share options Nick Flanagan 37735 share options na Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Annual Remuneration Report
FY2017
Base Salary During the year under review the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer were paid base annual salaries of 250000 FY2016 250000 and 182880 FY2016 184839 respectively.
The remuneration received by each Director that served during the period was as set out in the table on page opposite Year to 31 March 2017 Year to 31 March 000 Salary and fees
Pension
LTIP and
Total
Total
Executive
E LloydBaker 250   17 267 391 N Flanagan 183   9 192 286
J May 64    64 64 M Critchley 37    37 37
None of the Directors participate in the Groups defined benefit scheme.
Pension contributions represent payment of part of the directors base salary to a personal pension arrangement Employers National Insurance Contributions made relating to Directors emoluments in the period were 57498 FY2016 80630 Performance Related Annual Bonus The remuneration of the Executive Directors has been structured to incorporate a variable element up to 50% of base salary linked to the achievement of performance related targets approved by the Remuneration Committee each year.
These metrics are designed to align the Executive Directors interests with those of shareholders.
As previously reported the Executive Directors decided to waive their right to receive bonuses in respect of the performance in FY2016.
Accordingly no bonuses were received by the Executive Directors in FY2017.
In relation to the performance in FY2017 the metrics used were chosen to be aligned to the Groups objectives of growth increased profitability and enhanced financial strength see KPIs and for the Chief Financial Officer risk management.
In the case of the Chief Financial Officer these metrics were achieved in part however the Chief Financial Officer has decided to waive his right to receive a bonus in respect of FY2017.
Longterm Incentive Plan LTIP The Hayward Tyler LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP is the Groups primary longterm incentive arrangement and it was established in June 2015.
Prior to that no share options existed.
The LTIP has been established to incentivise the Executive Directors and certain senior managers the Executives to deliver longterm value creation for shareholders.
To date two awards have been issued under the scheme TSR LTIP and PBL LTIP.
These awards share the same characteristics other than their performance conditions.
Under TSR LTIP the Company has awarded the Executives either nominal options or restricted shares for which the participant pays only the nominal value of the shares.
The nominal options vest three years from the date of grant subject to continued service and the achievement of a performance target.
The restricted shares are subject to clawback under the same performance conditions.
The grants can be made for up to a maximum of the share equivalent of 200% of an Executives annual salary each year.
An award under TSR LTIP will vest only if the total shareholder return TSR achieved by the Company over the three year vesting period is greater or equal to the TSR of the median company in a defined comparator group of companies over that period.
The percentage of the award that vests operates on a sliding scale with 0% below the median 20% at the median and 100% in the upper quartile.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Options which have vested may be exercised up to 10 years from the date of grant.
An initial grant was made to the Executive Directors on 23 June 2015 that represented 100% of their salary as at the midclosing price of the Company on 22 June 2015 85 pence representing 294118 shares in the case of Ewan LloydBaker and 215153 shares in respect of Nick
In addition aggregate awards of 211764 shares were made to three senior managers in the Group.
Under PBL LTIP the Company has awarded the Executives either nominal options or restricted shares for which the participant pays only the nominal value of the shares.
The nominal options will vest 18 months from the date of grant subject to continued service and the achievement of certain performance conditions attached to the successful development and growth of the Peter Brotherhood business.
The restricted shares are subject to clawback under the same performance conditions.
A grant was made to the Executive Directors on 19 November 2015 that represented 250000 shares in the case of Ewan Lloyd Baker and 110000 shares in respect of Nick Flanagan.
In addition aggregate awards of 140000 shares were made to three senior managers in the Group.
In the year under review the performance conditions attached to the PBL LTIP were not met.
Accordingly the nominal options and restricted shares that had been awarded to the Executives lapsed and in the case of the restricted shares it is intended that they will be clawed back by the Company and cancelled.
Company Share Option Plan CSOP The Hayward Tyler Company Share Option Plan CSOP is the Groups share option scheme for employees and it was established in June 2015.
The CSOP has been established to incentivise the Executive Directors and certain senior managers the Executives to deliver longterm value creation for shareholders.
It aligns the interests of the Executives with those of shareholders and encourages share ownership.
To date one award has been made under the scheme.
Under the CSOP the Company has awarded the Executives nominal options for which the participant pays an exercise price for the shares.
These options vest three years from the date of grant and are subject to continued service.
There is no performance target and the exercise price is 79.5 pence per share.
Details of sharebased employee remuneration are given in note 8 to the financial statements.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Performance Chart The chart below shows the relative performance of the Companys TSR compared with the TSR of a comparable group of companies over the last four years.
These indexes have been chosen as comparators as they represent broad equity indexes of which the Company is a constituent member.
Source SandP CapitalIQ
Base Salary and Performance Related Annual Bonus For the new financial year the Executive Directors will receive a base salary and benefits and they will be eligible to receive a performance related bonus for the year to 31 March 2018 that have a maximum potential of 50% of base salary.
The award of a bonus will be dependent on achieving various financial targets and in the case of the Chief Financial Officer certain risk management criteria.
Directors Interests in Shares The Directors who served the Company during the period together with their beneficial interests in the shares of the Company were as follows Ordinary shares of 1p each At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016 E LloydBaker 4233959 4201564 N Flanagan 384333 384333 J May 41963 41963 M Critchley 4168131 includes 544118 of restricted shares Directors Service Contracts and Letters of Appointment The Executive Directors have service contracts that have a notice period of 12 months.
All
NonExecutive Directors have specific terms of engagement that have a notice period of three months.
Maurice Critchley John May 19 July 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Report of the Directors The Directors present their report and the financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Principal Activities The primary business activity of the Group is to design engineer manufacture and service performancecritical equipment for the global energy sector.
Business Review
A review of the business and future developments is given in the Chairmans Statement the Chief Executives Business Review and the Financial Review.
Results and Dividends The trading results for the period and the Groups financial position at 31 March 2017 are shown in the attached financial statements.
Given the announced proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc we do not intend to recommend the payment of a final dividend for FY2017.
Annual General Meeting The notice of meeting will be sent to shareholders in due course.
This notice will include the text of the resolutions proposed to be passed at the meeting.
Corporate Governance Details of how the Group addresses corporate governance issues are set out in Corporate
Directors
Biographical details of the Directors are set out in Board of Directors.
Directors Interests Details of the Directors that served in the period together with their beneficial interests in the shares of the Company are set out in the Directors Report on Remuneration.
Directors ReElection At the end of each financial period one third of the Directors who are subject to retirement by rotation shall retire from office by rotation.
Ewan LloydBaker and Nick Flanagan retire by rotation and being eligible offer themselves for reelection at the Annual General Meeting of the Company.
The Chairman confirms that the performance of each of the Directors proposed for reelection is effective and is committed to his role.
Directors Remuneration Details of the remuneration of the Directors are set out in the Directors Report on
Employees
The Company is an equal opportunity employer with particular reference to nondiscrimination and nonharassment on the basis of ethnic origin religion gender age disability and sexual orientation.
The Group gives disabled people the same consideration as other individuals.
Matters that affect the Group are communicated to employees through formal and informal meetings internal announcements and regular contact with Directors and senior management.
External Auditor The external auditor Grant Thornton UK LLP will retire at the annual general meeting and being eligible offer themselves for reappointment in accordance with s.12 2 of the Isle of Man Companies Act 1982.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Financial Risk Management Policies
The details of the Groups financial risk management policies are detailed in note 29 to the financial statements.
Going Concern After making due enquiry and having considered The Groups budget for the coming year and its projections through to 2020 The likelihood that the proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc the Avingtrans Transaction will complete The Groups longterm financing arrangements as part of an enlarged group following the Avingtrans Transaction and In the unlikely event that the Avingtrans Transaction does not complete the alternative funding solutions available to the Group and the Company the Directors confirm that they have determined that the working capital available to the Group will be sufficient for the foreseeable future and at least the next 12 months.
Accordingly the Company continues to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Major Interests in Shares At 31 March 2017 the following parties highlighted in the table below had a significant direct or indirect holding in the securities of the Company.
Major Interests in Shares Number of shares Percentage at date of notification Platform Securities Nominees Limited 6067407 10.95% Securities Services Nominees Limited 6050000 10.92% The Bank of New York Nominees Limited 4356798 7.87% Ewan LloydBaker 4233959 7.64% Maurice Critchley 4168131 7.53% Harwood Nominees Limited 3559680 6.43% Hargreaves Lansdown Nominees Limited 3024506 5.46% Vidacos Nominees Limited 2955460 5.34% State Street Nominees Limited 2183133 3.94% aggregate of more than one holding Related Party Transactions Details of related party transactions are given in note 32 to the financial statements.
For and on behalf of the Board N Flanagan
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Statement of Directors Responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report including the strategic report the report on governance and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Isle of Man company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Company financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
Under Isle of Man company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRS as adopted by the European Union have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Report on Remuneration comply with the Companies Acts 1931 to 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are also responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Hayward Tyler Group website www. tg. lobal.
Legislation in the Isle of Man governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
In so far as the Directors are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the Directors have taken all steps that they ought to have taken to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information.
N Flanagan
19 July 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Independent Auditors Report to the members of Hayward Tyler Group PLC We have audited the financial statements of Hayward Tyler Group PLC for the year ended 31 March 2017 which comprise the Group and Company Statements of Financial Position the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Company Statements of Changes in Equity the Group and Company Cash Flow Statements and the related notes to the financial statements.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance Section 80C2 of the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in Statement of Directors Responsibilities as set out on the previous page the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements which give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Report and Accounts to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Opinion on financial statements In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and Companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended in accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
Paul Naylor Grant Thornton UK LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants Grant Thornton House Milton Keynes 20 July 2017 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 SECTION 3 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Detailed analysis of our audited financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 providing indepth disclosure on the financial performance of the Group.
Contents
Statements of Financial Position Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Changes In Equity Company Statement of Changes In Equity Cash Flow Statement Notes to the Financial Statements Contacts and Financial Calendar Glossary of Terms Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Statements of Financial Position Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Noncurrent assets Goodwill 16 2573 2573 Other intangible assets 17 1553 1586 Investments 18   11884 9723 Property plant and equipment 19 29560 25302 Deferred tax assets 22 2839 2726 17 17 Other debtors 21  180 Trade and other receivables Pension and other employee obligations 37565 32534 25894 13512 Current assets Inventories 20 7792 6626 Trade and other receivables 22 23311 20414 125 10673 Other current assets Current tax assets Cash and cash equivalents 23 1235 5135 2636 1550 36207 34690 2775 12235 Total assets 73772 67224 28669 25747 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 24 15612 15178 62 97 Borrowings 31.4 15188 7418 2153 70 Provisions 26 3284 3542 Current tax liabilities 13 997 755 Other liabilities 25 3637 3426 104 142 Derivatives 31.2 302 292 Current liabilities 39020 30611 2319 169 Net current liabilitiesassets 2813 4079 456 12066 Total assets less current liabilities 34752 36613 26350 25578 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 31.4 8161 6356 3419 2941 Other creditors 25 4213 4449 12374 10805 3419 2941 Net assets 22378 25808 22931 22637 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Company
At
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March
Calledup share capital 3tel554 Share premium account 34 36677 36677 36677 36677 Merger reserve 14502 14502 20667 20667 Reverse acquisition reserve Share based payment reserve Other equity Foreign currency translation reserve 1022 375 Retained earnings 10553 6438 35116 35372 Total equity 22378 25808 22931 22637 The accounts were approved by the Board of Directors on 19 July 2017 and were signed on its behalf by E LLOYDBAKER DIRECTOR N FLANAGAN DIRECTOR Company registration number V Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated Income Statement Year to 31 March 2017 Year to 31 March 2016 Notes Trading Non trading Total Trading Non trading
Revenue 6 62719  62719 61648  61648 Cost of sales 45413  45413 41223  41223 Gross profit 17306  17306 20425  20425 Other income 2.5  535 535 Operating charges 2.5 19835 159 19994 14659 1777 16436 Operating lossprofit 7 2529 376 2153 5766 1777 3989 Finance income Finance costs 2.5 and 11 Lossprofit before tax 3705 376 3329 5147 2159 2988 Lossprofit for the year 3870 9 3861 4550 2200 2350 Basic earnings per share pence 14 7.09 0.02 7.07 9.47 4.58 4.89 Diluted earnings per share pence 14 6.93 0.01 6.92 9.47 4.58 4.89 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Lossprofit for the year 3861 2350 Other comprehensive incomeloss Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit and loss Remeasurement of net defined benefit liability 643 138 Income tax relating to items not reclassified Items that will be reclassified subsequently to profit and loss Gain on translation of overseas subsidiaries Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 1174 247 Total comprehensive lossprofit for the year 2687 2597 Attributable to Equity shareholders of the Company 2687 2597 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
Capital
Share
Premium
Merger
Reserve
Reverse
Acquisition
Reserve
Treasury
Stock
Reserve
Share
Based
Payment
Reserve
Other
Equity
Foreign
Currency
Translation
Reserve
Retained
Earnings
Total
Balance at 1 April 2015 455 28705 14502 19973 274  18 238 8230 15441
Issue of share capital Sale of shares Employee share based compensation Transactions with owners 99 7972   274 93   668 7770 Profit for the year         2350 2350 Actuarial gain for the year on pension scheme see note 28 Deferred tax on actuarial movement on pension scheme Gain on translation of overseas subsidiaries        137  137 Total comprehensive income        137 2460 2597 Balance at 31 March 2016 554 36677 14502 19973  93 18 375 6438 25808
Issue of share capital Sale of shares Employee share based compensation Transactions with owners      38   781 743 Loss for the year         3861 3861 Actuarial gain for the year on pension scheme see note 28 Deferred tax on actuarial movement on pension scheme Gain on translation of overseas subsidiaries        647  647 Total comprehensive income        647 3334 2687 Balance at 31 March 2017 554 36677 14502 19973  131 18 1022 10553 22378 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Company Statement of Changes in Equity
Share
Capital
Share
Premium
Merger
Reserve
Treasury
Stock
Reserve
Other
Equity
Based
Payment
Reserve
Retained
Earnings
Total
Balance at 1 April 2015 455 28705 20667 274 18  35321 14250 Dividends       668 668 Issue of share capital 99 7902      8001 Sale of shares  70  274    344 Employee share based compensation Transactions with owners 99 7972  274  93 668 7770 Profit for the year       617 617 Balance at 31 March 2016 554 36677 20667  18 93 35372 22637 Dividends       781 781 Issue of share capital Sale of shares Employee share based compensation Transactions with owners      38 781 759 Profit for the year       1037 1037 Balance at 31 March 2017 554 36677 20667  18 131 35116 22931 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Cash Flow Statement
Company
Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Operating activities Trading profitloss before tax 3705 5147 101 230 Noncash adjustment 35 3539 1995 538 350 Net changes in working capital 35 4880 116 253 4244 Contributions to defined benefit plan Payment of nontrading items 376 1359 Taxes paid Net cash from operating activities 5421 5141 184 4364 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment Proceeds from finance leases to purchase property plant and equipment 3027 1578 Purchase of intangible assets Interest received Disposal of property plant and equipment Acquisition of trade and assets Investment in subsidiary Dividends received Net cash used in investing activities 3401 12662 356 788 Financing activities Proceeds from borrowings 7977 15665 2700 9865 Repayment of borrowings 432 12760  10217 Rebanking costs Proceeds from issue of share capital Dividends paid Sale of treasury shares Repayment of finance leases 1019 631 Interest paid Grant income received Net cash from financing activities 4922 10887 1626 6702 Net change in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year Cash and cash equivalents at end of year Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements General information Hayward Tyler Group PLC is incorporated and resident in the Isle of Man.
The Companys registered office is Peregrine Corporate Services Limited Burleigh Manor Peel Road Douglas Isle of Man IM1 5EP.
The Companys principal place of business is 1 Kimpton Road Luton UK LU1 3LD.
Hayward Tyler Group PLCs shares are listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC is the ultimate parent company of the Group and these consolidated financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling  which is its functional currency.
These consolidated financial statements have been approved for issue by the Board of Directors on 19 July 2017.
Given the announced proposed transaction with Avingtrans plc we do not intend to propose a yearend dividend.
The Group includes both the Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood businesses which together provide around 350 years of engineering experience heritage and pedigree.
The Group is focused on delivering performancecritical solutions for the most demanding requirements to meet current and future global energy needs.
Hayward Tyler is a market leader in the design manufacture and servicing of performancecritical motors and pumps for the harshest of environments.
Peter Brotherhood is a market leader in the design manufacture and servicing of performancecritical steam turbines turbo gensets compressors and combined heat and power systems.
The end markets served by the Group include oil and gas topside and subsea power generation conventional and nuclear the chemical and industrials sectors the marine market and the sugar industry.
In addition to the head office in Luton England Hayward Tyler has manufacturing and service support facilities in Kunshan China Delhi India East Kilbride Scotland and Colchester USA together with a sales office in Shanghai China.
Peter Brotherhood has its manufacturing and servicing facility in Peterborough England.
These facilities and staff provide cover 24 hours 7 days a week for maintenance overhaul and repair.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Summary of significant accounting policies Going concern The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The
Directors have taken note of the guidance issued by The Financial Reporting Council on Going Concern Assessments in determining that this is the appropriate basis of preparation of the financial statements and have considered a number of factors.
After making due enquiry and having considered The Groups budget for the coming year and its projections through to 2020 The likelihood that the proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc the Avingtrans Transaction will complete The Groups longterm financing arrangements as part of an enlarged group following the Avingtrans Transaction and In the unlikely event that the Avingtrans Transaction does not complete the alternative funding solutions available to the Group and the Company the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Further detail can be found in the significant management judgments in section 4.
Accordingly the Company continues to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Basis of preparation The company and consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the requirements of the Isle of Man Companies Act 1931 2006.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost basis for the purposes of inclusion in this document with the exception of some financial instruments which are carried at fair value see note 31 and freehold properties which are held at revalued amounts see note 19.
The accounting policies set out below have been consistently applied to all the periods presented.
In accordance with the exemption provided by the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 no separate Income Statement or Statement of Comprehensive Income is presented for the Company.
2.3 Basis of consolidation The Group financial statements consolidate those of the Company and all of its subsidiaries as of 31 March 2017.
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Company is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the subsidiary in accordance with IFRS10  Consolidated Financial Statements.
All transactions and balances between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation including unrealised gains and losses on transactions between Group companies.
Where unrealised losses on intragroup asset sales are reversed on consolidation the underlying asset is also tested for impairment from a group perspective.
Amounts reported in the financial statements of subsidiaries have been adjusted where necessary to ensure consistency with the accounting policies adopted by the Group.
Profit or loss and other comprehensive income of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are recognised from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as applicable.
2.4 Business combinations For business combinations occurring since 1 January 2010 the requirements of IFRS 3R have been applied.
The consideration transferred by the Group to obtain control of a subsidiary is calculated as the sum of the acquisitiondate fair values of assets transferred liabilities incurred and the equity interests issued by the Group which includes the fair value of any asset or liability arising from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Acquisition costs are expensed as incurred.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The Group recognises identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination regardless of whether they have been previously recognised in the acquirees financial statements prior to the acquisition.
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are measured at their acquisitiondate fair values.
Goodwill is stated after separate recognition of identifiable intangible assets.
It is calculated as the excess of the sum of a fair value of consideration transferred b the recognised amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and c acquisitiondate fair value of any existing equity interest in the acquiree over the acquisitiondate fair values of identifiable net assets.
If
2.5 Trading and nontrading The consolidated income statement reports the results for the year under the headings Trading and Nontrading.
Trading represents the underlying performance of Hayward Tyler and Peter Brotherhood together with head office costs.
Nontrading represents nonrecurring items.
There was nontrading other income in the year of 0.5 million which relates to a compensation claim relating to damage to equipment in the Centre of Excellence.
There were also nontrading operating charges in the year of 0.2 million.
These charges relate to cost of the acquisition of the Peter Brotherhood business and amortisation of the Peter Brotherhood order book.
Non trading tax charges of 0.4 million relate to a reduction in the deferred tax asset of 0.3 million following the change in the enacted UK corporation tax rate from 20% to 17% plus a tax charge on nontrading other income and operating charges of 0.1 million.
2.6 Segmental reporting In identifying its operating segments management follows the Groups service lines which represent the main products and services provided by the Group.
The activities undertaken by the original equipment manufacturing segment OE includes the design and manufacture of motors pumps and steam generators.
The aftermarket segment AM provides a comprehensive range of aftermarket services and spares supporting the Groups own product range as well as those of other original equipment manufacturers.
Each of these operating segments is managed separately as they require different resources and have a different customer base including sales and marketing approach.
All intersegment transfers are carried out at arms length prices.
The measurement policies the Group uses for segment reporting under IFRS 8 are the same as those used in its financial statements except that Centre of Excellence expenses net of grant income expenses relating to sharebased payments and unallocated central costs are not included in arriving at the operating profit of the operating segments.
In addition corporate assets which are not directly attributable to the business activities of any operating segment are not allocated to a segment.
There have been no changes from prior periods in the measurement methods used to determine reported segment profit or loss.
Foreign currency translation The consolidated financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling which is the Companys functional currency.
Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
In the Groups financial statements all assets liabilities and transactions of the Group entities with a functional currency other than the Pound Sterling the Groups presentation currency are translated into Pounds Sterling upon consolidation.
The functional currencies of the entities in the Group have remained unchanged during the reporting period.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 b Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency of the respective Group entity using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation of yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in profit or loss.
Nonmonetary items measured at historical cost are translated using the exchange rates at the date of the transaction not retranslated.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value are translated using the exchange rates at the date when fair value was determined.
The assets and liabilities in the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries and related goodwill are translated at the rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
Income and expenses are translated at the average rate.
The exchange differences arising from the retranslation of the opening net investment in subsidiaries are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the Foreign Currency Translation Reserve in equity.
On disposal of a foreign operation the cumulative translation differences are reclassified from equity to profit or loss when the gain or loss on disposal is recognised.
2.8 Property plant and equipment Land held for use in production or administration is stated at historical cost.
As land is considered to have an unlimited useful life related carrying amounts are not depreciated.
Buildings for use in production or administration are initially recognised at acquisition cost and subsequently measured using the cost model cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Property and equipment held under finance leases are capitalised and included in property plant and equipment.
Such assets are depreciated on a straight line basis over their expected useful lives determined by reference to comparable owned assets or over the term of the lease if shorter.
Buildings are stated at cost or revaluation less depreciation and impairment losses.
Equipment furniture and fittings are stated at cost less depreciation and impairment losses.
Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to write off the cost or revaluation of fixed assets less their estimated residual value over their expected useful lives.
The following useful lives are applied
25 years Plant and machinery 510 years Fixtures and fittings 35 years Short leasehold improvements  over period of lease Material residual value estimates and estimates of the useful life are updated as required but at least annually whether or not the asset is revalued.
Gains or losses arising on the disposal of property plant and equipment are determined as the difference between the disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the assets and are recognised in profit or loss within other income or other expenses.
2.9 Leased assets The economic ownership of a leased asset is transferred to the lessee if the lessee bears substantially all the risks and rewards related to the ownership of the leased asset.
The related asset is then recognised at the inception of the lease at the fair value of the leased asset or if lower the present value of the lease payments plus incidental payments if any. corresponding amount is recognised as a finance leasing liability.
Leases of land and buildings are classified separately and are split into a land and a building element in accordance with the relative fair values of the leasehold interests at the date the asset is recognised initially.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Depreciation methods and useful lives for assets held under finance lease agreements correspond to those applied to comparable assets which are legally owned by the Group.
The corresponding finance leasing liability is reduced by lease payments less finance charges which are expensed as part of finance costs.
The interest element of leasing payments represents a constant proportion of the capital balance outstanding and is charged to profit or loss over the period of the lease.
All other leases are treated as operating leases.
Payments on operating lease agreements are recognised as an expense on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Associated costs such as maintenance and insurance are expensed as incurred.
2.10 Goodwill Goodwill represents the future economic benefits arising from a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognised.
Goodwill is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is considered to have an indefinite useful life.
Refer to Note 2.12 for a description of impairment testing procedures.
Other intangible assets Other intangible assets include capitalised development costs of the Hayward Tyler businesses incurred in the development of new pump and motor technology and product and process development.
They are accounted for using the cost model whereby capitalised costs are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful life.
Management assess the useful life of group intangible assets to be in the range of five to ten years.
Costs that are directly attributable to the development phase of technology are recognised as an intangible asset provided they meet the following recognition requirements completion of the intangible asset to the end of the development phase is technically feasible so that it will be available for use or sale the Group intends to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it the Group has the ability to use or sell the intangible asset the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits.
Among other things this requires that there be a market for the output from the intangible asset or for the intangible asset itself or if it is to be used internally the asset will be used in generating such benefits there are adequate technical financial and other resources to complete the development and to use or sell the intangible asset and the expenditure attributable to the intangible asset during its development can be measured reliably.
Development costs not meeting these criteria for capitalisation are expensed as incurred.
Directly attributable costs include employee costs incurred on the development along with an appropriate portion of relevant overheads.
Development costs recognised as an intangible asset are subject to the same subsequent measurement method.
However until completion of the development project the assets are subject to impairment testing only as described below in the note on impairments.
In addition other intangible assets include the fair value of intangible assets acquired in a business combination at their acquisition date less any amortisation of such assets.
In the case of Peter Brotherhood these assets include the value of the order book at the acquisition date less the value of the orders that had traded during the period from the acquisition date to 31 March 2017.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 2.12 Impairment testing of goodwill other intangible assets and property plant and equipment For impairment assessment purposes assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are largely independent cash inflows cashgenerating units.
As a result some assets are tested individually for impairment and some are tested at cashgenerating unit level.
Goodwill is allocated to those cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from synergies of a related business combination and represent the lowest level within the Group at which management monitors goodwill.
Cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated determined by the Groups management as equivalent to its operating segments are tested for impairment at least annually.
All other individual assets or cashgenerating units are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets or cashgenerating units carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount which is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and valueinuse.
To determine the valueinuse management estimates expected future cash flows from each cashgenerating unit and determines a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of those cash flows.
The data used for impairment testing procedures are directly linked to the Groups latest approved budget adjusted as necessary to exclude the effects of future reorganisations and asset enhancements.
Discount factors are determined individually for each cashgenerating unit and reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and assetspecific risk factors.
Impairment losses for cashgenerating units reduce first the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to that cashgenerating unit.
Any remaining impairment loss is charged pro rata to the other assets in the cashgenerating unit.
With the exception of goodwill all assets are subsequently reassessed for indications that an impairment loss previously recognised may no longer exist.
An impairment loss is reversed if the assets or cashgenerating units recoverable amount exceeds its carrying amount.
2.13 Investments Investments in subsidiaries are recorded at fair value of consideration paid less impairment.
2.14 Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises the direct purchase price including all expenses directly attributable to the manufacturing process as well as suitable portions of related production overheads based on normal operating capacity.
Costs are assigned using the first in first out cost formula.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less applicable variable selling expenses.
2.15 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and demand deposits together with other shortterm highly liquid investments maturing within 90 days from the date of acquisition that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
2.16 Equity reserves and dividend payments Share capital represents the nominal value of shares that have been issued.
Share premium includes any premiums received on issue of share capital.
Any transaction costs associated with the issuing of shares are deducted from share premium net of any related income tax benefits.
The foreign currency translation reserve represents differences arising on the retranslation of net investments in overseas subsidiary undertakings based on the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The merger reserve of 14.5 million includes 9.9 million arising as a result of the acquisition of Southbank in January 2010.
The merger reserve represents the difference between the nominal value of the share capital issued by Hayward Tyler Group PLC and its fair value at 20 January 2010 the date of the acquisition.
Treasury stock reserve represents the cost of stock issued and subsequently reacquired.
The reverse acquisition reserve arises as a result of the method of accounting for the acquisition of Southbank by Hayward Tyler Group PLC.
In accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations Revised 2008 the acquisition has been accounted for as a reverse acquisition.
Share based payment reserve comprises the fair value of options and restricted shares recognised as an expense less the nominal value of restricted shares which is presented in share capital.
Upon exercise of options or performance share rights any proceeds received are credited to share capital.
Retained earnings include all current and prior period retained profits.
Dividend distributions payable to equity shareholders are included in other liabilities when the dividends have been approved in a general meeting prior to the reporting date.
2.17 Taxation Tax expense recognised in profit or loss comprises the sum of deferred tax and current tax not recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Calculation of current tax is based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
Deferred income taxes are calculated using the liability method.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that the underlying tax loss or deductible temporary difference will be utilised against future taxable income.
This is assessed based on the Groups forecast of future operating results adjusted for significant non taxable income and expenses and specific limits on the use of any unused tax loss or credit.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised in full although IAS 12 Income Taxes specifies limited exemptions.
As a result of these exemptions the Group does not recognise deferred tax on temporary differences relating to goodwill or to its investments in subsidiaries.
2.18 Postemployment benefits shortterm employee benefits and sharebased employee remuneration Post employee benefits The Group provides postemployment benefits through defined benefit plans as well as various defined contribution plans.
A defined contribution plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions into an independent entity.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions after its payment of the fixed contribution.
The contributions are recognised as an employee benefit expense when they are due.
Plans that do not meet the definition of a defined contribution plan are defined benefit plans.
Under the Groups defined benefit plans the amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on retirement is defined by reference to the employees length of service and final salary.
The legal obligation for any benefits remains with the Group even if plan assets for funding the defined benefit plan have been set aside.
Plan assets may include assets specifically designated to a longterm benefit fund as well as qualifying insurance policies.
The asset recognised in the statement of financial position for defined benefit plans is the present value of the fair value of plan assets less the defined benefit obligation DBO at the reporting date.
The net surplus at the end of the year is 1.0 million FY2016 0.2 million.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Management estimates the DBO annually with the assistance of independent actuaries.
This is based on standard rates of inflation salary growth rate and mortality.
Discount factors are determined close to each yearend by reference to high quality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related pension liability.
Service cost on the Groups defined benefit plan is included in employee benefits expense.
Employee contributions all of which are independent of the number of years of service are treated as a reduction of service cost.
Net interest expense on the net defined benefit liability is included in finance costs.
Gains and losses resulting from remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability are included in other comprehensive income.
Shortterm benefits Shortterm employee benefits including holiday entitlement are current liabilities included in pension and other employee obligations measured at the undiscounted amount that the Group expects to pay as a result of the unused entitlement.
Sharebased employee remuneration The Group operates equitysettled sharebased remuneration plans for its key management personnel.
None of the Groups plans are cashsettled.
All goods and services received in exchange for the grant of any sharebased payment are measured at their fair values.
Where employees are rewarded using sharebased payments the fair value of employees services is determined indirectly by reference to the fair value of the equity instruments granted.
This fair value is appraised at the grant date and excludes the impact of nonmarket vesting conditions.
All sharebased remuneration is ultimately recognised as an expense in the income statement with a corresponding credit to sharebased payment reserve.
If vesting periods or other vesting conditions apply the expense is allocated over the vesting period based on the best available estimate of the number of share options expected to vest.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to become exercisable.
Estimates are subsequently revised if there is any indication that the number of share options expected to vest differs from previous estimates.
Any adjustment to cumulative sharebased compensation resulting from a revision is recognised in the current period.
The number of vested options ultimately exercised by holders does not impact the expense recorded in any period.
Upon exercise of share options the proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are allocated to share capital up to the nominal or par value of the shares issued with any excess being recorded as share premium.
2.19 Provisions contingent liabilities and contingent assets Provisions are recognised when present obligations as a result of a past event will probably lead to an outflow of economic resources from the Group and amounts can be estimated reliably.
Timing or amount of the outflow may still be uncertain.
A present obligation arises from the presence of a legal or constructive commitment that has resulted from past events for example product warranties granted to a customer legal disputes or onerous contracts.
Provisions are measured at the estimated expenditure required to settle the present obligation based on the most reliable evidence available at the reporting date including the risks and uncertainties associated with the present obligation.
Where there are a number of similar obligations the likelihood that an outflow will be required in settlement is determined by Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 considering the class of obligations as a whole.
Provisions are discounted to their present values where the time value of money is material.
Any reimbursement that the Group can be virtually certain to collect from a third party with respect to the obligation is recognised as a separate asset.
However this asset may not exceed the amount of the related provision.
No liability is recognised if an outflow of economic resources as a result of present obligations is not probable.
Such situations are disclosed as contingent liabilities unless the outflow of resources is remote.
2.20 Revenue recognition Revenue comprises revenue from the sale of goods and the rendering of services.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of consideration received or receivable and represents amounts obtained through trading activities net of value added tax and trade discounts.
The
Group applies the revenue recognition criteria set out below to each separately identifiable component of the sales or service transaction in order to reflect the substance of the transaction.
The consideration received from these transactions is allocated to the separately identifiable component by taking into account the relative fair value of each component.
Revenue is recognised when the amount of revenue can be measured reliably it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the entity the costs incurred or to be incurred can be measured reliably and when the criteria for each of the Groups different activities has been met.
These activityspecific recognition criteria are based on the goods or solutions provided to the customer and the contract conditions in each case and are described below.
The Group provides pumps motors turbo gensets compressors and steam turbines specifically customised to each customer.
The contracts for the sale of these goods specify a fixed price for their development and installation.
When the outcome can be assessed reliably contract revenue and associated costs are recognised as revenue and expenses respectively by reference to the stage of completion of the contract activity at the reporting date.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of consideration received or receivable in relation to that activity.
When the Group cannot measure the outcome of a contract reliably revenue is recognised only to the extent of the contract costs incurred and to the extent that such costs are recoverable.
Contract costs are recognised in the period in which they are incurred.
When it is probable that total contract costs will exceed total contract revenue the total expected loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
The stage of completion of any contract is assessed by management by taking into consideration all information available at the reporting date.
The percentage of completion is calculated by comparing costs incurred to date with the total estimated costs of the contract.
The gross amount due from customers for contract work is presented as an asset within trade and other receivables for all contracts in progress for which costs incurred plus recognised profits less recognised losses exceeds progress billings.
The gross amount due to customers for contract work is presented as a liability within trade and other payables for all contracts in progress for which progress billings exceed costs incurred plus recognised profits less losses.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 b Aftermarket Revenue comprises the sale of spare parts and other aftermarket services which is recognised when the Group has transferred to the buyer the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods and services supplied.
Significant risks and rewards are generally considered to be transferred to the buyer when the customer has taken undisputed delivery of the goods and services.
Interest income is recorded on an accrual basis using the effective interest method.
2.21 Operating expenses Operating expenses are recognised in profit or loss upon utilisation of the service or at the date of their origin.
Expenditure for warranties is recognised and charged against the associated provision when the related revenue is recognised.
2.22 Borrowing costs Borrowing costs primarily comprise interest on the Groups borrowings.
Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of a qualifying asset are capitalised as part of the cost of that asset when it is probable that they will result in future economic benefits and the costs can be measured reliably.
All other borrowing costs are expensed in the period in which they are incurred and reported within finance costs.
2.23 Financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities are recognised on the Groups Statement of Financial Position when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are derecognised when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire or when the financial asset and all substantial risks and rewards are transferred.
A financial liability is derecognised when it is extinguished discharged cancelled or expires.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are measured initially at fair value plus transactions costs except for financial assets and financial liabilities carried at fair value through profit or loss which are measured initially at fair value.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are measured subsequently as described below.
Financial assets For the purpose of subsequent measurement financial assets are classified into the following categories upon initial recognition  loans and receivables.
The category determines subsequent measurement and whether any resulting income and expense is recognised in profit or loss or in other comprehensive income.
All financial assets except for those at fair value through profit or loss are subject to review for impairment at least at each reporting date.
Financial assets are impaired when there is any objective evidence that a financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired.
Different criteria to determine impairment are applied for each category of financial assets which are described below.
All income and expenses relating to financial assets that are recognised in profit or loss are presented within finance costs or finance income except for impairment of trade receivables which is presented within other expenses.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
After initial recognition these are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Discounting is omitted where the effect of discounting is immaterial.
The Groups cash and cash equivalents and trade and most other receivables fall into this category of financial instruments.
Individually significant receivables are considered for impairment when they are past due or when other objective evidence is received that a specific counterparty will default.
Receivables that are not considered to be individually impaired are reviewed for impairment in groups which are determined by reference to the industry and region of a counterparty and other available features of shared credit risk characteristics.
The impairment loss is then based on recent historical counterparty default rates for each identified group.
Financial liabilities The Groups financial liabilities include borrowings trade and other payables and derivative financial instruments.
Financial liabilities other than derivatives are measured subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method except for financial liabilities held for trading or designated at fair value through profit or loss that are carried subsequently at fair value with gains or losses recognised in profit or loss.
All interestrelated charges and if applicable changes in an instruments fair value that are reported in profit or loss are included within finance costs or finance income.
Derivative financial instruments Derivatives are financial assets or financial liabilities classified as held for trading and recorded at fair value through profit and loss.
Due to certain customer contracts being settled in foreign currencies the Group enters into forward exchange contracts and swaps in order to reduce the exposure to foreign currency risk.
2.24 Government Grants A government grant is recognised only when there is reasonable assurance that a the Group will comply with any conditions attached to the grant and b the grant will be received.
A grant is recognised as income in the income statement over the period necessary to match it with the expense to which it relates on a systematic basis.
For reporting purposes the grant income is deducted from the related expense.
A grant relating to assets is presented as deferred income in the consolidated statement of financial position and released over the life of the asset in line with depreciation.
In the year ended 31 March 2015 Hayward Tyler Limited HTL based in Luton UK was awarded a 3.5 million grant from the Regional Growth Fund RGF.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 the Group has concluded that there is reasonable assurance that it will be able to comply with the RGF grant conditions.
The grant is conditional upon HTL achieving a job target of 231 full time jobs at the Luton business by 2024 and defraying 21.6 million on eligible spending by 2020.
This eligible spending relates to the extension to the existing factory plant and machinery training and research and development.
Failure to hit either target could result in the repayment of part of the grant.
Accordingly at inception of the grant the Group recognised a receivable for the full grant amount of 3.5 million presented as an other debtor and a deferred income liability of 3.5 million presented as an other creditor.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 the group received the remaining debtor of 0.2 million 2016 1.9 million.
Also in the year ended 31 March 2017 the deferred income liability was reduced to 2.6 million by 0.3 million of grant income 2016 0.3 million that is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
This grant income is included in operating charges as a deduction from related research development and training expenses.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Changes in accounting policies Standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards that are not yet effective and have not been adopted early by the Group At the date of authorisation of these financial statements certain new standards and amendments to existing standards have been published by the IASB that are not yet effective and have not been adopted early by the Group.
Information on those expected to be relevant to the Groups financial statements is provided below.
Management anticipates that all relevant pronouncements will be adopted in the Groups accounting policies for the first period beginning after the effective date of the pronouncement.
New standards interpretations and amendments not either adopted or listed below are not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments The new standard for financial instruments IFRS 9 introduces extensive changes to IAS 39s guidance on the classification and measurement of financial assets and introduces a new expected credit loss model for the impairment of financial assets.
IFRS 9 also provides new guidance on the application of hedge accounting.
Management has started to assess the impact of IFRS 9 but is not yet in a position to provide quantified information.
At this stage the main areas of expected impact are as follows the classification and measurement of the Groups financial assets will need to be reviewed based on the new criteria that considers the assets contractual cash flows and the business model in which they are managed an expected credit lossbased impairment will need to be recognised on the Groups trade receivables it will no longer be possible to measure equity investments at cost less impairment and all such investments will instead be measured at fair value.
Changes in fair value will be presented in profit or loss unless the Group makes an irrevocable designation to present them in other comprehensive income and if the Group continues to elect the fair value option for certain financial liabilities fair value movements will be presented in other comprehensive income to the extent those changes relate to the Groups own credit risk.
The Group has no financial liabilities classified as Available for Sale or Held to Maturity IFRS 9 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 presents new requirements for the recognition of revenue replacing IAS 18 Revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and several revenuerelated Interpretations.
The new standard establishes a controlbased revenue recognition model and provides additional guidance in many areas not covered in detail under existing IFRSs including how to account for arrangements with multiple performance obligations variable pricing customer refund rights supplier repurchase options and other common complexities.
During the year the Group performed a preliminary assessment of IFRS 15 which is subject to changes arising from more detailed ongoing analysis.
Furthermore the Group is considering the clarifications issued by the IASB in April 2016 and will monitor any further developments.
Presently contract revenues and expenses are recognised by reference to the stage of completion of contract activity where the outcome can be estimated reliably otherwise revenue is recognised only to the extent of recoverable contract costs incurred.
Current guidance indicates the Group is only able to recognise revenue over time where an entitys performance does not create an asset with an alternative use and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance.
Due to the bespoke nature of contracts the Group will continue Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 recognising contract revenue and expenses over time however IFRS 15 criteria will be taken into consideration when identifying the correct treatment for each new contract.
The Group from the preliminary assessment undertaken considers that the impact of IFRS 15 will not result in a significant change in the revenue and margin recognised for each accounting period when compared with the current application of IAS 18 and IAS 11.
IFRS 15 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 will replace IAS 17 and three related Interpretations.
It completes the IASBs long running project to overhaul lease accounting.
Leases will be recorded on the statement of financial position in the form of a rightofuse asset and a lease liability.
IFRS 16 is effective from periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
Management is yet to fully assess the impact of the Standard and therefore is unable to provide quantified information.
However in order to determine the impact the Group is in the process of performing a full review of all agreements to assess whether any additional contracts will now become a lease under IFRS 16s new definition deciding which transitional provision to adopt either full retrospective application or partial retrospective application which means comparatives do not need to be restated.
The partial application method also provides optional relief from reassessing whether contracts in place are or contain a lease as well as other reliefs.
Deciding which of these practical expedients to adopt is important as they are oneoff choices assessing its current disclosures for finance leases Note 27 and operating leases Note 27 as these are likely to form the basis of the amounts to be capitalised and become rightofuse assets determining which optional accounting simplifications apply to its lease portfolio and if it is going to use these exemptions considering the IT system requirements and whether a new leasing system is needed.
This is being considered in line with implementing IFRS 15 and IFRS 9 so the Group only has to undergo one set of system changes and assessing the additional disclosures that will be required.
4 Significant management judgements in applying accounting policies The following are significant management judgements in applying accounting policies of the Group that have the most effect on the financial statements.
Going concern The Groups principal bank borrowing facilities and loan notes contain change of control clauses that are activated by an acquisition of the Company which provide the lender with the opportunity to be prepaid or continue to lend to the Company.
The proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc Avingtrans Transaction is expected to activate these clauses.
Management has considered together with its advisers the likelihood that the Avingtrans Transaction will take place and has determined that they have a reasonable expectation that it will complete.
Such considerations include the level of support for the Avingtrans Transaction received from the shareholders of the Company and the shareholders of Avingtrans plc In the case of the Company more than 50% in number of the shareholders attending a meeting to approve the Avingtrans Transaction representing 75% or more in nominal value of the shares held by those shareholders need to approve it.
Irrevocable
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 In the case of Avingtrans plc shareholders representing more than 50% in nominal value of the shares held by those shareholders attending the meeting to approve the Avingtrans Transaction need to approve it.
Irrevocable undertakings to vote in favour of the Avingtrans Transaction have been received from shareholders representing 31.7% of Avingtrans plcs share capital and in addition shareholders representing a further 13.4% have indicated an intention to vote in favour of the Avingtrans
In addition Management has considered together with the executive directors of Avingtrans plc the funding arrangements of the enlarged group created by the Avingtrans Transaction and the working capital report prepared by independent reporting accountants and has determined that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Such considerations include the strength of Avingtrans plcs balance sheet which included 26.2 million net cash at 31 May 2017 and the advanced state of negotiations with lenders to provide facilities to the enlarged group.
Internally generated development costs Management monitors progress of internal research and development projects by using a project management system.
Significant judgement is required in distinguishing research from the development phase.
Development costs are recognised as an asset when all the criteria are met whereas research costs are expensed as incurred.
To distinguish any researchtype project phase from the development phase it is the Groups accounting policy to require a detailed forecast of sales or cost savings expected to be generated by the intangible asset.
The forecast is incorporated into the Groups overall budget forecast as the capitalisation of development costs commences.
This ensures that managerial accounting impairment testing procedures and accounting for internallygenerated intangible assets is based on the same data.
The Groups management also monitors whether the recognition requirements for development costs continue to be met and an assessment made of its recoverability.
This is necessary as the economic success of any product development is uncertain and may be subject to future technical problems after the time of recognition.
Further information on intangible assets is contained in note 17.
Revenue recognition  original equipment manufacture The stage of completion of a contract is assessed by management taking into consideration all information available at the reporting date.
In this process management carries out significant judgements about milestones actual work performed and the estimated costs to complete the work.
Further information on the Groups accounting policy for contracts is contained in note Deferred tax assets The assessment of the probability of future taxable income in which deferred tax assets can be utilised is based on the Groups latest approved budget forecast which is adjusted for significant nontaxable income and expenses and specific limits to the use of any unused tax loss or credit.
The tax rules in the numerous jurisdictions in which the Group operates are also carefully taken into consideration.
If a positive forecast of taxable income indicates the probable use of a deferred tax asset especially when it can be utilised without a time limit that deferred tax asset is usually recognised in full.
The recognition of deferred tax assets that are subject to certain legal or economic limits or uncertainties is assessed individually by management based on the specific facts and circumstances.
All unused tax losses and credits have been recognised in the year as management believes that use of the deferred tax asset created is probable.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
In applying the classification of leases in IAS 17 management considers its leases of equipment as finance lease arrangements.
In some cases the lease transaction is not always conclusive and management uses judgement in determining whether the lease is a finance lease arrangement that transfers substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership.
Further information on the Groups leases are contained in note 27.
Property leases are spilt between land and the building to assess whether they are operating or finance leases.
Land is almost always an operating lease due to its long life but judgment is required to assess the classification between operating and finance lease for buildings which are assessed individually against the criteria in IAS 17.10.
5 Estimation uncertainty When preparing financial statements management undertakes a number of judgements estimates and assumptions about recognition and measurement of assets liabilities income and expenses.
The actual results may differ from the judgements estimates and assumptions made by management and will seldom equal the estimated results.
Information about estimates and assumptions that have the most significant effect on recognition and measurement of assets liabilities income and expenses is provided below.
Actual results may be substantially different.
Original equipment revenue The stage of completion of any contract is assessed by management by taking into consideration all information available at the reporting date.
In this process management formulates estimates regarding actual work performed and the estimated costs to complete the work.
Deferred tax asset  refer to note 22 The extent to which deferred tax assets can be recognised is based on an assessment of the probability that future taxable income will be available against which the deductible temporary differences and tax loss carryforwards can be utilised.
In addition significant judgement is required in assessing the impact of any legal or economic limits or uncertainties in various tax jurisdictions.
Defined benefit pension liability  refer to note 28 Management estimates the defined benefit pension liability annually with the assistance of independent actuaries however the actual outcome may vary due to estimation uncertainties.
The estimate of its defined benefit pension gross liability of 13.8 million FY2016 13.2 million is based on standard rates of inflation and mortality.
The estimate does not include anticipation of future salary increases as there are no members with benefits related to future salary progression.
Discount factors are determined close to each period end by reference to high quality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension liability.
Estimation uncertainties exist particularly with regard to medical cost trends which may vary significantly in future appraisals of the Groups defined benefit pension obligations.
The value of the defined benefit pension asset at 31 March 2017 was 1.0 million FY2016 0.2 million.
Provisions  refer to note 26 The amount recognised for warranties for which customers are covered for the cost of repairs is estimated based on managements past experience current knowledge and future expectation that defects may arise.
The value of warranty provisions at 31 March 2017 was 0.9 million FY2016 0.8 million.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The amount recognised for restoration is a management estimate in relation to the estimated cost to restore the property to the agreed condition set out in the lease rental agreement for Peter Brotherhoods Peterborough property.
Goodwill  refer to note 16 Management carry out impairment tests at each reporting date and indicate present values of future cash flows in respect of both the OE and AM divisions are far in excess of the carrying values of the associated assets including goodwill such that management considers the likelihood of any impairment arising to be remote.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 6 Segment information Management currently identifies the Groups two service lines OE and AM as operating segments.
The activities undertaken by the OE segment include the manufacture of pumps motors and steam turbines.
The activities of the AM division include the servicing of and provision of spares for a wide range of goods.
Segment information can be analysed as follows for the reporting periods under review OE AM Total Year to 31 March 2017 000 000 000 Segment revenues from External customers 18569 44150 62719 Other segments Segment revenues 18569 44150 62719 Cost and expenses 24158 36033 60191 Segment operating profit 5589 8117 2528 OE AM Total Year to 31 March 2016 000 000 000 Segment revenues from External customers 27274 34374 61648 Other segments Segment revenues 27274 34374 61648 Cost and expenses 26403 26753 53156 Segment operating profit 871 7621 8492 The Groups revenues from external customers are divided into the following geographical areas 31 March 31 March 2016 Africa and Middle East 5754 Americas and Caribbean excl.
USA
Asia Pacific excl.
China 20221 China 3476 Europe excluding UK 7316 United Kingdom 7860 United States of America 15226 62719 61648 Revenues from external customers in the Groups domicile United Kingdom as well as its major markets have been identified on the basis of the customers geographical location.
No customer represented greater than 10% of Group revenue in the year to 31 March 2017 or in the year to 31 March 2016.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The totals presented for the Groups operating segments reconcile to the entitys key financial figures as presented in its financial statements as follows Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Segment revenues Segment revenues 62719 61648 Elimination of intersegmental revenues 62719 61648 Segment profit Segment operating profit 2528 8492 Centre of Excellence expenses net of grant income 1631 896 Other operating costs not allocated 2236 1503 Foreign currency exchange differences 1190 327 Trading operating profit Nontrading items see note 2.5 Operating profit after exceptional items 2153 3989 Finance income 9 Finance costs 1175 961 Fair value on derivatives 10 40 Group profit before tax 3329 2988 7 Operating profit Operating profit is stated after charging Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Depreciation of owned assets 1753 961 Depreciation of assets held under finance leases 409 183 Amortisation of other intangible assets 416 675 Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual accounts Fees payable to the Companys auditor for other services Audit of the accounts of subsidiaries Tax compliance services Other assurance services  10 Rentals under operating leases Land and buildings 251 199 Plant and equipment 316 262 Foreign currency exchange differences  loss 1294 327 Research and developments costs 409 304 Foreign currency exchange differences relate to realised losses on receipts and payments together with an unrealised loss arising on the retranslation of net current assets.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 8 Employee remuneration Employee benefits expense The employee benefit expense during the year was as follows Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Wages and salaries 23356 17674 Social security costs 2125 1661 Share based payments 38 106 Redundancy costs 30 68 Pension costs 887 880 26436 20389 The average numbers of employees during the year were as follows Year to 31 March Year to 31 March OE and AM 334 241 General and administration 144 146 Selling Key management personnel Key management of the Group are members of the Board of Directors in Hayward Tyler Group
Remuneration in respect of the Directors including employers national insurance cost was as follows Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Shortterm employee benefits Postemployment benefits Sharebased payment benefits Employers National Insurance Contributions Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The amounts set out above include remuneration in respect of the highest paid Director as follows Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Shortterm employee benefits Postemployment benefits Sharebased payment benefits Employers National Insurance Contributions None of the Directors participate in the Groups defined benefit plan.
Details of related party transactions are given in note 32 to the financial statements.
Sharebased employee remuneration As at 31 March 2017 the Group maintained three sharebased payment schemes as longterm incentive plans that align managements interest with those of shareholders.
The plans are the Total Shareholder Return LongTerm Incentive Plan TSR LTIP the Peter Brotherhood Limited LongTerm Incentive Plan PBL LTIP and the Company Share Option Plan CSOP.
All the schemes will be settled in equity.
In both LTIP schemes there are options and restricted shares.
Participants awarded restricted shares pay only the nominal value of the shares and the shares are subject to claw back if performance conditions are not met.
The dates and performance conditions are identical on restricted shares and options however on vesting only restricted shares are entitled to receive any accrued dividends on the underlying shares during the vesting period.
Those granted restricted shares are required to pay the nominal value of the shares at the commencement of the vesting period creating share capital.
Subsequently the accounting treatment for the restricted shares is the same as the share options.
In total 38000 2016 106000 of employee remuneration expense all of which related to equitysettled sharebased payment transactions net of related deferred tax has been included in the income statement and credited to sharebased payment reserve.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 TSR LTIP The TSR LTIP is part of the remuneration package of the Executive Directors and certain senior managers Executives.
Options and restricted shares under this programme will vest only if the total shareholder return achieved by the Company over the three year vesting period is greater or equal to the TSR of the median company in a defined comparator group of companies over that period.
The percentage of the award that vests operates on a sliding scale with 0% below the median 20% at the median and 100% in the upper quartile.
In addition participants in this programme have to be employed until the end of the agreed vesting period.
Upon vesting each option allows the holder to purchase one ordinary share at a nominal value of 0.01 up to 10 years from the grant date.
Total expense included in the income statement relating to the TSR LTIP is 69000 2016 53000.
The TSR LTIP options and restricted shares together with their related exercise prices were as follows for the reporting period Restricted shares Share options
Exercise price per share pence Number
Outstanding at 1 April 2016 294118 1 426917 1
Forfeited
Exercised
Outstanding at 31 March 2017 294118 1 426917 1 Exercisable at 31 March 2017 Fair values have been determined by a Monte Carlo model.
The following principal assumptions were used in the valuation Grant date 23 June 2015 Vesting period ends 23 June 2018 Share price at date of grant pence 79 Volatility 44.00% Option life years 3 Dividend yield 1.70% Riskfree investment rate 1.04% Option fair value at grant date pence 28 Restricted shares fair value at grant date pence 30 Exercise price at grant date pence 1 Exercisable from 23 June 2018 Exercisable to 23 June 2025 Remaining contractual life years 8.2 Dividend yield for restricted shares is 0.00% The underlying expected volatility was determined by reference to historical share price of the Company over the same period as the expected life of the awards that were granted.
Weighted average fair value of options granted during the period is 28 pence and weighted average fair value of restricted shares granted is 30 pence.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 PBL LTIP The PBL LTIP is part of the remuneration package of the Groups Executives.
Options and restricted shares under this programme were to vest only if Peter Brotherhood Limited a subsidiary of Hayward Tyler Group PLC delivered an operating profit before intercompany charges of 1.6 million or higher andor revenues of 27.5 million or higher in its audited results for the year ended 31 March 2017.
At present Management do not believe Peter Brotherhood will achieve the requisite vesting conditions and the options and restricted shares will be forfeited upon signing of the statutory accounts.
Failure to achieve the vesting conditions resulted in a credit in the period of 53000 2016 expense of 53000.
The PBL LTIP options and restricted shares together with their exercise prices were as follows for the reporting period Restricted shares Share options
Exercise price per share pence Number
Outstanding at 1 April 2016 250000 1 250000 1
Forfeited
Exercised
Outstanding at 31 March 2017 250000 1 250000 1 Exercisable at 31 March 2017 Fair values have been determined using a Black Scholes option pricing model.
The following principal assumptions were used in the valuation Grant date 19 November 2015 Vesting period ends 1 June 2017 Share price at date of grant pence 91 Volatility 31.00% Option life years 1.53 Dividend yield 1.50% Riskfree investment rate 0.56% Option fair value at grant date pence 88 Restricted shares fair value at grant date pence 90 Exercise price at grant date pence 1 Exercisable from 1 June 2017 Exercisable to 1 June 2025 Remaining contractual life years 8.2 Dividend yield for restricted shares is 0.00% Options vest as at the later of 1 June 2017 or the date that the audited accounts are published Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Company Share Option Plan The CSOP is part of the remuneration package of the Executive Directors and certain senior managers Executives.
Options under this programme will vest if individuals remain employees of the Group 3 years from the option grant date.
Upon vesting each option allows the holder to purchase one ordinary share at a price of 0.795 for up to 10 years from the grant date.
Total expense included in the income statement relating to the CSOP is 22000 2016 nil.
Share options Number of shares
Outstanding at 1 April 2016
106915 79.5
Exercised
Outstanding at 31 March 2017 106915 79.5 Exercisable at 31 March 2017 Grant date 7 July 2016 Vesting period ends 7 July 2019 Share price at date of grant pence 80 Volatility 42% Option life years 3 Dividend yield 1.73% Riskfree investment rate 0.98% Option fair value at grant date pence 111.3 Exercise price at grant date pence 79.5 Exercisable from 7 July 2016 Exercisable to 7 July 2026 Remaining contractual life years 9.3 9 Trading EBITDA Trading earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation are as follows Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Trading operating profit 2529 5766 Depreciation and amortisation 2534 1401 Trading EBITDA 5 7167 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 10 Finance Income Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Finance income from pension 9 11 Finance costs Year to 31 March Year to 31 March
Interest payable on borrowings 1034 371 Finance charges  rebanking 63 206 Finance costs of pensions  2 Unwinding of discounts on provision Loss arising on fair value of derivative contracts 1185 619
Finance charges  prepayment  382 1185 1001 12 Income tax expense a Analysis of total tax charge Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Current tax UK corporation tax at 20% FY2016 20% 173 Amounts over provided in prior years 249 Overseas taxation 1200 840 Adjustment in respect of prior year  110 Total current tax charge 778 730 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Deferred tax Accelerated capital allowances 70 238 Gains available for offset against future taxable income 1053 311 Retirement benefit obligations 160 69 Less movement recorded in other comprehensive income Other temporary differences
Effect of change in tax rate 292 253 Amounts overunder provided in prior years 403 202 Total deferred tax credit 246 92 Tax charge reported in the income statement 532 638 b Reconciliation of profit before tax total to tax charge The relationship between the expected tax expense based on the domestic effective tax rate of Hayward Tyler Group PLC at 20% FY2016 20% and the reported tax expense in the income statement is set out below which also shows the major components of tax expense Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Lossprofit before tax 3329 2988 Domestic tax rate for Hayward Tyler Group PLC 20% 20% Expected tax charge 666 598 Adjustment for taxrate differences in foreign jurisdictions 581 220 Deferred tax not recognised and effect of tax rate change 278 234 Amounts over provided in prior years 154 312 Adjustment for nondeductible expenses 185 366 Tax charge 532 638 Note 22 provides information on the entitys deferred tax assets and liabilities including the amounts recognised directly in the income statement.
13 Income tax assetliability
31 March
31 March Current tax assets 467 207 Current tax liabilities 997 755 Income tax payable 530 548 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 14 Earnings per share The calculation of the basic earnings per share is based on the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year.
The calculation of diluted earnings per share is based on the basic earnings per share adjusted to allow for the issue of shares and the posttax effect of dividends andor interest on the assumed conversion of all dilutive options and other dilutive potential ordinary shares.
Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Adjusted Earnings per share calculations based on Trading LossProfit Trading LossProfit for the year 000 3870 4550 Weighted average number of shares used for basic earnings per share 54608885 48047956 Shares deemed to be issued for no consideration in respect of share based payments 1204659 8017 Weighted average number of shares used in diluted earnings per share 55813544 48055973 Basic earnings per share pence Diluted earnings per share pence 6.93 9.47 Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Earnings per share calculations based on Total LossProfit LossProfit for the year 3861 2350 Weighted average number of shares used for basic earnings per share 54608885 48047956 Shares deemed to be issued for no consideration in respect of share based payments 1204659 8017 Weighted average number of shares used in diluted earnings per share 55813544 48055973 Basic earnings per share pence Diluted earnings per share pence 6.92 4.89
An interim dividend of 0.58 pence per ordinary share was declared during the year representing a total of 321231 FY2016 305723.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 15 Dividends Year to 31 March 2017 Year to 31 March 2016 Pence per Pence per Paid in the year share 000 share 000 Interim dividend  current year 0.58 321 0.552 306 Final dividend in respect of prior year Given the announced proposed acquisition of the Company by Avingtrans plc a final dividend will not be paid.
16 Goodwill The net carrying amount of goodwill can be analysed as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Gross carrying amount Carrying amount at start of year Acquired through business combinations Carrying amount at end of year 2573 2573 Impairment testing For the purpose of annual impairment testing goodwill is allocated to the operating segments expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combinations in which the goodwill rises as follows
31 March
31 March
AM 2157 2157 Carrying amount at end of year 2573 2573 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The recoverable amount of each segment was determined based on valueinuse calculations covering a detailed threeyear forecast followed by an extrapolation of expected cash flows for the remaining useful lives using a declining growth rate determined by management.
The recoverable amount of each operating segment is set below
31 March
31 March
19231 23539 AM 125861 94467 The key assumptions used in the calculations were the forecast operating cash flows for the next three years and a terminal value of such flows based on approved budgets and plans.
These budgets and plans are based on past performance the strength of the order book at 31 March 2017 the strength of the pipeline of future orders and expectations for the market development of the CGU taking into account the current economic climate and forecast assumptions both internal and external where appropriate around the relevant product markets an estimate of the longterm growth rate for the CGU representing managements best estimate of future longterm growth in the respective divisions taking into account both internal and external projections for the markets in which they operate.
The growth rate used for the first three years was 10% for OE and 10% for AM which has been based on forecasts provided by each of the business units.
The terminal growth rate used was 2% which is based on the UKs longterm consumer price index growth rate and a discount rate of 9.97% was used to discount future cash flows and reflects managements estimate of the weighted average cost of capital of the Group.
Impairment tests are carried out at each reporting date and indicate present values of future cash flows in respect of both the OE and AM divisions are far in excess of the carrying values of the associated assets including goodwill.
In the case of OE the result of the impairment test is sensitive to a change in the assumptions made.
Despite its relatively low carrying value OE has significant intrinsic value to the AM division which derives most of its revenue from original equipment that has been designed and manufactured by the Group.
Taking all of these elements together including the close alignment of AM to OE management considers the likelihood of any impairment arising to be remote.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 17 Other intangible assets The Groups other intangible assets comprise 1 internally generated development costs and 2 the order book acquired on acquisition of Peter Brotherhood see note 2.11.
The net carrying amounts for the reporting periods under review can be analysed as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Gross carrying amount Balance at start of year 3386 2159
Acquisition through business combinations Exchange gainloss Balance at end of year 3769 3386 Accumulated amortisation and impairment Balance at start of year 1800 1125 Amortisation 416 675 Balance at end of year 2216 1800 Carrying amount at end of year 1553 1586 The amortisation charge for the year is included within operating charges and disclosed in note The main material asset included above is the development of the subsea motor that under pins the investment in the Centre of Excellence as well as the support of key and potential future customers which has a carrying value of 662521 at 31 March 2017.
The remaining amortisation period of the subsea is between 15 years varying on the different elements.
18 Investments The Company had the following investments in subsidiary undertakings
31 March
31 March Gross value of investments Balance at start of year 29916 27916 Additions 2161 2000 Balance at end of year 32077 29916 Provision for impairment Balance at start of year 20193 20193 Impairment in year Balance at end of year 20193 20193 Net book value at end of year 11884 9723 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 On 29 March 2017 the Company subscribed for 100 ordinary shares in Peter Brotherhood Limited which have a nominal value of 0.01 per share and a share premium of 21599.99 per share.
This arrangement allowed Peter Brotherhood Limited to repay borrowings owed to the Company.
The Company owns more than 20% of the following companies Name of company Place of incorporation % ownership voting power Principal activity Southbank UK Limited England and Wales 100 Holding company Redglade Associates Limited England and Wales 100 Property Redglade Investments Limited England and Wales 100 Property Hayward Tyler Group Limited England and Wales 100 Holding company Hayward Tyler Limited England and Wales 100 Trading Hayward Tyler UK Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Varley Pumps Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Hayward Tyler Solutions Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Hayward Tyler Holdings Limited England and Wales 100 Holding company Hayward Tyler Holding Inc USA 100 Holding company Hayward Tyler Inc USA 100 Trading Hayward Tyler Pumps Kunshan Co
China 100 Trading Hayward Tyler India PTE Limited India 100 Trading Appleton and Howard Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Hayward Tyler Fluid Dynamics
England and Wales 100 Dormant Hayward Tyler Fluid Handling Limited England and Wales 100 Trading Hayward Tyler Services Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Specialist Energy Group Trustee
England and Wales 100 Acts as employee benefit trust Hayward Tyler Pension Plan Trustees
England and Wales 100 Manages pension scheme Sumo Pumps Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Hayward Tyler Engineered Products
England and Wales 100 Dormant Capital Engineering Services Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Credit Montague Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Mullins Limited England and Wales 100 Dormant Nviro Cleantech Limited England and Wales 100 Holding company Nviro Cleantech Inc USA 100 Holding company Vertus Technologies US LLC USA 100 Holding company Vertus Technologies Industrial LLC USA 100 No longer trading Vertus Technologies Limited Cayman Islands 100 Holding company Nviro Cleantech Limited Peter Brotherhood Limited Cayman Islands England and Wales Holding company
All companies are owned indirectly by Hayward Tyler Group PLC except for Southbank UK Limited Specialist Energy Group Trustee Limited Nviro Cleantech Limited and Peter Brotherhood Limited which are owned directly and the results for all companies have been included within the consolidated results for the Group.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 19 Property plant and equipment The Groups property plant and equipment comprise primarily land buildings plant and machinery and fixtures and fittings.
The carrying amount can be analysed as follows
Freehold land and buildings
Plant and machinery fixtures and fittings Assets in course of construction
Gross carrying amount Balance at 1 April 2016 9480 4371 19401 8075 41327 Exchange adjustments
Reclassificationadjustments 7618 196 372 7618 176 Disposals   68  68 Balance at 31 March 2017 17207 5540 25367 515 48629 Depreciation and impairment Balance at 1 April 2016 3140 1240 11645  16025 Exchange adjustments Reclassificationadjustments 653 653 176  176 Disposals   55  55 Charge for the year 325 383 1455  2163 Balance at 31 March 2017 2812 2376 13881  19069 Carrying amount at 31 March 2017 14395 3164 11486 515 29560 Gross carrying amount Balance at 1 April 2015 8814 1982 13779 1702 26277 Exchange adjustments
Reclassification
Acquisition through business combinations Disposals 5317 82 286  5685 Balance at 31 March 2016 9480 4371 19401 8075 41327 Depreciation and impairment Balance at 1 April 2015 3048 1100 10841  14989 Exchange adjustments Reclassification  2 2 Disposals   252  252 Charge for the year Balance at 31 March 2016 3140 1240 11645  16025 Carrying amount at 31 March 2016 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The category Assets in course of construction in the fixed asset table relates to the work being carried out at the Centre of Excellence in Luton.
The work for phase one was completed during
A valuation of the freehold land and buildings relating to the Luton property will be carried out by an independent valuer once the phase two construction is completed.
The Groups freehold land and buildings were valued by independent valuers for the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2011 and an impairment charge was made at that date.
The Directors believe that there has been no further impairment of the property since that date.
Fair value of freehold land and buildings do not have quoted prices and have been determined based on professional appraisals that would be classified as Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement.
If the cost model had been used the carrying amount of land and buildings would be 6020824 FY2016 6165105.
Revaluation previously has only ever resulted in a decrease arising as a consequence there is no revaluation surplus.
All depreciation charges are included within operating charges and disclosed in note 7.
The Groups land and buildings have been pledged as security for term loans.
Additions in the year includes investment in the Centre of Excellence.
This is made up of 1128946 of building improvements and 2539670 of new plant and machinery.
The carrying value of assets under finance leases included in plant and machinery amounted to 4884057 FY2016 2227459.
The depreciation charged to the financial statements in the year in respect of finance leased assets amounted to 409103 FY2016 182735.
20 Inventories Inventories recognised in the statement of financial position can be analysed as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Raw materials and consumables 3079 3092 Work in progress 2859 1908 Finished goods and goods for resale 1854 1626 7792 6626 In the year ended 31 March 2017 total inventory included in expenses amounted to 25129000 FY2016 24839000.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 21 Trade and other receivables Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March
Trade receivables 15929 15860 Less provision for impairment of receivables Trade receivables  net 15765 15693 Gross amounts due from customers 7403 4222 Other receivables Other debtors Due from Group undertakings   122 10661 Trade and other receivables 23311 20414 125 10673 Prepayments 3211 1668 3 VAT recoverable Other current assets 3402 2308 14 12 Total current trade and other receivables Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Non current Due from Group undertakings Other debtors Trade and other receivables  180 14027 3806 Total non current trade and other receivables The Directors believe that the carrying amounts of trade and other receivables approximate their fair values.
The receivables are shortterm and noninterest bearing in the Group.
Receivables are longterm interest bearing loans to subsidiaries in the Company.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 All of the Groups trade and other receivables have been reviewed for indicators of impairment.
Certain trade receivables were found to be impaired and an allowance for credit losses of 0.2 million FY2016 0.2 million has been made.
The movement in the provision for credit losses can be reconciled as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Balance at start of year 167 139 Charge for the year 130 189 Impairment reversals Amounts utilised in the year Balance at end of year 164 167 An analysis of unimpaired trade receivables that are past due is given in note 29.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 22 Deferred tax assets Deferred tax movements for the year arising from temporary differences and unused tax losses of the Group can be summarised as follows
31 March
31 March Balance at start of year 2726 2555 Charge to income statement for the year note 12 246 92 Charge to other comprehensive income Recognised in business combination Balance at end of year 2839 2726 Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available in future against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
This is assessed based on the Groups forecast of future operating results and the future projected profitability of the Group.
There are no losses for which a deferred tax asset has not been recognised FY2016 nil.
Deferred tax assets 1 April
Recognised in other comprehensive income
31 March Accelerated tax depreciation 13 103   90 Retirement benefit obligations Tax losses 2806 437   3243 Derivatives 58 2   60 Temporary differences 121 49 17  187 Total 2726 246 133  2839 1 April
Recognised in other comprehensive income
31 March Accelerated tax depreciation 154 14  181 13 Retirement benefit obligations Tax losses 2605 201   2806 Derivatives 50 8   58 Temporary differences 18 65 18 92 121 Total 2555 92 10 89 2726 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 23 Cash and Cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents included the following components Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Cash at bank and in hand
USD
EUR
Other
21tel2636 1235 5135 2636 1550 At 31 March 2017 the Group had the following undrawn facilities Group At 31 March
31 March Revolving credit facilities 1722 5087 Corporate charge card facility 279 344 The bank revolving credit facilities and loans are secured by fixed and floating charges over the Groups assets.
The shortterm bank borrowings under the revolving credit facilities have been classified under borrowings in Hayward Tyler Group PLC.
A breakdown of cash and borrowings is set out below Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Cash at bank and in hand 1235 5135 2636 1550 Shortterm bank borrowings 12624 6629 Shortterm bank loans 411 859 Shortterm nonbank borrowings 2153 70 2153 70 Noncurrent bank borrowings 2502 1212 Noncurrent bank loans 2240 2203 Noncurrent nonbank borrowings 3419 2941 3419 2941 Net debt 22114 8639 2936 1321 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of the cash and cash equivalents approximates to their fair value.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 24 Trade and other payables Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Trade payables 9666 10376 62 91 Payments on account 5400 3863 Social security and other taxes Due to Group undertakings Trade and other payables 15612 15178 62 97 The carrying amounts of trade and other payables approximate to their fair values.
All amounts shown above are shortterm liabilities and accrue no interest.
25 Other liabilities Other liabilities can be summarised as follows Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March
Accruals 2706 1705 104 142 Other payables 931 1721 3637 3426 104 142 Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Non current Other creditors  deferred income 4213 4449 4213 4449 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 26 Provisions
At
31 March
31 March Warranty 890 773 Loss making contracts
2166 2088 Other 228 330 3284 3542 All provisions are considered current.
The carrying amounts may be analysed as follows
Loss making contracts
Other
Total
Carrying amount at start of year 773 351 2088 330 3542 Exchange differences 76   16 92 Additional provisions 960  78 398 1436 Unused amounts reversed 266    266 Amount utilised 653 351  516 1520 Carrying amount at end of year 890  2166 228 3284 Warranty provision Provisions for warranty work represent the estimated cost of work provided under the terms of the contracts with customers with reference to the length and unexpired portion of the terms provided.
Loss making contracts Provisions for loss making contracts are the estimated total costs that exceed the total revenues from contracts that are in progress at the reporting date.
Restoration provision Provisions for restoration represent the estimated cost to restore the property to the agreed condition set out in the lease rental agreement for Peter Brotherhood Limiteds Peterborough property which resulted from the sale and leaseback of the property.
Other provisions include Annual leave provision Paid holidays are regarded as an employee benefit and are charged to the profit or loss as the benefit is earned.
A provision is made at the balance sheet date to reflect the present value of the holidays earned but not taken.
Liquidated damages Provisions for liquidated damages are the liabilities estimated to arise on the expected delay in shipment of contracts that have been shipped prior to 31 March 2017.
There were minor expected delays in the year.
Post acquisition provision Provision for incremental committed expenditure arising from the acquisition.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 27 Leases Finance leases The Group leases various equipment under finance lease arrangements.
The net carrying amount of the assets held under finance lease arrangements is 4884057 FY2016 2227459.
The assets are included under Plant and Machinery which form an integral part of property plant and equipment see note 19.
The future aggregate minimum finance lease payments are as follows Group At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016
Present value of payments
Present value of payments No later than 1 year 1316 1145 517 429 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years Later than 5 years 4037 3649 1805 1641 Less Amounts representing finance charges Present value of minimum lease payments The lease agreement for the equipment includes fixed lease payments and a purchase option at the end of the lease term.
The agreement is noncancellable but does not contain any further restrictions.
No contingent rents were recognised as an expense in the reporting periods under review.
Operating leases The Group leases various buildings vehicles and equipment under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have varying terms escalation clauses and renewal rights.
The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are
31 March
31 March Group 000 000 No later than 1 year 933 981 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years 2920 3223 More than 5 years 5175 6679 9028 10883 Lease payments recognised as an expense during the period are shown in note 7.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 28 Pensions and other employee obligations Within the UK the Group operates a defined benefit plan with benefits linked to final salary and a defined contribution plan.
The defined benefit pension arrangement called the Hayward Tyler Pension Plan the Plan provides benefits based on final salary and length of service on retirement leaving service or death.
With effect from 1 June 2003 the Plan was closed to new UK employees and to future service accrued for existing members who are offered membership of the defined contribution plan.
The majority of UK employees are members of one of these arrangements.
The method used in assessing the Plan liabilities is the projected unit method.
A full valuation of the Plan is produced every three years the next one being as at 1 January 2017 which is due by 31 March 2018 and updated annually to 31 March 2017 by independent qualified actuaries.
The Plan is subject to the Statutory Funding Objective under the Pensions Act 2004.
A valuation of the Plan is carried out at least once every three years to determine whether the Statutory Funding Objective is being met.
As part of the process the Company must agree with the trustees of the Plan the contributions to be paid to address any shortfall against the Statutory Funding Objective.
The Statutory Funding Objective does not currently impact on the recognition of the Plan in these accounts.
The Plan is managed by a board of trustees appointed in part by the Company and in part from elections by members of the Plan.
The board of trustees includes a professional trustee Independent Trustee Services Limited.
The trustees have responsibility for obtaining valuations of the fund administering benefit payments and investing the Plans assets.
The trustees delegate some of these functions to their professional advisers where appropriate.
The Plan exposes the Company to a number of risks Investment risk The Plan holds investments in asset classes such as equities which have volatile market values and while these assets are expected to provide the real returns over the longterm the shortterm volatility can cause additional funding to be required if a deficit emerges Interest rate risk The Plans liabilities are assessed using market yields on high quality corporate bonds to discount the liabilities.
As the Plan holds assets such as equities the value of the assets and liabilities may not move in the same way Inflation risk A significant proportion of the benefits under the Plan are linked to inflation.
Although the Plans assets are expected to provide a good hedge against inflation over the long term movements over the shortterm could lead to deficits emerging Longevity risk In the event that members live longer than assumed a deficit will emerge in the Plan and Concentration risk A significant proportion of the Plans liabilities are in respect of a single pensioner member.
The development of the liabilities over time will therefore depend heavily on the actual experience in respect of this member.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 There were no plan amendments curtailments or settlements during the period.
The Groups defined benefit obligations and plan assets may be reconciled to the amounts presented on the face of the statement of financial position for each of the reporting periods under review as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Defined benefit obligation 13857 13204 Fair value of plan assets Impact of asset ceiling Net defined benefit asset 1040 167 Scheme liabilities The defined benefit obligations for the reporting periods under review are as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Defined benefit obligation at start of year 13204 14084 Interest cost 423 423 Changes to demographic assumptions 382 Changes to financial assumptions 1781 415 Benefits paid 1169 888 Defined benefits obligation at end of year 13857 13204 For determination of the pension obligation the following actuarial assumptions were used Group At 31 March
31 March Discount rate 2.50% 3.35% Expected rate of pension increases 2.25% 2.00% Inflation assumption 3.25% 2.80% Mortality assumption S2PXA CMI S2PXA CMI S2PXA CMI  for males and females projected on a year of birth basis using CMI projections with a longterm rate of improvement of 1.25% per annum with a plus 2 year age rating.
The mortality assumptions imply the following life expectancies Male retiring at age 65 in 2017 Female retiring at age 65 in 2017 22.2 Male retiring at age 65 in 2037 Female retiring at age 65 in 2037 23.7 These assumptions were developed by management under consideration of expert advice provided by Barnett Waddingham independent actuarial appraisers.
These assumptions have led to the amounts determined as the Groups defined benefit obligations for the reporting periods under review and should be regarded as managements best estimate.
However the actual outcome may vary.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 No assumption is made with regard to the expected rate of salary increases as there are no members with benefits related to future salary progression.
Scheme assets The assets held by the pension fund can be reconciled from the opening balance to the reporting date as follows
31 March
31 March Group 000 000 Fair value of plan assets at start of year 13371 13905 Interest income 432 421 Return on plan assets excluding amounts included in net interest 2042 277 Contributions by the Group 221 210 Benefits paid 1169 888 Fair value of plan assets at end of year 14897 13371 Actual return on plan assets 2474 144 The Group expects to pay contributions of 232000 in the year to 31 March 2018 and the weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation is around 14 years.
Plan assets do not include any investment in shares of the Company.
Plan assets can be broken down into the following major categories of investments Group At 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016 000 % 000 % Diversified growth funds 9311 62.5 8959 67 Gilts and LDI funds 5422 36.5 4412 33 Liquid funds 164 1 Total value of assets 14897 100 13371 100 All equity and debt instruments have quoted prices in active markets Level 1.
Fair values of real estate investments do not have quoted prices and have been determined based on professional appraisals that would be classified as Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement.
Level 3 valuations are sensitive to unobservable inputs.
Scheme expenses Net interest income resulting from the Groups defined benefit plans was 9000 FY2016 2000 expense.
The employee benefits expense for the period is nil FY2016 nil.
In the period the actual return on plan assets was 2474000 FY2016 144000.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The remeasurement recorded in other comprehensive income is as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Gainloss on scheme assets in excess of interest 2042 277 Experience losses Gain from changes to demographic assumptions 382 Lossgain from changes to financial assumptions 1781 415 Total gain recognised in other comprehensive income Sensitivity of the value placed on the liabilities stments to assumptions Approximate effect on liabilities Reduce discount rate by 0.1% p.
Increase inflation and related assumption by 0.1% p.
Increase a longterm rate of longevity improvement by 0.25 p.
Apply a 90% loading to the mortality base table reduces probability of death by 10% at each age Note that the above sensitivities are approximate and only show the likely effect of an assumption being adjusted whilst all other assumptions remain the same.
Risk mitigation strategies The trustees invest the Plans assets in combination of LiabilitySensitive assets and Return Generating assets.
The LiabilitySensitive assets are invested in a variety of LDI Liability Driven Investment Funds.
These funds invest in a combination of interest rate and inflation rate swaps in order to mimic the movement in expected cashflows of the Plan caused by changes in interest and inflation rates.
Effect of the Plan on Companys future cashflows The most recent comprehensive actuarial valuation was carried out as at 1 January 2014.
The actuarial valuation as at 1 January 2017 is currently underway.
The result of the 2014 valuation were updated to 31 March 2017 by allowing for cashflows in and out of the Plan and changes to assumptions over the period.
In the event that the valuation reveals a larger deficit than expected the Company may be required to increase contributions above those set out in the existing schedule of contributions.
Conversely if the position is better than expected contributions may be reduced.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 29 Risk management objectives and policies The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks foreign currency risk credit risk liquidity risk cash flow risk and interest rate risk.
The Groups overall risk management programmes focus on both credit risk and the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
The Groups risk management is coordinated at its headquarters in close cooperation with the Board of Directors and focuses on actively securing the Groups and the Companys short to mediumterm cash flows by minimising the exposure to financial markets.
While the Group does use derivatives in order to economically hedge its exposure to foreign currency risk and cash flow interest rate risk see below it does not engage in the trading of derivatives for speculative purposes nor does it write options.
The most significant financial risks to which the Group and the Company are exposed are described below.
The Group is exposed to market risk through its use of financial instruments and specifically to currency risk interest rate risk and certain other price risks which result from both its operating and investing activities.
Foreign currency sensitivity The Group operates in overseas markets and is subject to currency exposures of transactions undertaken during the period.
Managements overarching objective is to minimise the extent of the Groups exposure to currency risk.
In respect of transactional foreign currency risk the Group maintains a policy that all exposures on material committed transactions should be economically hedged as far as possible.
The Group prepares rolling 12 month currency cash flow forecasts to enable currency exposures to be identified and then subsequently hedged.
The Group uses forward exchange contracts to hedge the impact on receipts and payments of the volatility in exchange rates of US Dollar and Euro to Pound Sterling.
The notional principal amounts of the outstanding forward foreign exchange contracts at 31 March 2017 were 8.5 million FY2016 5.9 million.
Hedge accounting is not applied in respect of these hedged transactions.
Derivative contracts are measured at fair value in the statement of financial position with movements in that fair value being recognised in profit or loss.
Currency exposures comprise the monetary assets and monetary liabilities of the Group that are not denominated in the functional currency of the operating unit involved.
The significant currency risk arises from contracts raised in US Dollars.
The following table illustrates the sensitivity of profit and equity to a reasonably possible change in the US DollarPound Sterling exchange rate of 10%.
These changes are considered to be reasonably possible based on observation of recent volatility in the currency markets.
The calculations are based on a change in average US DollarPound Sterling exchange rate for each period and the foreign currency denominated financial instruments held at each reporting date that are sensitive to changes in the US DollarPound Sterling exchange rate.
All other variables are held constant.
Change in exchange rate 10% 10% Impact on profit in a 12 month period based on financial instruments held at 31 March 2017 762 932 31 March 2016 546 667 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 There is no impact on equity arising from foreign exchange fluctuations as the Group does not use hedge accounting.
Exposures to foreign exchange rates vary during the year depending on the volume of overseas transactions.
Nonetheless the analysis above is considered to be representative of the Groups exposure to currency risk.
The Company does not have any currency exposures.
Interest rate sensitivity The Groups borrowings include loans that carry variable rates of interest and thus expose the Group to cash flow risk.
The Groups policy is to minimise interest costs and changes in the market value of debt.
Interest rate risk is regularly monitored to ensure that the mix of variable and fixed rate borrowing is appropriate for the Group.
The Group has chosen to maintain the majority of its borrowings as floating in order to benefit from low current interest rates.
The Group has term borrowings of 9.2 million that have an effective fixed rate of interest.
These borrowings relate to finance lease agreements 3.6 million and loan notes 5.6 million.
The remaining term borrowings of 12.9 million have a floating rate of interest based on LIBOR.
The Groups policy is to minimise interest rate cash flow risk exposures on longterm financing.
The interest rate profile of the financial assets and liabilities of the Group at 31 March 2017 is as follows Group Fixed Floating Zero Total Interest rate profile 000 000 000 000
Trade and other receivables   23311 23311
Trade and other payables   15612 15612 Bank loans  2651  2651 Amounts due under revolving credit facilities  11477  11477 Amounts due under finance lease agreements Amounts due under loan notes agreements 9221 14128 15612 38961 Cash  1235  1235 9221 12893 15612 37726 The following table illustrates the sensitivity of profit and equity to a reasonably possible change in interest rates of 0.5%.
These changes are considered to be reasonably possible based on observation of current market conditions.
The calculations are based on a change in average market interest rate for each period and the financial instruments held at each reporting date that are sensitive to changes in interest rates i. net floating rate debt.
All other variables are held constant.
Change in interest rate 0.5% 0.5% Impact on profit in a 12 month period based 000 000 on financial instruments held at 31 March 2017 64 64 31 March 2016 21 21 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 The Company has minimal exposure to interest rate risk.
It has interest bearing liabilities that are matched with interest bearing assets.
It is exposed to interest rate risk on its financial assets being its cash at bank balances.
The interest rate receivable on these balances is less than 0.5%.
The Company gave careful consideration to which organisation it should use for its banking services and interest rates available was one aspect of the decision.
The Directors currently believe that interest rate risk is at an acceptable level.
Credit risk analysis The Group continuously monitors defaults of customers and other counterparties identified either individually or by group and incorporates this information into credit risk controls.
Where available at reasonable cost external credit ratings andor reports on customers and other counterparties are obtained and used.
The Groups policy is to deal only with creditworthy counterparties.
The Groups most significant exposure to credit risk is in respect of the possibility of any individual customer being unable to settle their debts as they fall due or as a result of changes in the political landscape that impact the Groups ability to collect debts from an individual jurisdiction.
The credit risk associated with customers and jurisdictions is considered as part of the tender review process and is addressed initially via contract payment terms and where appropriate payment security.
In certain circumstances it may lead to a decision by the Group to cease trading with individual customers or customers from certain jurisdictions.
The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk is limited to the carrying amount of financial assets recognised at the reporting date as summarised below Group At 31 March
31 March Classes of financial assets  carrying amounts Trade and other receivables 23311 20414 Cash and cash equivalents 1235 5135 The Groups management considers that all the above financial assets that are not impaired or past due for each of the reporting dates under review are of good credit quality.
None of the Groups financial assets are secured by collateral or other credit enhancements.
Some of the unimpaired trade receivables are past due as at the reporting date.
Financial assets past due but not impaired can be shown as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Not more than 3 months 73 13 More than 3 months but less than 6 months 3 4 More than 6 but less than 12 months More than 12 months In respect of trade and other receivables the Group is not exposed to any significant credit risk exposure to any single counterparty or any group of counterparties having similar characteristics.
Trade receivables consist of a large number of customers in various industries and geographical areas.
Based on historical information about customer default rates Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 management consider the credit quality of trade receivables that are not past due or impaired to be good.
The credit risk for cash and cash equivalents is considered to be negligible since the counterparties are reputable banks with high quality external credit ratings.
The Companys credit risk arises principally from the Companys cash balances and the balances due to it from other Group undertakings.
An allowance for impairment is made where there is an identified loss event which based on previous experience is evidence of a reduction in the recoverability of the cash flows.
The concentration of the Companys credit risk is considered by counterparty geography and currency.
During the year ended and as at 31 March 2017 the Company held minimal cash balances.
In addition as at 31 March 2017 the Company had provided longterm intercompany funding to its subsidiaries of 14.2 million FY2016 14.6 million the Companys management consider that these financial assets that are not impaired are of good credit quality.
Liquidity risk analysis The Group together with the Company manages its liquidity needs by carefully monitoring scheduled debt servicing payments for longterm liabilities as well as forecast cash inflows and outflows due in daytoday business.
Liquidity needs are monitored in various time bands on a daytoday and weektoweek basis as well as on the basis of a rolling 60day forecast and a rolling 15week projection.
Longterm liquidity needs for a 365day lookout period are identified quarterly.
Net cash requirements are compared to available borrowing facilities in order to determine headroom or any shortfalls.
The Group and the Company maintain cash and headroom to meet their liquidity requirements for 60day periods at a minimum.
Funding for longterm liquidity needs is additionally secured by an adequate amount of credit facilities and the ability to sell longterm investment in subsidiaries.
As at 31 March 2017 the liabilities that have contractual maturities including interest payments where applicable are summarised below Group Company
1 year
1 year
1 year
1 year 31 March 2017 Trade payables 9666  62 Accruals and other payables 3637  104 Shortterm bank borrowings 11477 Finance lease liabilities 1147 2502 Bank loans Loan notes Owed to Group undertakings 31 March 2016 Trade payables 10376  91 Accruals and other payables 3426  142 Shortterm bank borrowings 6200 Finance lease liabilities 429 1212 Bank loans Loan notes Owed to Group undertakings   6 The above amounts reflect the contractual undiscounted cash flows which may differ to the carrying values of the liabilities at the reporting date.
Where the counterparty has a choice of Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 when an amount is paid the liability has been included on the earliest date on which payment can be required.
The Directors are of the view that the fair value of borrowings approximate to their carrying value.
30 Capital management objectives The Groups capital management objectives are to ensure the Groups ability to continue as a going concern and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk.
The Group funds itself through equity and debt which is defined as bank borrowings loan notes and finance leases.
The Groups capital is represented by the carrying amount of equity as presented on the face of the statement of financial position.
The Groups longterm goal in capital management is to maintain a balance of capital to overall financing in the range 40% to 60% while maintaining net debt to trading EBITDA below the Groups target KPI of less than 2.01.
At 31 March 2017 capital represented 50% of overall financing FY2016 75% and the Board will continue to monitor developments in the Groups capital over FY2018.
The capital and overall financing for the reporting periods under review is summarised as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Total equity 22378 25808 Total equity 22378 25808 Net borrowings 22114 8639 Overall financing 44492 34447 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 31 Financial assets and liabilities 31.1 Categories of financial assets and liabilities The carrying amounts presented in the financial statements relate to the following categories of assets and liabilities Group Company
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Financial assets
Loans and receivables Trade and other receivables 23311 20414 125 10673 Cash and cash equivalents 1235 5135 2636 1550 Financial liabilities
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Trade payables 9666 10376 62 91 Borrowings 15188 7418 2153 70 Finance liabilities measured at fair value Derivatives 302 292
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Borrowings 8161 6356 3419 2941 See note 2.23 for a description of the accounting policies for each category of financial instrument.
The fair values are presented in the related notes.
A description of the Groups risk management objectives and policies for financial instruments is given in note 29.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 31.2 Derivatives financial instruments The fair value of forward foreign currency contracts is calculated by reference to current market rates for contracts with similar maturity profiles.
The derivative financial liabilities can be summarised as follows Group At 31 March
31 March Forward exchange contracts 302 292 Fair value of derivative financial liabilities 302 292 The Group uses forward exchange contracts to mitigate exchange rate exposure arising from forecast sales and purchases US Dollars and Euro respectively.
In the period a loss of 10000 2016 40000 was recognised in the consolidated income statements.
The fair value measurements of all of the above derivative financial liabilities fall into Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
Valuation has been obtained from an external valuation report which compares the contractual deal rate with the spot rate at the 31 March 2017.
31.3 Financial results by category of financial instruments The financial results by category of financial instruments can be summarised as follows Group Company Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Loans and receivables  interest received Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost  interest paid Fair value movements on derivative financial instruments Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 31.4 Borrowings Borrowings comprise the following financial liabilities Group Current Noncurrent
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Bank borrowings and loans 14041 6989 5659 5144 Finance lease liabilities 1147 429 2502 1212 15188 7418 8161 6356 Company Current Noncurrent
31 March
31 March
31 March
31 March Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Bank borrowings and loans 2153 70 3419 2941 2153 70 3419 2941 The bank borrowings and loans are secured by fixed and floating charges over the Group assets.
The rates of interest on these borrowings and loans are detailed in note 29.
The above bank loans contain terms and conditions that are normal for the commercial banking market. breakdown of net debt is given in note 23.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 32 Related party transactions The Groups related parties include its key management postemployment benefit plans for the Groups employees and subsidiaries.
Unless otherwise stated none of the transactions incorporate special terms and conditions.
Outstanding balances are usually settled in cash.
Transactions with key management personnel During the year the Group undertook transactions with key management personnel as set out below.
Members of the Board of Directors are considered to be key management personnel.
Remuneration with key management personnel are disclosed in note 8 and in the
Remuneration Committees report.
Nicholas Flanagan and Ewan LloydBaker have subscribed to the Hayward Tyler Group PLC 10 million secured loan note programme.
Loan notes issued in the programme have a term range of between 1 and 4 years and a coupon of between 6.75% and 7.0%.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 Nicholas Flanagan received interest of 5250 FY2016 5264 on his subscription of 75000.
Ewan LloydBaker received interest of 1412 FY2016 1053 on his subscription of 50000.
Loan note subscriptions were made on an arms length basis.
During the year the Group ordered machinery from Severn Drives and Energy Limited and Severn Subsea Technologies Limited both of which Maurice Critchley is a Director.
The total value of orders placed was 41511 FY2016 1385180 and the amount billed in the year was 786505 FY2016 377730.
This machinery was provided on an arms length basis.
Transactions with postemployment benefit plans The defined benefit plan referred to in note 28 is a related party to the Group.
The Groups transactions with the pension scheme include contributions paid to the plan which are disclosed in note 28.
The Group has not entered into other transactions with the pension scheme neither has it any outstanding balances at the reporting dates under review.
Transactions with subsidiaries Transactions and balances within the Group have been eliminated on consolidation.
Balances between the Company and its subsidiaries at the yearend were as follows Company At 31 March
31 March Amounts due from subsidiary undertakings Southbank UK Limited Hayward Tyler Group Limited Hayward Tyler Limited Peter Brotherhood Limited Redglade Investments Limited 14148 14467 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings Nviro Cleantech Limited Peter Brotherhood Limited Amounts due from subsidiary undertakings represent intercompany funding.
In the case of Southbank UK Limited funding has been provided to finance working capital particularly for Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Hayward Tyler and to finance debt repayments.
Funding has been provided to Hayward Tyler Limited to finance the Centre of Excellence and working capital.
Funding was provided to Peter Brotherhood Limited to fund the acquisition and support working capital.
Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings relate to trading balances.
From 1 April 2014 the intercompany funding has been converted to loans at market rates of interest with varying terms of between one to three years.
33 Commitments
31 March
31 March Group 000 000 Contracted for but not provided for 217 2274 217 2274 34 Equity Share capital The share capital of Hayward Tyler Group PLC consists of fully paid ordinary shares with a par value of 1 pence per share.
Shares authorised and issued are summarised below.
At
31 March
31 March Authorised share capital 80000000 ordinary shares of 1p 80telAt 31 March 2017 At 31 March 2016
000 No.
Issued share capital Allotted calledup and fully paid At start of year 55384856 554 45507404 455 Issued in the Year   9877452 99 At end of year 55384856 554 55384856 554 Share premium Share premium consists of proceeds received in addition to the nominal value of the shares issued net of transaction costs.
Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 35 Noncash adjustments and changes in working capital The following noncash flow adjustments and adjustments for changes in working capital have been made to profit before tax to arrive at operating cashflow.
Group
Company
Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Year to 31 March Noncash adjustments Amortisation of intangibles Depreciation of property plant and equipment Finance costs Interest income Share based payment Deferred tax Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment Total adjustments 3539 1995 538 350 Net changes in working capital Movement in inventories 1108 5152 Movement in trade and other receivables 3899 4785 277 4084 Movement in trade and other payables
4880 116 253 4244 Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017
Contacts
Company registration number
Grant Thornton UK LLP 202 Silbury Boulevard Central Milton Keynes MK9 1LW Nominated Advisor FinnCap Limited 60 New Broad Street
EC2M 1JJ Registered Office and Agent Peregrine Corporate Services
Burleigh Manor Peel Road
Isle of Man IM1 5EP
National Westminster Bank Silbury House 300 Silbury Boulevard Central Milton Keynes MK9 2AZ
Share Registrars Limited The Courtyard 17 West Street Farnham Surrey GU9 7DR
E LloydBaker N Flanagan J May M Critchley Corporate Finance Advisor Akur Capital 66 St Jamess Street
SW1A 1NE
Mishcon de Reya LLP Africa House 70 Kingsway London WC2B 6AH Hayward Tyler Group PLC Financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Glossary of Terms 2Q2017 Second quarter of FY2017 being 1 July 2016 to 30 September 2016 AIM London Stock Exchanges market for smaller growing companies AM Aftermarket business segment ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Transaction
The proposed acquisition of HTG by Avingtrans plc BCP Boiler Circulating Pump Cash Conversion Ratio of a Trading EBITDA plus movement in working capital to b Trading EBITDA Centre of
