The AZ of experience Annual Report 2017 Landsec at a glance Welcome to Landsec.
We buy sell develop and manage commercial property in the UK.
Our aim is to create a great experience for everyone we rely on from our customers to our communities partners and employees.
We believe thats the best way to create longterm sustainable value for our shareholders and everyone else we affect.
With the background of geopolitical and economic uncertainty affecting the UK our markets lost momentum during the year.
However by having a clear strategy and acting early weve been able to achieve a good relative performance this year.
We consider both the short and longterm effects of our actions.
And in this Annual Report weve further integrated important content about our broader social and environmental impacts.
London Portfolio Retail Portfolio Performance measures Profit before tax 2016 1336m 1.4% Total business return 2016 13.4% 3.7% Total property return 2016 11.5% Dividend up 10.1% 4.3 out of 5 Customer satisfaction both London and Retail 18.5% Reduced carbon intensity kgCO by 18.5% compared to 201314 baseline Employment created for 962 disadvantaged people to date million sq ft portfolio million sq ft development programme completed billion of assets million sq ft portfolio shopping centres retail parks leisure destinations 14.4bn portfolio or 23.2 million sq ft 638 employees Number of staff
Largest commercial property company in UK by market capitalisation assets 1 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Visit our new website site Everything we do starts with understanding the changing needs and expectations of the people who matter most to us  our customers communities partners and employees.
We then draw on our experience to create the very best experiences for them.
By getting that right were able to create longterm value for our shareholders.
Put simply for us Everything is experience .
Over the following pages we explore 26 stories that capture our approach in action from A to Z.
And we report on what our approach achieved this year  financially socially and physically.
Contents
Strategic Report 16 Chief Executives statement 18 Our market Our strategy 24 Key performance indicators 26 Our business model Creating sustainable longterm value 30 Financial review 36 Physical review 38 Social review 42 Managing risk 44 Our principal risks and uncertainties 46 London Portfolio review 50 Retail Portfolio review 54 Going Concern Viability Statement
56 Letter from the Chairman 58 Board of Directors 60 Executive Committee 61 Leadership Letter from the Chairman of the Nomination Committee 66 Effectiveness Letter from the Chairman of the Audit Committee 70 Accountability 75 Investor relations
Directors Remuneration Report
Chairmans Annual Statement
78 Remuneration at a glance 80 Annual Report on Remuneration 90 Summary of Directors Remuneration Policy Directors Report Financial statements Statement of Directors Responsibilities
97 Independent Auditors Report
103 Income statement Statement of comprehensive income 104 Balance sheets Statement of changes in equity 106 Statement of cash flows Notes to the financial statements Additional information 156 Business analysis  Group 160 Business analysis  London 161 Business analysis  Retail 162 Sustainability reporting 168 Combined Portfolio analysis 170 Lease lengths Development pipeline and trading property development schemes 172 Alternative performance measures 172 Five year summary Acquisitions disposals and capital expenditure 175 Remuneration policy 180 Subsidiaries joint ventures and associates 183 Shareholder information 186 Key contacts and advisers 187 Glossary IBC Cautionary statement A breath of fresh air 2 Landsec Annual Report 2017 We design our buildings to be healthy efficient and productive spaces.
Which is why our ventilation system at The Zig Zag Building supplies air as fresh as youd find at the coast.
At Bluewater our upgraded system is so effective weve turned off the air conditioning.
Thats cut costs and energy use and helps make the place even more inviting for visitors.
3 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report This year brought political social and economic uncertainty.
That affected our markets weakening demand for space.
Put simply  our markets dont know whats next.
In London the office market reached a turning point.
Supplyconstrained conditions eased and the vacancy rate rose with the Brexit vote a catalyst for change.
In the retail sector a range of factors impacted retailers confidence from the threat of cost inflation to online sales growth.
But we also saw opportunities.
Successful businesses continued to look for innovative technically resilient space in London.
And in retail there remained continued demand from dynamic brands for new and repurposed space in the best locations.
Our year 4 Landsec Annual Report 2017 We also saw the continuation of four longterm trends  each driven by expectation each creating opportunities for us Smart office occupiers expect their work environment to deliver business benefits.
That includes operational efficiency but its also about attracting inspiring and enabling talent.
People expect more from their shopping experience.
Destination centres must go way beyond convenience and choice and provide a truly memorable day and night  out.
People also expect the best businesses to lead on creating better environmental and social outcomes.
That means recognising the deeper longterm effects of decisions and actions.
And talented employees expect a great career experience.
Which is why a compelling employer brand is an increasingly valuable asset.
Designed with care We work to create memorable customer experiences while minimising our impact.
For example at 1 New Street Square smart design choices saved 200 tonnes of carbon and reduced material costs by more than 600000.
5 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Employer brand We aim to provide employees with a great career experience so were delighted to be one of Property Weeks Best Places to Work in Property list  the only listed REIT included in their list.
Film stars Destination centres give people plenty of reasons to spend time as well as money.
Which is why youll now find 28 boutique and multiplex cinemas within our Retail Portfolio.
Blend of experience Its vital our team has the right blend of experience skills and knowledge  including at the top.
This year Nicholas Cadbury joined the Board further enhancing our financial and consumer expertise.
Community impact Weve launched the UKs first scaffolding academy inside a prison helping offenders at HMP Brixton get the skills and experience they need to find employment outside  reducing the risk of reoffending.
Lighting up London At Piccadilly Lights were creating Europes most technically advanced digital screen giving customers extraordinary new ways to interact with two million people each week.
Healthy HQ From collaborative working spaces and smart acoustics to a healthy food bar our new HQ in Victoria has transformed the workplace experience for our employees.
Knowing our market From smart technologies embedded in buildings to more flexible leases were using our experience to prepare now for what our customers will need tomorrow.
6 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Girls Can Do It Too The proportion of female workers in UK construction is just 11%.
To give young women an experience of working in construction our Girls Can Do It Too project invited students at two girls schools to plan design and model a development pitching their ideas to a panel of dragons .
Jobs change lives At our Lewisham shopping centre were supporting an innovative approach to work experience helping young people gain skills develop selfdiscipline and find jobs.
Multichannel opportunities Fashionista Missguided opens at Bluewater this summer part of the trend for online retailers to provide a deeper brand experience through physical stores.
Insights drive relationships By working to understand the business weve helped TripAdvisor grow.
Their customer experience has inspired them to triple space with us at Soho Square and commit through to 2023.
7 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Nova shines bright Weve created a stunning new destination in the heart of SW1 with landmark office space and an array of eateries making this a stylish and delicious place to work visit and play.
17 new restaurants and three popup kiosks are set to open this summer together with hundreds of alfresco dining seats.
Pedestrianisation public art and striking architecture complete the transformation of this area between Victoria Station and the Royal Parks.
8 Landsec Annual Report 2017 9 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report So how did we address our opportunities this year We drew our speculative London development programme to a close and sharpened our focus on letting space actively managing assets and patiently tracking potential acquisitions.
We worked to improve further our Retail Portfolio finding new ways to help retailers and restaurateurs delight customers.
We became the first property company in the world to have its sciencebased carbon targets formally approved.
We also helped take our industry forward on community employment and wellbeing.
And we enhanced the career experience we offer moving to a new headquarters designed for collaborative working and developing new ways to strengthen our culture.
10 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Queuing around the block Our student lockins promise discounts freebies and a top night out.
They really draw the crowds with over 27700 students at our event this year at St Davids.
Our resilient results this year are down to the actions we have taken over the past few years to upgrade our assets and strengthen our balance sheet.
In March 2010 when we restarted development our Combined Portfolio was valued at 9.5bn and debt was 4.2bn.
Today our portfolio is valued at 14.4bn and weve reduced debt to 3.3bn.
Our net assets have increased by 4.9bn over seven years.
And at the same time we have increased revenue profit by 52%.
Our balance sheet is in robust health with low levels of gearing and development.
That gives us the firepower to buy when the time is right.
Our high quality assets are well matched to the changing needs of our customers and communities  a vital advantage in uncertain times.
Weve recommended a full year dividend of 38.55p per share up 10.1%.
11 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Pride at work Inspired by our support for Pride the biggest lesbian gay bisexual and transgender parade in the UK this year employees launched the Companys first LGBT network.
Oxford welcomes
Opening in October Westgate will provide everything from global brands to a boutique cinema from street food to rooftop dining.
Developed with The Crown Estate and the strong support of local people  its a place set to inspire and delight.
Reimagining space By taking a fresh approach to design at 20 Eastbourne Terrace a 1960s office tower in Paddington weve been able to raise ceiling heights bring in more daylight and introduce a planted roof terrace.
The asset was fully let within a year of completion.
Sustainability Matters All employees are taking part in Sustainability Matters a training experience designed to embed sustainable thinking in decision making across the Company.
12 Landsec Annual Report 2017
We now measure customer satisfaction across every one of our retail destinations using online surveys to track feedback on events and the overall customer experience.
Tastes change Food is a vital ingredient in the shopping centre experience thats why were constantly refreshing our restaurant mix  like bringing Indian street food brand Mowgli to Trinity Leeds this year.
Young talent In an industry lagging on diversity our Trainee Academy provides opportunities for school leavers from a broad range of backgrounds to develop a career here.
13 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report X marks the spot We focus our activity where businesses and people want to spend their time and money from regional cities to Londons most dynamic and wellconnected centres.
Validated carbon targets We are the first property company in the world to have its science based emissions target formally approved  clear evidence were serious about sustainability and the environment.
Working together Through our Customer Improvement Groups we bring supply partners together regularly so they understand our priorities we hear their views and customers are assured of terrific service.
Zig Zag  truly worldclass 14 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Research tell us that enriching the work environment makes employees happier healthier and much more productive.
The Zig Zag Building combines highend office space with retail restaurants and reimagined public realm in SW1.
The offices feature outdoor terraces shower rooms filtered air stunning views and exceptional natural light  just some of the reasons it was named Best office scheme in the world at the World Architecture Festival.
15 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Uncertainty will continue to shape our markets but we go forward in great shape  with clear priorities In London well focus on active asset management and preparations for future acquisitions and developments.
In Retail well continue to enhance our destination assets and strengthen our portfolio.
We will do even more to sustain the success of our Company customers and communities further embedding sustainability in our approach.
And well keep developing our people enhancing the knowhow we need to compete thrive and lead our industry.
Above all else well work to understand and address peoples changing needs using our experience to create great experiences for others.
Because ultimately  Everything is experience.
Chief
Executives statement Robert Noel Chief Executive 16 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Landsec is in a great position.
We have a portfolio of firstclass assets combined with historically low levels of operational and financial gearing at a time of geopolitical and economic uncertainty.
Weve largely completed and let our speculative development programme.
Despite being net sellers in the previous year revenue profit is up 5.5% to 382m and adjusted diluted earnings per share are up 5.7% to 48.3p.
Our
Our Combined Portfolio is valued at 14.4bn and with adjusted net debt broadly unchanged over the year at 3.3bn our loantovalue is 22.2%.
Weve reduced our cost of debt and have access to the funds needed to buy when opportunities appear.
Despite uncertainty in the outside world we remain confident of our core strengths inside the Company and were recommending a final dividend of 11.7p  raising the dividend for the year by 10.1%.
Market environment Put simply our markets remain in good health but theyve paused for breath.
In the London office market we expected the occupational balance to shift from demand to supply during the course of 2017.
The Brexit vote brought that inflexion point forward.
In last years report I said a vote to leave the EU would create business uncertainty leading to lower occupational demand falling rental values and a reduction in construction commitments.
This is happening though less than we expected.
Overall the UK economy continued to perform well during the year.
In the retail market the effect of the referendum was less clearcut although faced with pressure on disposable income shoppers have started to show more caution.
Retailers were a little slower to take up new space during the year but we continued to see opportunities to meet the everevolving needs of the most successful brands.
We wont be sure of the longterm effect of Brexit on our markets for some time.
Negotiations with the EU can only begin in earnest after the general election.
Although the business community remains in uncharted territory that doesnt mean we should wait for change to happen to us.
Were taking this time to prepare the business for the opportunities and challenges we see ahead.
We hope the new government can give businesses as much certainty as possible on areas including tax regulation access to skilled labour and public spending such as investment in infrastructure  including desperately needed homes.
A clear and ambitious strategy for improving digital connectivity would have a particularly powerful impact.
Robert Noel reports on our performance during the year and shares his outlook for the next 12 months.
17 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report First class portfolio The foundations of the business are rock solid underpinned by our resilient portfolio and low leverage.
In London our modern welllocated assets are well let with a weighted average unexpired lease term on offices of 10.3 years.
Having already scaled back speculative development activity before the year started the last 12 months saw us put the finishing touches on over 1 million sq ft of space including high profile developments at 1 New Street Square EC4 20 Eastbourne Terrace W2 and Nova Victoria SW1 which completed shortly after the year end.
Of the 3.1 million sq ft programme we started in 2010 we have let or sold all but 283000 sq ft.
Our Retail Portfolio is a collection of vibrant destinations that attract dynamic brands and are wellmatched to consumer trends.
During the year we built and let a leisure extension at White Rose Leeds.
Our newest destination Westgate Oxford is on schedule to open in October and is 80% spoken for.
Since the year end weve acquired a portfolio of three outlet centres establishing our position as the leading ownermanager of outlets in the UK.
Strong relationships Throughout the year we pursued our vision of being the best property company in the UK in the eyes of our customers communities partners and employees.
Ultimately their experience drives our performance.
Were responsible for ensuring that Landsec can thrive for many years to come.
Thats why we set ourselves even higher expectations this year on issues we share with our customers and communities such as local employment and placemaking.
Weve also improved the way we address our climate impacts and risks.
Great people In January we completed the move into new headquarters at 100 Victoria Street SW1.
This is one of our buildings and it expresses the best of who we are and what we do.
Were on one floor of openplan workspace supported by innovative technology.
Thought has gone into everything from the way we collaborate to how we minimise energy and waste.
Its the UKs highest rated office fitout according to sustainability assessment scheme BREEAM.
Our results 3.7 % Ungeared total property return 1.2% Decrease in adjusted diluted net assets per share 1.4% Total business return Our activity of investment lettings of development lettings of acquisitions of development and refurbishment expenditure of disposals We go forward in excellent shape ready to make acquisitions when the time is right.
Evolving market conditions require role changes in our teams as our emphasis shifts from selling and development to management and buying.
Our people relish these challenges.
We are also enriching our culture recruiting more from outside our industry so we gain fresh perspectives and new capabilities.
During the year we introduced stretching targets on gender and ethnic diversity and fairness.
Outlook
Weve achieved our plan to have minimal development exposure and longer lease terms in London offices a transformed Retail Portfolio and low gearing at this point.
Over the next 12 months were unlikely to see rental values grow in London unless we have more certainty on movement of people and the UKs terms of trade with the EU and the rest of the world.
In the retail sector the extent to which higher supply chain costs are passed on to customers remains to be seen.
Whatever the outcome higher costs tend to reduce take up of space.
In the short term with significantly reduced risk and a portfolio of firstclass assets we go forward in excellent shape ready to make acquisitions when the time is right.
Longer term we remain confident in our market and our ability to deliver sustainable growth.
Well continue to address the trends that shape our business in coming years.
For example the combination of an ageing population and technological progress will have a huge effect on the way we live work shop play travel and are cared for.
In turn this will affect the way we design construct and manage buildings and how we attract the best talent.
The importance of thinking ahead and acting early was brought home to me by our completion of Nova in April.
Design on this project started in 2003 when the iPhone was still an idea in Steve Jobs head.
We must continue to anticipate change so that we can keep providing the right space for our customers and communities whatever their future demands  helping businesses and people to thrive.
Robert Noel Chief Executive 18 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Product innovation Technology and design innovation have the potential to change the face and functionality of buildings in exciting ways.
They will also impact the construction process.
While markets evolve at remarkable speed the design construction leasing and operational processes for commercial property remain relatively slow and inflexible.
Our industry must do more to reduce timetomarket cut cost and increase flexibility resilience efficiency and sustainability.
And we will have to continue designing buildings today that will appeal to and work well for a new generation tomorrow.
Sustainability as an advantage Businesses government and the public increasingly recognise the need for longterm thinking on social and environmental issues.
The best companies in our industry are expected to take a lead on diversity local employment community responsible supply chains the wellbeing of occupiers and visitors climate risks energy and biodiversity.
Smart progressive thinking can help to support the people and resources companies rely on to prosper and grow  and bring all sorts of business benefits.
See how were responding to these opportunities and challenges on page 21 Our market Evolving customer needs For many London office occupiers location is no longer the only consideration.
Flexibility of layout and lease terms efficient attractive space technical resilience and physical and digital connectivity are now just as important.
And cost per head is more important than  per sq ft.
In retail successful operators are generally looking for fewer but larger spaces where they can showcase their entire online range and provide a brand experience.
People are shopping less often but will travel further for  and stay longer in the most successful destination centres.
Balance of supply and demand We anticipated that the balance between occupational supply and demand in the London office market would shift during 2017.
Since
Brexit we have seen lower levels of demand.
As a result the vacancy rate is rising headline rents have stalled and net effective rents have weakened.
If investment values fall further this may present opportunities for companies with capital to buy assets.
In retail the market is oversupplied with space but assets providing a great experience or convenience will do better than those caught between the two.
As catchments evolve shopping destinations must ensure they can compete against others further afield.
Six big drivers of opportunities and challenges Economic uncertainty Wider uncertainty has affected the ability of many customers to plan and take decisions.
For consumers increased economic uncertainty may lead to lower spending.
For businesses that have to take new space theres generally a combination of good choice and attractive incentives available.
Others are opting to sit tight extending leases and taking additional space if required.
The impact of this has not yet been seen in investment values.
Brexit brings potential for economic and financial benefits as well as challenges not least for exporters and businesses looking to move into or expand in the UK.
UK competitiveness In the short term ongoing Brexit negotiations are likely to fuel uncertainty and commercial caution.
Looking further out we see the potential for the UK to emerge from this period in good shape.
We fully expect London to continue as one of the worlds most successful financial and cultural centres.
6 market drivers 19 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
This year we moved from supplyconstrained conditions into a market with more supply and weaker occupational demand.
The UKs vote to leave the EU triggered a weakening in demand for London office space stalling growth in rental values and asset prices.
The market is also driven by the evolving needs and expectations of customers and communities.
Enduring appeal Central London has enduring appeal for investors and occupiers offering Capabilities and opportunities of a global financial centre Deep and liquid property investment market International gateway Reasonable and relatively stable tax rates Strong business and transport infrastructure Diverse community and Englishspeaking population Access to top universities
Were continuing to see the market polarised between destination centres and convenience.
The growth of online shopping is driving the rationalisation of store estates with only the strongest locations holding ground.
Some online brands are moving into physical stores as convergence drives efficiency and they see opportunities to create great brand experiences.
Stores are the best place to see touch feel and buy and they remain at the heart of most transactions.
Londons strengths attract a large and diverse mix of property investors many from overseas.
This helps us when selling assets but increases competition when buying.
Challenges
Challenges for London include Uncertainty over the outcome of the Brexit negotiations Limitations on economic growth due to restrictions on immigration Lack of housing at affordable or attractive prices Pressure on an ageing infrastructure Continued lack of clarity around airport expansion High levels of stamp duty Demand for betterfaster digital connectivity
We expect current uncertainty will continue to impact demand for space.
Headline rents have started to fall and we expect incentives to increase and average lease terms to shorten further.
London is an increasingly polycentric city and location is no longer the only consideration for occupiers.
This may result in buying opportunities outside traditional core areas.
Opportunities
The best destinations continue to drive above average performance for retailers and attract the greatest demand for space from the broadest range of retailers.
A retreat from the UK by some international retailers has been balanced by the expansion plans of others.
Successful shopping destinations deliver higher dwell time and average spend per visit by providing consumers with a great experience and an appropriate mix of retail food and beverage and leisure.
Challenges
An uncertain economic environment is putting pressure on discretionary spending.
At the same time retailer confidence is muted as they deal with the challenges of increased business rates increases to the living wage and the requirement to continue investment in multichannel offers and fulfilment.
Outlook
We expect to see consumer caution led by concern about higher cost of living combined with lower wage growth.
Destination and convenience centres will continue to outperform compared with those centres that fail to meet consumers needs and respond to online retailing and the gap in performance is likely to widen further.
London
Portfolios market in 2017 We buy develop manage and sell office retail leisure and residential space in central London.
Retail
Portfolios market in 2017 We buy develop manage and sell retail and leisure space in the best locations.
Market during the year 9% Physical retail store sales 0.3% All retail sales including online 2.5% UK footfall
British Retail Consortium
Market during the year 11.7 m sq ft Takeup of office space in central London 2016 14.7 million sq ft 4.7 % Vacancy rate 2016 2.7% 8.3% Decline of the prime headline office rents in the West End Prime headline office rents in the City were flat Source CBRE 20 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Our strategy Our strategy is designed to ensure we are a sustainable business through the market cycles creating and protecting value over the longterm.
Our strategy helps us pursue our vision of being the best property company in the UK in the eyes of our customers communities partners and employees.
We make understanding and meeting peoples needs our top priority always looking to use our experience to provide them with great experiences.
We act early in response to changes and trends in our markets.
And we aim to lead our industry forward on critical longterm issues from diversity to community employment carbon and climate resilience.
We buy assets and start development early in the cycle manage assets actively to ensure they generate strong income and sell at the appropriate time and recycle capital.
We aim to make sound longterm investments so our assets keep their appeal meet changing regulations and generate returns for years to come.
Nova our strategy in action Completed in April 2017 Novas extraordinary office residential and restaurant spaces reflect the changing expectations of our customers.
Deliver sustainable longterm shareholder value Maximise the returns from the investment portfolio Manage our balance sheet effectively Maximise development performance Ensure high levels of customer satisfaction Attract develop retain and motivate high performance individuals Continually improve sustainability performance Go to page 24 for more information Our strategic objectives 21 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Develop close relationships with our customers communities partners and employees so we understand their evolving needs and they trust us to meet their expectations.
Market
Focus on two dynamic sectors of the UK commercial property market  offices retail and leisure in London and retail and leisure outside London.
Being active in these two sectors rather than one provides us with greater financial stability as they work to different cycles.
Timing
Apply our experience and insight so we buy develop manage and sell assets at the appropriate time in the property cycle.
Scale
Maintain our size and strength so when we judge the timing is right we can deploy our capital and acquire or develop a number of major assets at the same time.
Locations
Buy and develop in thriving locations or places with excellent potential.
Good transport links are becoming more highly valued than fashionable postcodes.
Finance
Enhance returns through appropriate levels of debt using our assets as security to drive down costs.
Risk
Address the risk that space will be left unlet  or let at low rents  if supply outstrips demand by owning assets with strong appeal developing early in the cycle and managing actively.
Act early to mitigate risks related to changes in climate legislation and resource availability.
Our strategic choices 6 opportunities How were addressing our biggest opportunities and challenges Evolving customer needs Strategic focus on creating great experiences Designing in greater flexibility connectivity and technical resilience Focus on wellconnected locations in London and dominant retail destinations Prioritising cost per head over cost per sq ft Balance of supply and demand Speculative development programme brought to a close in London Monitoring buying opportunities closely Significant asset management activity across the business Delivering the largest current retail development in the UK this year in a city with a significant shortage of contemporary retail space Economic uncertainty Operational and financial gearing at historic low Access to capital for acquisitions Preparing now for the next cycle UK competitiveness Strong belief in prospects of London and the UK Ongoing investment in Londons physical and social infrastructure Company well represented in public debate and industry groups Product innovation Investment in customer insight and forecasting Strengthening our customerled culture Leadership on sustainable design and innovation Working groups with partners to improve industry processes Sustainability as advantage Vision is to lead UK listed real estate sector in sustainability Innovative collaboration on community employment First property company to have an approved sciencebased carbon target Pioneering use of green gas and renewable electricity Get an overview of these opportunities and challenges on page 18 22 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Market cycle
The London office market sees marked periods of over and undersupply and the balance can shift from one to the other quite quickly.
Buy
We aim to buy assets when values are falling or low or when we see a longterm opportunity to enhance value.
Were currently watching the market carefully monitoring around 2 billion of potential acquisitions.
Our strong balance sheet and access to capital mean we can buy when we spot the right opportunity.
Develop
We start to develop early in the cycle so we benefit from lower construction costs aiming to deliver completed schemes when demand from customers is rising and levels of available space are low.
Weve drawn our large speculative development programme to a close for this cycle.
We have plenty of options for development within our portfolio and the financial capacity to acquire new development sites.
Manage
We talk to our customers regularly so we understand their changing needs and can respond quickly.
This helps us to retain customers and improve rental values keeping our portfolio attractive and resilient.
Sell
We sell assets when we see better ways to use the capital.
We aim to sell when theres strong demand for the space and ahead of a turn in the cycle from demand to supply.
We look to add value through asset management or refurbishment ahead of selling an asset.
For more on our London Portfolio see pages 4649
The retail property market is less volatile than London offices and is fundamentally driven by long term structural changes such as consumer spending population trends or the impact of online retailing.
We are focused on London and the best regional destinations.
Buy
We acquire when we see an opportunity to transform an undermanaged property or land into a great destination for shoppers and visitors.
Develop
We put strong emphasis on creating attractive well considered space where people want to spend time and return frequently.
We help customers pursue multichannel strategies and we ensure our environments use new technology to enhance the shoppers experience.
We derisk developments by seeking substantial prelettings before we start construction.
And we ensure we contribute to the environmental social and economic fabric of the local area and community which helps to make our centres busy and well regarded.
Manage
We are proactive managers constantly looking for opportunities to enhance our space in line with the changing needs of our customers and communities.
We continually refresh the tenant mix in our destinations and work hard to create the most compelling blend of retail and leisure.
Sell
We dispose of an asset when we see opportunities to use capital elsewhere to create better more valuable space with greater appeal.
For more on our Retail Portfolio see pages 5053
Starting schemes at the right point in a rising market helps maximise value and minimise risk.
Buy
Falling values bring opportunities to buy assets at attractive prices.
Sell
Selling some assets at the right point in a rising market means value can be crystallised and the portfolio can be biased towards high quality assets with long lease lengths.
Manage
Active management of assets through the cycle helps to reduce voids and ensure space meets occupiers changing needs.
Property values Property values 23 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Investing through the lifecycle We aim to buy develop manage and sell assets in a way that benefits those closest to us  our customers communities partners and employees.
Buy
We acquire an asset if it has the potential to meet the evolving needs of our customers and communities can be acquired at the right price and is likely to create financial value for us over time.
Published this year our Responsible Property Investment Policy sets out the standards for acquisitions.
Develop
We develop when we see an opportunity to create space that will appeal to customers enhance the area and create financial value for us.
We design for the safety health and wellbeing of occupants.
We also design for efficiency and productivity.
And we design to improve the public realm around our buildings including connectivity and wider infrastructure.
Our
To help us pursue our aim of being a sustainability leader in our industry by the end of this year we had enhanced the Sustainable Development Brief we give to partners.
Going forward we will set tougher targets and higher expectation levels around innovation.
The brief gives equal weight to social and environmental issues.
Manage
We work with customers communities and partners to ensure our buildings operate efficiently and to help increase local prosperity.
We redesign and refurbish space if we spot an opportunity to make it more attractive useful and valued.
We work with occupiers to manage energy waste and water as cost efficiency and environmental factors.
100% of the electricity we buy for our managed portfolio is now renewable and we collaborate with customers to reduce energy consumption.
Thinking about sustainability helps us to protect the building from external risks such as price volatility changing regulation supply issues and premature obsolescence.
And it enables us and them to meet our commitments.
Sell
We sell an asset when we see an opportunity to deploy our capital more effectively elsewhere.
Through our investment and activity the building we sell should perform at a higher level than the building we bought financially socially and environmentally.
This should make it more valuable.
We aim to build a positive legacy leaving a place in a better state than when we arrived.
By helping to improve peoples lives we strengthen our reputation and add value to our asset.
We believe that responding to peoples needs and giving careful consideration to the environment economy and community helps us to create enduring financial social and physical value over the long term.
Where we acquire or develop we work closely with customers and communities to ensure the new space meets their needs and expectations.
We manage most of the buildings we own by value which means we get to see how people interact with them and hear their views.
When we have control of assets we can take decisive action to improve things for the better.
We aim to develop and manage buildings in a sustainable and innovative way make efficient use of natural resources in everything we do and create jobs and opportunities for the people who live near our assets including disadvantaged groups who are furthest from employment.
Refurbish or retrofit to relet
Reinvest capital Key performance indicators Three year total shareholder return TSR % Progress Not Achieved Three year TSR performance compared to the TSR performance of a comparator group weighted by market capitalisation of property companies within the FTSE 350 Real Estate Index TSR of 9.2% for the three year period from April 2014 did not exceed our comparator group at 16.2% Chart 1 Revenue profit m Progress Achieved Revenue profit compared to an internal minimum threshold which is reset every three years Revenue profit of 382m was above the internal threshold for 201617 set in April 2015 Chart 4 Three year total property return TPR % Progress Achieved Three year TPR performance compared to the IPD Quarterly Universe weighted to the sectors in which the Group is invested TPR of 12.7% per annum for the three year period from April 2014 exceeded our benchmark at 11.5% per annum Chart 2 Development lettings m Progress Partially Achieved Progress development lettings and residential sales within our development programme 28.0m of lettings achieved against a threshold of 23.4m Chart 5 One year total property return TPR % Progress Not Achieved One year TPR compared to all March valued properties within IPD One year TPR of 3.9% was below the estimated IPD benchmark of 4.8% Chart 3 Customer satisfaction Progress Achieved Maintain overall customer satisfaction rates in Retail and London customer surveys London and Retail both achieved 4.3 out of 5
We work to turn our strategic objectives into tangible performance using individual key performance indicators to measure our progress.
Strategic objectives Ensure high levels of customer satisfaction Attract develop retain and motivate high performance individuals Continually improve sustainability performance Deliver sustainable long term shareholder value Maximise the returns from the investment portfolio Manage our balance sheet effectively Maximise development performance Reported Threshold 32teltel15 201516 201617 Reported Threshold 201415 201516 201617 Landsec IPD Quarterly Universe 201415 201516 201617 3 years p.
London Portfolio Retail Portfolio Total portfolio Landsec IPD relevant sector IPD March universe excluding Landsec estimate Retail London 201415 201516 201617 Landsec Comparator group 201617 3 years 24 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Internal customer focus programme Progress Not Achieved Deliver an internal customer focus programme Not achieved as the programme was delayed to coincide with the launch of the new Landsec brand in June 2017 New ways of working Progress Achieved Ensure that the new ways of working including those associated with the head office move help to embed the purpose vision and values in a measurable way The office move to Victoria embedded the purpose vision and values and created a step change in a more collaborative and innovative culture Operational efficiency Progress Achieved Support operational efficiency by conducting sitespecific energy reduction assessments of the likeforlike portfolio to accelerate our existing energy management programme Initiatives selected from the assessments will be implemented in at least twothirds of our most energyintensive sites Community Employment
Progress Achieved A further 173 people into jobs via our Community Employment Programme and Trainee Academy Sustainability Matters Progress Achieved Deliver an impactful Sustainability Matters awareness raising and training programme Sustainability Matters level 1 and level 2 modules delivered to employees External customer focus programme Progress Achieved Deliver an external customer focus programme A programme of external customer engagement activities has been delivered % increase in Leesman employee survey score versus 2016 89% of our most energyintensive sites have initiatives selected for implementation Our programmes placed 186 people into jobs this year 95% of employees completed the Sustainability Matters programme during the year Strategy Delivery Reward Strategic objectives Performance vs KPIs Management of risk
Read more on page 42 Read more on pages 8182 25 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Our business model Creating and protecting value We aim to be a sustainable business through the market cycles by anticipating and responding to the changing needs of our customers communities partners and employees.
We always try to act early to position the Group for the conditions we see ahead.
How we set about creating sustainable longterm value for our shareholders and the wider world.
Inputs Core activities
Including the different types of funds we use to invest in our business from shareholder capital to borrowings.
Physical
Including our land and buildings the materials and technologies we use and the natural environment.
Social
Including the relationships we have with customers communities and partners and the capabilities of our employees.
26 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Sell Buy Manage Develop Capital reinvestment Capital reinvestment Further reading Read more about our value outputs over the page on page 28 Further reading Read more about our value outputs over the page on page 29 Further reading Read more about our value outputs over the page on page 29
We take a longterm view of value creation.
For us thats about returning financial value to our shareholders while making a positive contribution to society.
We work hard to provide our customers with a great experience support local communities recruit and develop great people enhance the built environment and minimise our impact.
Financial
Longterm growth in income and asset values creating capacity for us to increase dividends for our shareholders.
Physical
Space that creates value for us by meeting the changing requirements of our customers and communities and a healthy environment for all.
Social
Our ability to help businesses and people to thrive  including our own employees.
27 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Creating sustainable longterm value Heres some more insight on the breadth of outputs our activities can generate and how we work to both create and protect value.
Profit
We aim to grow our longterm underlying profit.
We manage the business for the long term and growth in underlying profit ensures we can provide a sustainable dividend for shareholders.
Revenue profit and earnings per share are particularly helpful indications of how were doing.
Asset value Our markets are cyclical.
The
London office market tends to have greater swings between rising and falling values.
Our valuations reflect where were at in the cycle and how were doing in relative terms to our peers.
Our strategy is to act early reshaping our portfolios so we can be resilient through the downturns and ready for opportunities to buy and develop as the cycle evolves.
Balance sheet Loantovalue LTV shows the amount of our debt relative to the value of our assets.
While a low LTV tends to represent a strong balance sheet at times we will want to increase debt so we can fund buying and development activity.
At other times we will fund that activity by selling assets.
Our adjusted diluted net assets per share measure is important because it enables shareholders to monitor the movement in the value of the net assets of the business and to compare this with the share price.
Dividend
We judge the level of dividend payments carefully paying out most of our underlying earnings but retaining some funds so that we have maximum flexibility around investments and disposals.
Our progressive dividend policy means we aim to increase returns to shareholders at a sustainable level over time.
0tel 2013 teltel 2013 2014 40.5tel 2013 Adjusted net debt LHS Group LTV RHS % 0tel 2013 2014 1teltel 500tel 2013 2014 Revenue profit m Chart 7 Adjusted diluted Chart 8 earnings pence per share Valuation surplus Chart 9 deficit Adjusted net debt and Chart 11 loantovalue ratio Adjusted diluted Chart 10 net assets pence per share
Chart 12 pence per share Includes proportionate share of joint ventures and subsidiaries as explained in the notes to the financial statements.
Includes proportionate share of joint ventures and subsidiaries as explained in the notes to the financial statements.
The surplusdeficit represents the increase decrease in value of the Combined Portfolio over the year adjusted for net investment.
28 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Financial Jobs and opportunities We create income for our employees and those of our many suppliers.
We aim to ensure that everyone who works on our behalf is treated and paid fairly and promptly.
We believe our business should reflect the diversity of the communities we serve.
And we help disadvantaged people and young people to access job opportunities in our industry.
Customers
From retailers to shoppers and diners from office occupiers and their employees who work in our spaces to their visitors we aim to provide our customers with a fabulous experience.
We design our buildings to support the wellbeing and productivity of those who visit and work in them.
Health safety and security We work to maintain an exceptional standard of health safety and security in all the working environments we control.
We also partner and collaborate with others to help raise standards in our industry
To help a total of 1200 disadvantaged people secure jobs by 2020 To ensure the working environments we control are fair and ensure that everyone who is working on our behalf within an environment we control  is paid at least the Living Wage by 2020.
Sustainable design and innovation We think about the longterm appeal impacts and resilience of our assets designing with long term value in mind.
We look to enhance biodiversity and support the wellbeing of those who use our buildings.
And we work closely with our partners to minimise environmental impacts.
Natural resources Being efficient helps us to mitigate our impacts and reduce cost.
Our aim is to reduce carbon intensity energy and waste while maximising the benefits of the space we create and manage.
We always look to be thoughtful and smart in the way we buy use reuse and dispose of resources.
Social
New HQ Our new headquarters is designed to promote productivity and enrich our employees time at work.
Living wall Featuring 52000 plants 20 Fenchurch Streets living wall enriches both the visitor experience and urban biodiversity.
Diversity
A broad range of backgrounds and perspectives make us a stronger business.
Target
To reduce carbon intensity kgCO 2 m by 40% by 2030 compared with a 201314 baseline for property under our management for at least two years with a longerterm ambition of an 80% reduction by 2050 To continue to procure 100% renewable electricity across our portfolio and achieve 3 MW of renewable electricity capacity by 2030 To send zero waste to landfill with at least 75% recycled across all our operational and construction activities by 2020.
29 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Portfolio quality We constantly look to strengthen our portfolio ensuring it meets the changing needs of our customers and communities.
We always aim to bring social economic and environmental benefits to the areas where we operate.
Physical Financial review Martin Greenslade Chief Financial Officer
Revenue profit 2016 362m Adjusted diluted earnings per share 2016 45.7p Dividend per share 2016 35.0p 14.4bn Combined Portfolio 2016 14.5bn 1417 p Adjusted diluted net assets per share 2016 1434p Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information on page 31.
30 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Martin Greenslade reports on our financial performance in detail and explains the movements in our key financial measures.
In my financial review last year I explained how the quality and resilience of our assets had been enhanced this decade through investment in developments and acquisitions funded by the sale of weaker assets.
Our balance sheet had also been strengthened by rising values leading to lower gearing with the additional disposals in the second half of last year reinforcing the position.
This year as the property market lost direction following the EU referendum our high quality assets and low gearing have helped limit the impact of declining values in our core markets.
Over the year our assets fell in value by 1.0% or 147m including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures compared with an increase last year of 907m.
The decline in asset values is behind both the fall in earnings per share 14.3p compared with 169.4p last year and the reductions in basic and adjusted diluted net assets per share.
In contrast the Group has delivered strong underlying earnings growth despite the impact of disposals we made last year.
Both revenue profit and adjusted diluted earnings per share increased this year revenue profit was up 5.5% from 362m to 382m and adjusted diluted earnings per share were up 5.7% at 48.3p.
Presentation of financial information Our property portfolio is a combination of properties that are wholly owned by the Group part owned through joint arrangements and those owned by the Group but where a third party holds a noncontrolling interest.
Internally management review the results of the Group on a basis that adjusts for these forms of ownership to present a proportionate share.
The Combined Portfolio with assets totalling 14.4bn is an example of this approach reflecting the economic interest we have in our properties regardless of our ownership structure.
We consider this presentation provides a better explanation to stakeholders of the activities and performance of the Group as it aggregates the results of all of the Groups property interests which under IFRS are required to be presented across a number of line items in the statutory financial statements.
The same principle is applied to many of the other measures we discuss and accordingly a number of our financial measures include the results of our joint ventures and subsidiaries on a proportionate basis.
Measures that are described as being presented on a proportionate basis include the Groups share of joint ventures on a linebyline basis but exclude the non owned elements of our subsidiaries.
This is in contrast to the Groups statutory financial statements where the Groups interest in joint ventures is presented as one line on the income statement and balance sheet and all subsidiaries are consolidated at 100% with any nonowned element being adjusted as a noncontrolling interest or redemption liability as appropriate.
Our joint operations are presented on a proportionate basis in all financial measures.
Most of the measures discussed in this financial review are presented on a proportionate basis.
Measures presented on a proportionate basis are alternative performance measures as they are not defined under
For further details see table 119 on page 172.
31 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Income statement Our income statement has two key components the income we generate from leasing our investment properties net of associated costs including finance expense which we refer to as revenue profit and items not directly related to the underlying rental business principally valuation changes profits or losses on the disposal of properties and exceptional items which we refer to as capital and other items.
We present two measures of earnings per share the IFRS measure of earnings per share is based on the total profit for the year attributable to owners of the parent while adjusted diluted earnings per share is based on taxadjusted revenue profit referred to as adjusted earnings.
Income statement Table 13 Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Revenue profit see table 14 382 362 Capital and other items see table 17 270 974 Profit before tax 112 1336 Taxation 1 2 Profit attributable to owners of the parent 113 1338 Basic earnings per share 14.3p 169.4p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 48.3p 45.7p Profit before tax was 112m 1224m lower than last year principally due to the valuation deficit this year compared with a valuation surplus last year.
The same movement drives a 155.1p reduction in earnings per share from 169.4p last year to 14.3p this year.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share increased by 5.7% from 45.7p last year to 48.3p this year as a result of an increase in revenue profit from 362m to 382m.
The reasons behind the movements in each component of our income statement are discussed in more detail below.
Revenue profit Revenue profit is our measure of underlying pretax profit.
It excludes all capital items such as valuation movements and profits and losses on disposals as well as items of an exceptional nature.
Revenue profit is presented on a proportionate basis.
We believe revenue profit better represents the results of the Groups operational performance to stakeholders as it focuses on the rental income performance of the business and excludes capital and other items which can vary significantly from year to year.
A full definition of revenue profit is given in the glossary.
The main components of revenue profit including the contributions from London and Retail are presented in the table below.
Revenue profit increased by 20m from 362m last year to 382m for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Following asset disposals we made last year net rental income declined.
However this was more than offset by lower net interest expense as explained further below.
Net rental income Net rental income Chart 15 Net rental income m 65telNet rental income for the year ended 31 March 2016 Net rental income for the year ended 31 March 2017
Development programme Completed developments Acquisitions since 1 April 2015 Sales since 1 April 2015
Year ended 31 March 2017 Net rental income movement in the year Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information above.
Net rental income decreased by 4m this year as rental income growth from our developments and likeforlike portfolio was more than offset by the impact of properties sold since 1 April 2015.
Significant disposals included The Printworks Manchester and The Cornerhouse Nottingham both sold this year and Thomas More Square E1 Holborn Gate WC1 and Times Square EC4 in London and three retail parks in Gateshead Dundee and Derby all sold last year.
The impact of this years disposals will continue to be felt in the coming year as they contributed 9m of net rental income to this years results.
Our developments generated 27m of additional rent following completion of 20 Eastbourne Terrace W2 and 1 New Street Square EC4 alongside a full years income at The Zig Zag Building and 62 Buckingham Gate both SW1 and 1 and 2 New Ludgate EC4.
Likeforlike net rental income growth was 10m due to rent reviews and higher turnover related rents together with a reduction in bad debts.
Further information on the net rental income performance of the London and Retail portfolios is given in the respective business reviews.
Revenue profit Table 14 Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016
Portfolio
London
Portfolio
Total
Retail
Portfolio
London
Portfolio
Total
Change
Gross rental income Net service charge expense 4 1 5 2 1 3 2 Net direct property expenditure 16 16 32 24 17 41 9 Net rental income 31tel275 604 4 Indirect costs 22 17 39 25 19 44 5 Segment profit before finance expense 29tel256 560 1 Net unallocated expenses 40 34 6 Net finance expense 139 164 25 Revenue profit 382 362 20 Includes finance lease interest after rents payable.
32 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Net indirect expenses The indirect costs of the London and Retail portfolios and net unallocated expenses should be considered together as collectively they represent the net indirect expenses of the Group including joint ventures.
In total net indirect expenses were 79m compared with 78m last year.
The 1m increase is largely the result of higher IT and corporate communication and sustainability costs largely offset by lower staff costs due to decreased headcount and reduced sharebased payment costs.
Our net finance expense has decreased by 25m to 139m primarily due to interest savings following the redemption of the 400m A8 bond in March 2016 and other refinancing undertaken this year together with lower average drawings under our bank facilities.
This has been partly offset by lower capitalised interest following completion of developments.
Valuation analysis Table 18 Market value 31 March 2017
Rental value change % Net initial yield %
Movement in equivalent yield bps Shopping centres and shops 3663 1.3 1.6 4.3 4.8 9 Retail parks 855 4.2 0.6 5.5 5.6 24 Leisure and hotels 1361 2.3 0.2 5.2 5.4 6 London offices 4153 4.4 2.5 4.0 4.7 18 Central London shops 1267 6.9 4.7 2.5 4.1 7 Other Retail and London 61 6.0 3.4 1.9 3.6 2 Total likeforlike portfolio 11360 1.4 1.9 4.2 4.8 11 Proposed developments 6 33.2 na  na na Development programme 1138 1.3 na 0.1 4.2 na Completed developments 1841 0.4 1.9 2.0 4.2 10 Acquisitions 94 0.4 na 3.7 3.8 na Total Combined Portfolio 14439 1.0 1.9 3.6 4.7 9 Rental value change excludes units materially altered during the year and Queen Annes Gate SW1.
Over the year to 31 March 2017 we have seen values fall in most categories of our Combined Portfolio largely due to outward yield movements.
Within the likeforlike portfolio our shopping centres fell in value by 1.3% as rental value growth was insufficient to offset a 9 basis points increase in yields.
The value of our retail parks was down 4.2% as lower investor appetite led to yields increasing by 24 basis points.
In contrast leisure and hotels saw yields reduce by 6 basis points with little change in rental values.
In London our offices saw values decline 4.4% as yields increased.
The 2.5% rental value increase in London offices is distorted by the valuer moving from net effective to headline rents on a number of assets.
On a consistent basis net effective rents in London offices were virtually unchanged over the year.
The 6.9% valuation uplift in central Capital and other items Table 17 Year ended 31 March Year ended 31 March Valuation and profits on disposal Valuation deficitsurplus 147 907 Movement in impairment of trading properties 12 16 Profit on disposal of investment properties 20 79 Profit on disposal of trading properties 36 41 Other profits on disposal 11 Net finance expense 34 39 Exceptional items Head office relocation 1 6 Redemption of medium term notes 170 27 Other 1 3 Capital and other items 270 974 Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information above.
Capital and other items An explanation of the main capital and other items is given below.
London shops is largely due to Piccadilly Lights where a replacement screen is being installed.
Outside the likeforlike portfolio the development programme saw values increase as construction risk reduced at Nova Victoria SW1 and Westgate Oxford.
Completed developments which largely comprises our recent London office schemes proved more resilient than our likeforlike London office assets falling in value by 0.4%.
Movement in impairment of trading properties The movement in impairment of trading properties of 12m 2016 16m relates to the reversal of previous impairment charges related to residential land at Ebbsfleet Kent where the valuers assessment of net realisable value has increased over the year.
Net finance expense included in revenue profit Chart 16 Net finance expense m Net finance expense for the year ended 31 March 2016 Net finance expense for the year ended 31 March 2017
Lower average net debt Lower capitalised interest
31 March tel Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information above.
Valuation of investment properties Our Combined Portfolio declined in value by 1.0% or 147m compared with an increase last year of 907m.
A breakdown of valuation movements by category is shown in table 18.
33 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Net debt and gearing Profits on disposals Profits on disposals relate to the sale of investment properties trading properties joint ventures and other investments.
We made a total profit on disposals of 67m compared with 120m last year.
The profit on disposal of investment properties of 20m includes the disposal of The Printworks Manchester and Ealing Filmworks.
The profit on disposal of trading properties of 36m includes a profit on the settlement of our remaining interest in the Kodak land at Harrow together with the sale of residential units at Nova and Kings Gate both SW1.
Other profits on disposal amounted to 11m.
Net finance expense included in capital and other items This largely comprises the amortisation of the bond exchange derecognition adjustment as explained in the notes to the financial statements and the fair value movement on interestrate swaps.
Exceptional items This year weve classified two items totalling 169m as exceptional.
Theyre excluded from revenue profit by virtue of their exceptional nature but form part of our pretax profits.
During the year we purchased some of our bonds with a nominal value of 690m paying a premium of 137m.
The redemption premium and 30m of the bond exchange derecognition adjustment associated with the redeemed bonds 2m of unamortised issue costs and 1m of associated fees 170m in total have been charged to the income statement as a finance expense.
Further details are given in the financing section below.
At 31 March 2016 we provided for the onerous lease on our head office at 5 Strand which arose following our commitment to move to 100 Victoria Street SW1.
During the year we agreed to assign the lease on 5 Strand to a third party at a lower net cost than originally estimated and weve therefore released the balance of the provision of 2m.
Partly offsetting this release is 1m of relocation costs incurred during the year.
Taxation
As a consequence of the Groups REIT status income and capital gains from the qualifying property rental business are exempt from corporation tax.
A property income distribution of at least 90% of this qualifying income must be made and this distribution is taxed as property income at the shareholder level to give a similar tax position to direct property ownership.
Profits on nonqualifying activities such as residential sales are subject to corporation tax and can be distributed as ordinary dividends.
This year we were able to offset taxable gains on nonqualifying activities with brought forward losses.
In the year there was a tax credit of 1m 2016 2m being a current tax credit of nil 2016 1m and a deferred tax credit of 1m 2016 1m .
The Group fully complies with tax regulations and HMRC confirmed the Groups low risk rating.
In the year total taxes borne and collected by the Group were 129m 2016 109m of which we directly incurred 41m 2016 32m including environmental taxes business rates and stamp duty land tax.
Balance sheet Balance sheet Table 19 31 March 31 March Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 Adjusted net debt 3261 3239 Other net assets 28 133 Adjusted net assets 11206 11365 Fair value of interestrate swaps 4 34 Bond exchange derecognition adjustment 314 368 Net assets 11516 11699 Net assets per share 1458p 1482p Adjusted diluted net assets per share 1417p 1434p Our net assets principally comprise the Combined Portfolio less net debt.
We calculate an adjusted measure of net assets which is lower than our net assets reported under IFRS due to an adjustment to increase our net debt to its nominal value.
We believe this better reflects the underlying net assets attributable to shareholders as it more accurately reflects the future cash flows associated with our debt instruments.
At 31 March 2017 our net assets per share were 1458p a decrease of 24p or 1.6% from 31 March 2016.
At 31 March 2017 adjusted diluted net assets per share were 1417p a decrease of 17p or 1.2% from 31 March 2016 driven by the reduction in the valuation of the Combined Portfolio.
Chart 20 summarises the key components of the 159m decrease in our adjusted net assets over the year.
Movement in adjusted net assets Chart 20 Movement in adjusted net assets m Adjusted net assets at 1 April 2016 Adjusted net assets at 31 March 2017 Revenue profit Valuation deficit Profits on disposals
Redemption of medium term notes
Year ended 31 March 2017 Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information above.
Net debt and gearing Table 21 31 March 31 March Net debt 2905m 2861m Adjusted net debt 3261m 3239m Gearing 25.2% 24.5% Adjusted gearing 29.1% 28.5% Group LTV 22.2% 22.0% Security Group LTV 28.3% 23.4% Weighted average cost of debt 4.2% 4.9% Adjusted net debt divided by adjusted net assets.
Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information above.
Over the year our net debt increased by 44m to 2905m.
The main elements behind this increase are set out in our statement of cash flows and note 21 to the consolidated financial statements.
Adjusted net debt was up 22m to 3261m.
For a reconciliation of net debt to adjusted net debt see note 20 to the financial statements.
Chart 22 sets out the main movements behind the small increase in our adjusted net debt.
34 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Net operating cash inflow was 379m largely offset by dividend payments of 289m.
Capital expenditure was 288m 258m on investment properties and 30m on trading properties largely relating to our development programme.
Net cash flows from the disposal of investment properties were 297m from the disposal of trading properties 110m and the disposal of investments in joint ventures 3m.
The premium payable for the purchase of the medium term notes was 137m.
Most of our gearing measures have increased marginally since 31 March 2016 due to the decrease in the value of our assets and the small increase in our adjusted net debt.
The measure most widely used in our industry is loan tovalue LTV.
We focus most on Group LTV presented on a proportionate basis which increased marginally from 22.0% at 31 March 2016 to 22.2% at 31 March 2017.
The increase in our Security Group LTV from 23.4% to 28.3% relates to the medium term notes we purchased this year.
These are held in a different entity to the issuing company and for the purposes of calculating this measure cannot be offset.
Financing
At 31 March 2017 our committed revolving facilities totalled 1940m 31 March 2016 1865m.
The 75m increase in committed facilities is the result of two new debt facilities totalling 560m offset by the cancellation of two existing facilities.
The pricing of our facilities which fall due in more than one year are between LIBOR 75 basis points and LIBOR 80 basis points.
Borrowings under our commercial paper programme typically have a maturity of less than three months carry a weighted average interest rate of approximately LIBOR 29 basis points and are unsecured.
Overall
During the year we purchased 690m nominal value of our medium term notes MTNs.
On 8 February 2017 we conducted a tender exercise which resulted in us buying back 635m nominal value of MTNs in three series.
In addition during the year we bought back 55m nominal value of MTNs in a number of ad hoc purchases following enquiries by bondholders.
Further details are set out in the table below and note 21 to the financial statements.
In conjunction with the tender offer we issued a new 400m MTN with an expected maturity of 2024 and a 300m MTN with an expected maturity of 2029.
A premium to par of 137m was paid across all of the MTN purchases reflecting future coupon savings of 206m.
Taking into account the interest cost of the facilities used for the purchases we estimate the Groups net interest saving next year will be a further 16m.
The Groups debt on a proportionate basis has a weighted average maturity of 9.4 years a weighted average cost of 4.2% and 89% is at fixed interest rates.
At 31 March 2017 we had 1.6bn of cash and available facilities.
This gives the business considerable flexibility to deploy capital quickly should acquisition opportunities arise.
Since the end of the year we have redeemed the Queen Annes Gate bond in its entirety.
The nominal value amounted to 273m at 31 March 2017 and the premium paid was 63m.
The redemption was funded by our existing short term facilities and is expected to result in an interest saving of 8m in the year to 31 March 2018.
Our pro forma cost of debt at 31 March 2017 taking into account this transaction is 3.7%.
Medium term note series
A4
A5
A7
Total
Nominal value purchased Tender offer 206 265 164   635 Ad hoc purchases  5tel23 2 690 Premium paid Tender offer 28 56 40   124 Ad hoc purchases Feesunamortised finance fees written off  2 1 Amortisation of bond exchange derecognition adjustment 19  6 5  30 Redemption of medium term notes total cost Purchase of medium term notes Table 23
Were recommending a final dividend of 11.7p to be paid on 27 July 2017 entirely as a Property Income Distribution to shareholders registered at the close of business on 23 June 2017.
Taken together with the three quarterly dividends of 8.95p per share already paid our full year dividend will be up 10.1% at 38.55p per share 2016 35.0p or 305m 2016 276m.
The first quarterly dividend for 201718 will be 9.85p per share 2016 8.95p.
Landsec has a progressive dividend policy which aims to deliver sustainable growth in dividends over time broadly in line with our underlying earnings growth as measured by our adjusted earnings per share.
The reason we use underlying earnings is that it excludes capital and other items such as valuation movements and nonrecurring income or costs.
We dont pay out a fixed percentage of adjusted earnings each year due to the earnings volatility that can come from our investment decisions.
For example when we empty a building in advance of development we lose rent which isnt recovered until after the new building has been built and let.
Similarly selling assets in the current low interest rate environment is likely to be earnings dilutive.
Our dividend policy aims to smooth out that earnings volatility with a more consistent dividend progression.
The degree to which our adjusted earnings per share exceeds the dividend per share known as our dividend cover will vary for the reasons described above.
In addition when setting our dividend were mindful of the earnings risks we have in the business for example from unlet speculative developments and the degree of flexibility we believe we require for example if we intend to sell properties despite the negative impact on earnings.
Last year we raised our dividend by almost 10% as earnings rose due to our successful development programme.
This year weve increased the dividend above our underlying earnings growth as weve now completed our disposal programme our speculative development risk is lower than for many years and were unlikely to add to that risk in the short term.
In addition to our focus on risk and flexibility when setting the dividend we also consider underlying cash flows recognising that these are generally lower than underlying earnings due to the lease incentives we give our customers and refurbishment capital expenditure.
Taking all these factors together we anticipate that dividend cover will be in the range of 1.2x to 1.3x.
This range is indicative only although its unlikely that we would consistently pay a dividend per share in excess of our adjusted earnings per share and as a minimum we will satisfy our dividend obligation under the REIT legislation.
At 31 March the Company had distributable reserves of 3.5bn which compares to the dividend payable in respect of this year of 305m.
We dont anticipate that the level of distributable reserves will limit distributions for the foreseeable future.
Martin Greenslade Chief Financial Officer Adjusted net debt Chart 22 Adjusted net debt m Adjusted net debt at 1 April 2016 Adjusted net debt at 31 March 2017
Dividends paid
Development refurbishment capital expenditure
Redemption of medium term notes Refinancing of interestrate swaps
Year ended 31 March 2017 3239 379 35 3261 Including our proportionate share of subsidiaries and joint ventures as explained in the Presentation of financial information above.
35 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Physical review A focus on the materials and technologies we use to create and operate our assets and the effect our spaces have on people and the natural environment.
Our portfolio Top ten assets by value 01 New Street Square EC4 Contemporary offices with retail and restaurants.
Annualised net rent 33.1m Cardinal Place SW1 Landmark site home to bluechip businesses and retailers.
Annualised net rent 22.7m Bluewater Kent The dominant shopping centre in the south east of England.
Annualised net rent 28.6m Landsec share One New Change EC4 Office and leisure destination in an iconic building.
Annualised net rent 28.3m 1 Sherwood StreetPiccadilly Lights W1 Offices retail leisure and a world famous advertising landmark.
Annualised net rent 7.3m 20 Fenchurch Street EC3 688000 sq ft of offices and a unique public Sky Garden.
Annualised net rent 20.3m Landsec share Trinity Leeds 778000 sq ft retail destination developed by us.
Annualised net rent 28.0m Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth Outlet shopping leisure and entertainment on a waterfront location.
Annualised net rent 27.1m 1 and 2 New Ludgate EC4 396000 sq ft of modern technically resilient office space restaurant and retail.
Annualised net rent 3.1m Queen Annes Gate SW1 BREEAM Excellent offices built by us in 1977 refurbished in 2008.
Annualised net rent 31.6m Natural resources When we buy use reuse and dispose of resources efficiently we see big benefits.
We minimise our impact on the environment.
We reduce costs both for us and for our customers and partners.
And we give our assets and our business greater resilience in the face of climate change challenges from scarcity of resources to new regulation.
Carbon
Last year we set a sciencebased target for reducing emissions.
This target helps companies determine how much they must cut emissions to prevent the worst impacts of climate change and stay in line with the Paris Agreement.
This year the Sciencebased Targets initiative approved our target making us the first real estate company in the world to achieve this.
During the year we reduced our carbon intensity by 18.5% compared to our 201314 baseline which puts us well on track to achieving our target for 2030 of a 40% reduction and our 2050 ambition of an 80% reduction.
Energy
This years carbon intensity performance is largely due to our active energy management programme which is reducing the energy we use to power our offices and shopping centres.
This year we set our first Group KPI for energy.
This required us to create detailed energy reduction plans for each of our properties and approve energy reduction measures at those consuming the most energy.
Were now generating more of our own electricity through onsite renewable sources such as solar panels on our properties.
We set ourselves a new target this year to achieve 3 megawatts MW capacity of renewable electricity by 2030.
Currently we have a renewable electricity capacity of 0.6 MW across eight assets.
The solar installation schemes in progress at White Rose and Trinity Leeds will add an additional 0.8 MW this coming year taking us to a total of 1.4 MW.
As of 1 April 2016 all the sites we manage are supplied by SmartestEnergy the UKs first officially certified 100% renewable electricity producer.
We are also helping to pioneer the use of green gas a lowcarbon substitute for mined or fracked gas.
Green gas made up 15% of our forward gas purchases for the coming year.
Cardinal Place SW1 now excludes 16 Palace Street SW1.
36 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Sustainable design and innovation The way we design buildings has a huge impact on how people use them.
Great design increases efficiency and encourages people to spend time in our spaces improving wellbeing.
This is good for our customers communities and partners and good for us.
Climate resilience Climate change is affecting our business today.
Warmer temperatures higher rainfall and more variable weather are putting new pressures on our buildings.
This year we introduced a new resilience commitment  assess and mitigate sitespecific climate change adaptation risks which are material across our portfolio .
Our
Scope 3 emissions and embodied carbon Scope 3 emissions are those outside our direct control.
They include the emissions involved in constructing our properties including the manufacture and transportation of materials and they represent 91% of our total emissions.
Since embodied carbon makes up such a big part of our carbon footprint we need to find ways to reduce it.
Were already hard at work on this.
For example our approach to sustainable design at Westgate has enabled us to avoid as many carbon emissions during construction as the centre is expected to generate in operation over the next 30 years putting us well ahead of Oxford City Councils environmental requirements.
This year we worked with the Carbon Trust to develop a consistent and transparent way of reporting Scope 3 emissions across our business.
With better data we can focus on identifying and implementing the measures that will make the most difference.
Biodiversity
This year we continued our work with The Wildlife Trusts exploring ways to increase biodiversity across our Retail Portfolio.
Together weve developed a methodology that enables us to determine each sites potential for biodiversity and to measure biodiversity at a local and Companywide level.
Weve now identified the properties with the greatest potential for biodiversity gain and will focus our activity there giving particularly close attention to how our sites connect with the wider landscape.
Wellbeing
Whenever we design a new development we think hard about the experience of the people who will use and visit it  everyone from office workers and their clients to shoppers and retail staff local neighbours and tourists.
This year we developed two stretching metrics on wellbeing for new developments To assess and design optimum air quality daylight lighting and noise factors Where appropriate to design and construct new developments to be prepared for certification by the WELL Building Institute which recognises buildings that maximise positive effects on people.
Were now pursuing these across our developments.
This year we also continued to sponsor the Better Places for People Campaign an initiative from the World Green Building Council that aims to inspire companies to think about the effects of property on people.
Thanks to our scale and the amount of green gas we buy we can drive demand boost the renewables industry and increase the proportion of green gas in the UKs energy mix.
This makes the whole industry greener  and in turn helps us hit our carbon targets.
Landsec energy intensity Chart tel
London Retail Landsec
Baseline
Baseline
2030 target
Waste can have a significant effect on the environment.
It also has financial impacts.
For example our proactive approach to waste management over the past three years has enabled us to avoid over 8m in landfill tax.
This year our London business sent over 77% of used materials for recycling  an improvement on last years rate of 74% and we continued to divert 100% of waste from landfill.
In Retail we diverted 99.9% of waste from landfill up from 99.0% the previous year.
We also sent 68.4% of used materials for recycling  a slight decrease on last years 69.3%.
We are now investigating circular economy principles for further waste reduction across the portfolio.
37 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report The table below shows the key actions we took to reduce embodied carbon at Westgate Oxford Actions Carbon Savings TCO 2 Earthworks and excavation  local disposal 10700 96% recycled content steel reinforcement 9000 Replacing cement with industrial waste products 9850 100% recycled content sheet piling 1000 Total savings to date 30550 38 Landsec Annual Report 2017
A focus on some of the key activities we carry out to support our customers communities partners and employees.
Customers
We aim to use our experience to ensure we give our customers a great experience.
We work with a diverse mix of businesses and organisations from global corporations and international consumer brands to trend operators fast growing tech companies and dynamic local businesses.
Understanding and meeting customers changing needs is at the heart of everything we do.
We work hard to understand future market dynamics and anticipate evolving expectations and requirements.
Ensuring high levels of customer satisfaction is one of our KPIs and we carry out annual surveys with customers to assess our performance and gain insight.
For more on our work with occupiers see our London Portfolio and Retail Portfolio reviews on pages 4653.
Jobs and opportunities Community employment Our Community Employment Programme is a collection of employment initiatives involving training providers charities and partners from our supply chain.
It targets those furthest from the job market including homeless people the longterm unemployed people with learning disabilities exoffenders and serving prisoners.
The programme plays a real part in the planning process and beyond showing local authorities how our work can benefit an area.
In 201617 183 people found work through our Community Employment Programme.
During the year we extended our prison work launching a scaffolding training centre in HMP Brixton a UK first.
When we started the programme in 2011 we focused on helping candidates in London find work on construction sites.
In 2015 we launched the programme at our Westgate development in Oxford.
This year we expanded the programme geographically from Portsmouth to Leeds.
Were now offering more opportunities in customer service  a reflection of our strategic shift from development activity towards asset management.
So far we have helped 962 people from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Education
Our education programmes help us engage the wider community including students schools and families.
The programmes raise awareness of our developments start conversations and develop our local relationships.
In many of the areas where we work theres a degree of social inequality  so we particularly want to reach out to those pockets of disadvantage and support our ambitions to improve diversity in our sector.
This year we worked with over 400 students between the ages of 12 and 18.
Projects included Girls Can Do It Too an inspiring partnership with two girls schools that challenged students to design model and pitch a new property development.
And were supporting The Sir Simon Milton Westminster University Technical College a new kind of college for students wishing to pursue a career in construction engineering and other roles that require both academic and technical ability.
Charity partnerships This was the third and final year of our national partnership with Mencap the UKs leading learning disability charity.
Across our business we raised over 360000 over the three years.
This year we asked employees to nominate charities that could help us achieve our goal of creating jobs and opportunities and we put our final shortlist to a Company vote  70% of respondents chose Barnardos.
They will become our national partner from 2017.
During the year our teams in London continued to help tackle homelessness.
We also expanded our work in homelessness across the
Were particularly focusing on Oxford where homelessness is rising.
Fairness
We were delighted this year when we became an accredited Living Wage Employer by The Living Wage Foundation.
All of our own employees are paid at least the Living Wage.
In our London business 100% of those working on our behalf within an environment we control  are paid at least the Foundation Living Wage 9.75 an hour in London 8.45 outside London.
In Retail were confident well meet our commitment that everyone working on our behalf is paid at least the Foundation Living Wage by 2020.
In 2015 we asked construction supply chain partners to pay the Foundation Living Wage in their own supply chain.
This year we started to check whether this is being achieved across our developments.
Moving forward well also include a formal commitment in every contract.
The Modern Slavery Act came into force in 2015.
Weve taken steps to make sure our staff and supply chain partners are aware of the Act and its requirements.
In 2016 we issued our first statement explaining how were addressing the risk of slavery and human trafficking in our business.
We then examined our recruitment processes and trained teams to help them spot the risks of modern slavery.
1teltel 2017 Jobs Target tel Cumulative total number of jobs secured Chart 25 85.7 % Landsec is acting responsibly and making tangible improvements to the management of Energy Water and Waste 2015 82.9% 2.8% increase 84.5% We feel that Landsec is acting responsibly and is having a positive effect on the local community 2015 82.2% 2.5% increase Landsecs customer engagement survey 39 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report people to get a job people to get work placements Over 1000 people took part in Mencap events Health safety and security Our priorities are Health to make sure every worker has a transferable occupational health record and to make sure all our maintenance and construction partners have a wellbeing policy Safety to have zero reportable health and safety incidents Security to raise awareness of physical and cyber security in our own organisation and across our industry Despite our efforts incidents reported under the Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 2013 RIDDORs increased this year.
This is partly because our system for logging and reporting of incidents is better and partly because we worked on several complex developments  including Nova which had over 2000 people on site at one time.
The good news is that by bringing our many partners together in Customer Improvement Groups weve created a more transparent culture.
Partners are more likely to tell us about safety incidents instead of hiding them.
Clive Johnson our Group Head of Health Safety and Security continued to chair the Health in Construction Leadership Group
This aims to make sure health gets as much attention as safety in our industry.
In January 2017 HCLG held its second summit drawing over 300 industry leaders.
This saw the launch of Mates in Mind a programme that shows people how to support colleagues with mental ill health.
In future well require all contractors to sign up.
For the coming year we have set new objectives to train all our people in physical and cyber security.
The training will help with everything from protecting data when working remotely to staying safe during terrorist incidents.
Our partnership with Mencap helped 40 Landsec Annual Report 2017 We were the only listed REIT to make the published list of 32 Best Places to Work Overall engagement  86% Proud to work for Landsec  93% Willing to give extra effort to help this organisation succeed  92% National Equality Standard assessment At the first assessment we fully met 27 out of 49 criteria and partially met the remaining 22 Key positives leadership training and external partnerships diversity aspects of new HQ Improvements needed setting of clear targets measurement of the impact of our diversity initiatives RICS Inclusive Employer Quality Mark Seen as a role model against all six criteria leadership recruitment staff development staff retention staff engagement and continuous improvement Property Week Best Places to Work Survey 2016 Our employees
Getting greater diversity into the Company including gender ethnicity social mobility disability and sexuality  is very important for us.
It means we better reflect the character of our customers and communities and are more likely to understand their changing needs.
This year weve set out these very specific objectives for the business to be achieved by 2020 Ensure that Landsec continues to meet all the voluntary targets set by the Hampton Alexander Review.
Currently 36% of senior management including the Executive Committee are female Improve female representation at Leader level to 30% Improve the Engagement scores for Black Asian and Minority Ethnic colleagues bringing them into parity with employee scores overall Improve the transparency of our reporting of all diversity data including the accurate measurement and tracking of engagement of other specific groups  including LGBT and disabled colleagues.
41 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Gender pay The UK Government has introduced legislation that will require employers with 250 or more UK employees to disclose information on their gender pay gap.
The first disclosures will be based on amounts paid in April 2017 and must be published by 4 April 2018.
Improving all aspects of the diversity of our workforce is a key people priority for Landsec as is being a leader in promoting change across our sector.
We have therefore chosen to publish our data in this years Annual Report.
The table below shows the gender pay picture for Landsec calculated in accordance with the published requirements.
The definition of pay shown is an hourly pay rate for each relevant employee as at 5 April 2017 reflecting base salary and certain allowances.
The bonus figures shown include total variable pay over the previous 12 months bonus paid plus any proceeds on exercise of SAYE ESOP or vesting of LTIP awards.
Quartile split Number %
Female
Male mean hourly rate
Lower
Upper
Investment in our people 2016 has been another year of significant investment in our people.
We continued to roll out our established management and leadership programmes Positive Impact and Positive Influence.
Almost 150 managers and leaders have now taken part and the feedback continues to be positive.
We have also invested in our senior executives who have been given access to a bespoke development offer including onetoone coaching business school programmes and peertopeer networking and mentoring.
In all 67% of our people have undergone some form of training.
In line with the focus from the Health Safety and Security team improving our wellbeing offer has been a key priority and we have taken advantage of the move to Victoria to redesign the way all our people including those based outside London can access high quality medical care including detailed health assessments.
This has been supported by a new healthier catering provision and a range of wellbeing initiatives including stress awareness mindfulness and yoga.
We are proud that our investment in people has been recognised externally.
In November 2016 we were the only listed REIT to be named in the Property Week Best Places to Work survey.
93% of our people said that they were proud to work for Landsec.
Key employee figures Total headcount 20 .4% Employee turnover 12% resignations stable yearonyear 50% Percentage of Senior Leader and Leader roles filled by internal people 4654% Overall malefemale ratio female representation up 1% Pay element Male Female % difference Mean hourly salary 43.26 28.86 33.3 Median hourly salary 33.36 21.27 36.3 Proportion of employees receiving a bonus 79.0% 77.1% Mean bonus 42894 14282 66.7 Median bonus 12741 4780 62.5 While at a headline level the figures would suggest a significant pay gap between males and females in our business we are satisfied that the issue is one of female representation in higher paying roles rather than of equal pay for equivalent roles.
The analysis below which includes additional data on hourly rate and mean bonus levels by pay quartile illustrates this more fully Like other companies across our industry we have a lower proportion of females in senior roles than we would like.
As we have said elsewhere in the Annual Report we have seen encouraging progress at the most senior levels and we already exceed the HamptonAlexander review target of 33% female representation at Executive Committee and the level below the top 28 executives.
However the majority of our upper quartile roles encompassing our Executive Senior Leader and Leader levels are still occupied by males.
In the pay quartiles where there is a greater prevalence of females their hourly pay matches or even exceeds that of their male counterparts.
Given this the differential in mean bonus payments at the lower levels of pay may seem surprising.
However this can partly be explained by the relatively high proportion in these groups of parttime females whose bonus payments are prorated.
For example in the lower quartile 14.2% of our employees are parttime and they are all female.
Encouraging more females into senior roles has become a key priority for us which is why we have committed to a specific target of improving our female representation at Leader level broadly the lower end of upper quartile from 20% to 30% by 2020.
This is underpinned by some specific initiatives such as the female mentoring programme and a new set of industrywide recruitment guidelines which we have developed in collaboration with our peers.
Managing risk By being both riskagile and riskresilient we will be in a stronger position to embrace opportunities deliver sustained success and enhance shareholder value.
Our key focus areas in 201617 Third party review of our risk management processes Crisis management exercises for the Executive Committee and senior management Third party review of our crisis management processes Cyber threats and other security risks including building management systems Disruptors to our key target markets Our key priorities for 201718 Continue to enhance the risk management framework and further embed the risk management culture amongst all employees Deep dive reviews into specific areas of risk Enhanced reporting for the Board and executive management Continue to enhance our approach to crisis management Construct scenarios to determine the impact of climate change on our existing portfolio and our future developments
The Board has overall responsibility for oversight of risk and for maintaining a robust risk management and internal control system.
It recognises the importance of identifying and actively monitoring the full range of financial and nonfinancial risks and other longer term threats or challenges potentially facing the business.
The Audit Committee supports the Board in the management of risk and is responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems during the year.
The Executive Committee is responsible for the daytoday management of risk which includes the ongoing identification assessment and mitigation of risk as well as the design implementation and evaluation of the system of internal control and for ensuring its operational effectiveness.
The Companys Risk Management and Internal Audit function supports the Audit Committee and Executive Committee in evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of the risk mitigation strategies and internal controls implemented by management.
The Board undertakes an annual assessment of the principal risks taking account of those that would threaten our business model future performance solvency or liquidity as well as the Groups strategic objectives.
Risk appetite The Board is responsible for the level and type of risk that the Group is willing to take and ensuring that it remains in line with our strategy.
By regularly reviewing the risk appetite of the business and reassessing the latest risk related information the Board seeks to ensure risk exposure remains appropriate at any point in the cycle.
Our risk appetite is cascaded throughout the organisation by being embedded within our policies and delegated authorities.
Risk management framework We have an established risk management and control framework that enables us to identify evaluate and manage our principal risks.
This is supported by a strong risk management culture amongst our employees.
Our approach is not intended to eliminate risk entirely but to provide a structure by which were risk aware and able to respond effectively and appropriately to create value for our shareholders.
Identification evaluation and management of risk The identification of risk is a continual process through discussion with management external agencies and stakeholders.
A full and detailed review of the risks the controls and the mitigation strategies is undertaken with the executive committees of the London and Retail businesses four times a year.
These form the basis for the principal risks and uncertainties as well as emerging risks which are challenged and validated by the Executive Committee.
These are then presented to the Audit Committee to ensure representatives of the Board are aware of and contribute to the latest position.
In addition a wholesale and indepth risk session is held with the Board every two years to ensure full Board participation in our risk management process.
Such a session is next due to be undertaken in 201718.
Senior management from across the business will also attend the Executive Committee and the Audit Committee to discuss specific risk areas such as a continuing focus on cyber risk accompanied by external advisers where relevant.
The Risk Management function headed by the Director of Risk Management and Internal Audit assists management by facilitating the risk discussions and providing challenge and insight where appropriate.
We evaluate each risk on three factors likelihood financial impact both to income and capital values and reputational impact from the business unit through to Group level.
We also consider the inherent gross risk the impact of the risk before any mitigating action is taken and the residual net risk the risk that remains after the effect of mitigating actions and controls are considered.
From this we identify principal risks current risks with relatively high impact and certainty and emerging risks those risks for which the extent and implications are not yet fully understood.
This also informs the business as to those risks that have a high dependency on the internal control systems which then directly helps to focus the work of the internal audit team.
The business considers the full range of external and internal risk including strategic operational people and technology.
A risk scoring matrix is used to ensure a consistent approach is followed.
Ownership and management of the risks are assigned to members of the Executive
They are responsible for ensuring the operating effectiveness of the internal control systems and for implementing key risk mitigation plans.
Internal Audit independently reviews the internal control systems using a risk based approach and on a quarterly basis management selfcertify that the key controls within their area of responsibility have been operating effectively.
42 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Risk heat map The risk heat map illustrates the relative positioning of our principal risks before and after mitigating actions.
Likelihood Unlikely Almost certain Impact Very high Low Customers  Structural changes in customer and consumer behaviours.
Market cyclicality  Market and political uncertainty or change in legislation.
Disruption  Failure to react effectively to new disruptors within our sectors including technological advances.
People and skills  Inability to attract retain and develop the right people and skills.
Major health and safety incident Accident causing injury or loss of life to employees contractors occupiers or visitors to our properties.
Risk management framework
Oversight
Group level
Identification
Risk governance
Oversight of risk Set the risk culture Approve risk appetite Annual assessment of the principal risks.
1st line of defence 2nd line of defence 3rd line of defence
Executive Committee Define the risk appetite Evaluate proposed strategies against risk appetite Identify the principal risks Design implementation and evaluation of the system of internal control and for ensuring its operational effectiveness.
Risk Management
Assist management with the identification and assessment of principal risks Aggregate risk information Monitor risks and risk response plans Create a common risk framework and language Provide direction on applying framework Provide guidance and training Facilitate risk escalations.
Audit Committee Supports the Board in monitoring risk exposure against risk appetite Review the effectiveness of our risk management and internal control systems.
Internal Audit Provide assurance on effectiveness of the risk programme testing of key controls and risk response plans for significant risks.
Risk ownership Business units Identify and assess risks Respond to risks Monitor risks and risk response Ensure operational effectiveness of key controls.
Support functions Provide guidance support to the risk team and business units.
Security threat or attack  Failure to identify or prevent a major physical security related threat or attack or react immediately and effectively.
Cyber threat or attack  External and internal intrusion to corporate and building management systems and data.
Sustainability  Increasing environment pressure andor properties do not comply with legislation or meet customer expectations or are unable to withstand the expected challenges of climate change.
Development  Unable to deliver capex programme to agreed returns andor occupiers reluctant to commit to take new space in our developments.
Key movement of risk after mitigating actions 43 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Our principal risks and uncertainties Change in the year
No change
New
Risk Mitigation Opportunity Strategic objective Change in the year
Structural changes in customer and consumer behaviours leading to an adverse change in demand for office and retail space and the consequent impact on rental growth.
Executives responsible Colette OSheaScott Parsons Large and diversified customer base no single customer represents more than 5.2% of rents Of our total income 68.0% is derived from occupiers who individually make less than a 1% contribution to rent roll Clear retail strategy focused on Everything is experience Development programme has delivered a modern office portfolio well suited to occupier requirements Experienced asset management team Strong relationships with occupiers.
Enhance and maintain our position as the partner of choice for our customers.
Shareholder value Investment portfolio Customer satisfaction
Total shareholder return Total property return Customer satisfaction rates Market cyclicality Market and political uncertainty or change in legislation leading to a reduction in demand or deferral of decisions by occupiers impacting real estate values the ability to sell assets and to raise further funding.
Executive responsible Robert Noel Large multiasset portfolio Monitor asset concentration our largest asset is 5.5% of the total portfolio Average investment property lot size of 120m Average unexpired lease term of 9.1 years with a maximum of 10.4% of gross rental income expiring or subject to break clauses in any single year.
Acquisition or development opportunities could arise out of the uncertainty.
Shareholder value Investment portfolio
Total shareholder return Total property return
Failure to react effectively to new disruptors within our sectors including technological advances innovation resulting in asset obsolescence and loss of competitive advantage.
Executive responsible Robert Noel Regular Board and Executive Committee discussion item Dedicated resources focused on innovation.
Recognising and managing change effectively will enable us to maintain our competitive advantage and increase the attractiveness of our assets to customers.
Shareholder value Investment portfolio
Customer satisfaction High performance individuals
Total shareholder return Total property return Lettings and sales Customer satisfaction rates New ways of working Advances in emerging technologies such as the merging of the virtual and physical environments threaten to disrupt organisations core business assumptions.
New entrants focused on disrupting existing business models are likely to impact most sectors including ours and those of our customers.
44 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Risk Mitigation Opportunity Strategic objective Change in the year People and skills Inability to attract retain and develop the right people and skills required to deliver the business objectives.
Executive responsible Diana Breeze Strong employee brand and dynamic proactive resourcing strategy Competitive remuneration plans Appropriate mix of insourcing and outsourcing Clear employee objectives and development plans Clear organisation and individual accountabilities Annual employee engagement survey to identify issues early Succession planning and talent management High profile market leading developments and assets to manage.
Build further expertise knowledge and capability in the business.
Shareholder value High performance individuals
Total shareholder return New ways of working Major health and safety incident Accident causing injury or loss of life to employees contractors occupiers or visitors to our properties leading to criminalcivil proceedings and resultant reputational damage delays to building projects and access restrictions to shopping centres.
Executive responsible Robert Noel CEO chairs Group Health Safety and Security
Regular Board reporting Dedicated specialist personnel Sharing of best practice across the business and industry through our One Best Way approach Annual cycle of health and safety audits across the portfolio Established policy and procedures including ISO 18001 certification Engagement with the enforcing authorities Lead the industry in health and safety to reduce incident levels.
Customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction rates Security threat or attack Failure to identify or prevent a major security related threat or attack or react immediately and effectively resulting in injury loss of life damage to buildings and a loss of consumer confidence and the consequent impact on rental growth and loss of income.
Executive responsible Robert Noel Dedicated property security teams supported by CCTV and other physical security measures Experienced property management teams Regular onsite and national security training Group insurance programme protects against losses of rent and service charge due to terrorism Business continuity and crisis management practice Sharing of best practice with our external customers through our Customer Improvement Groups Engagement with the National Counter Terrorism Security Office NaCTSO .
Enhance our reputation as a trusted and responsible partner.
Customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction rates Cyber threat or attack External and internal threat to corporate and building management systems and data resulting in a negative reputational impact and adverse operational and financial impact.
Executive responsible Martin Greenslade Dedicated Information Security team which monitors information security risk Regular review of Information Security policy Independent information security audit and penetration testing Employee awareness training.
Enhance our reputation as a trusted and responsible partner.
Customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction rates
Increasing environmental pressure and or properties that do not comply with legislation meet customer expectations or are unable to withstand the expected challenges of climate change resulting in an increased cost base an inability to attract or retain occupiers premature obsolescence and loss of asset value.
Executive responsible Miles Webber ISO accredited environmental and energy management systems Active involvement in legislative working parties Active environmental programme addressing key areas of carbon energy waste and biodiversity Energy reduction plan for every key asset Scenarios to determine how climate change will affect the existing portfolio and future developments.
Consolidate our position as a leader in sustainability and an environmentally responsible partner.
Customer satisfaction
KPI
Customer satisfaction rates Sustainability matters Energy reduction plans Refer to our sustainability report for more details.
Development
Unable to deliver capex programme to agreed returns andor occupiers reluctant to commit to take new space in our developments leading to negative valuation movements and a reduction in income.
Executives responsible Colette OSheaScott Parsons Amount of speculative development restricted so that the impact of failing to lease the unlet element of our development programme does not exceed the Groups retained earnings Proportion of capital employed in development programme based on total costs to completion will not exceed 20% of our total capital employed save that where a material part of the development programme is prelet this proportion can rise to 25% Monitor market cycle and likely occupier demand before committing to new developments and secure prelets where appropriate Assessment of developments against hurdle rates Prelet targets set for Retail developments.
Maximise returns by delivering developments at the right point in the cycle.
Enhance and maintain our position as the partner of choice for our customers.
Shareholder value
KPI
Total shareholder return Lettings and sales As we have less capital invested our risk is considered to be lower .
45 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report 46 Landsec Annual Report 2017 As a result of our actions the portfolio is in great shape.
Its
Colette OShea Managing Director London Portfolio 47 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Portfolio review Our results 1.3% Valuation deficit 1% Ungeared total property return underperformed its IPD Quarterly Universe sector benchmark at 3.4% of investment lettings 9m of development lettings 0% Likeforlike voids 31 March 2016 2.9% On a proportionate basis.
Reduces to 3.3% when Piccadilly Lights SW1 which remains in likeforlike during the screen replacement is excluded.
Actions and outcomes Focus for 201617 Progress in 201617 Focus for 201718 Outperform IPD sector benchmark Outperforming IPD sector benchmark Growing likeforlike net rental income Completing the letting of The Zig Zag Building 20 Eastbourne Terrace and Nova Victoria Completing the construction and letting of Piccadilly
Progressing build to grade to time and budget at 21 Moorfields EC2 Growing future development pipeline through acquisitions and 1.4 million sq ft of existing opportunities within portfolio
Employment
Programme
Improving energy management in support of 2030 corporate commitments The total return of the London Portfolio was 3.1% underperforming its IPD sector benchmark at 3.4% Complete the letting of 1 and 2 New Ludgate EC4 The Zig Zag Building SW1 and 20 Eastbourne Terrace W2 1 and 2 New Ludgate fully let The Zig Zag Building 89% let and 20 Eastbourne Terrace 90% let
Victoria SW1 Nova Victoria 47% let Submit a planning application at Southwark Street SE1 and secure planning consent for new screens at Piccadilly Lights W1 Planning resolution granted at Southwark Street and planning consent secured for new screens at Piccadilly Lights Progress to revised time and to budget at our committed developments All achieved except Nova Victoria over budget and delayed Secure employment for a further 129 candidates via our
Employment
Programme
Secured employment for 134 candidates This year supply constrained conditions in the occupational market gave way to weaker demand.
48 Landsec Annual Report 2017 However weve been positioning the business for these conditions and so are wellplaced.
Over the past 12 months weve completed our speculative development programme focused on letting the remaining space worked to maximise income and lease length through proactive asset management and readied the business to start buying when conditions are right.
In addition weve increased our emphasis on anticipating change to ensure our buildings and our service meet our customers needs while at the same time enhancing the environment for our communities.
This approach will deliver longterm value for us.
As a result of our actions the portfolio is in great shape.
Its occupied by a broad customer base spanning sectors from finance to fashion and we now have our longest ever weighted average unexpired lease term of 10.3 years.
Buy
We made no material acquisitions this year.
We have the firepower needed for when the right opportunities appear but we will be patient and disciplined.
Develop
At 20 Eastbourne Terrace W2 we completed a major refurbishment during the year creating 93000 sq ft of contemporary space in an 18storey tower overlooking Paddington Crossrail station.
The building offers 6000 sq ft floorplates and a stunning communal rooftop garden.
All of the space is now let on an average lease length of more than ten years at record rents.
In the City we completed 1 New Street Square EC4.
This 275000 sq ft scheme was pre let in its entirety to Deloitte on a 20 year lease.
Nova Victoria SW1 completed just after the year end in April  a high point in our longterm regeneration of Victoria.
The scheme features two exceptional office buildings 170 apartments and a fantastic lineup of restaurants creating Londons newest food destination.
49% of the 480000 sq ft office space and 93% of the retail and foodrelated space is now let.
148 of the apartments have now been sold 10 of them during the year.
The complexities of construction  together with competition for labour in a busy sector delayed final completion and impacted costs.
However the scheme is proving very popular and were confident well let the remaining space in good time.
At Nova East the second phase of Nova Victoria were finalising statutory approvals ready to start on site when the time is right.
We secured planning consent for 798000 sq ft of space in three London boroughs.
In the City at 21 Moorfields EC2 weve completed demolition and will shortly commence piling and construction of a raft that will sit above the eastern entrance to Liverpool Street Crossrail station ready for building 522000 sq ft in two buildings.
Completing the raft in July 2018 will mean we can complete construction of the buildings in 24 months providing an excellent prospect for the preletting market.
In Westminster at 1 Sherwood Street W1 behind Piccadilly Lights we secured planning consent for a 142000 sq ft mixed use scheme and in Southwark at Sumner Street SE1 resolution to grant planning consent for 134000 sq ft.
We have a further 360000 sq ft in feasibility at Red Lion Court SE1.
Manage
We were very active asset managers this year moving early to address lease expiries and rent reviews as well as securing reversions ahead of expectation.
At Dashwood House EC2 we completed rent reviews on 6m 86% of the income increasing the rent by 26%.
At One New Change EC4 we reviewed 19m 65% of the rent increasing the offices by 3% and the retail by 18%.
At Cardinal Place SW1 we reviewed 11m 48% of rent increasing the offices by 14% and the retail by 23% as well as letting 113000 sq ft of available space.
At 140 Aldersgate Street EC1 we reviewed 1m 44% of the rent and achieved a 33% uplift as well as letting 25000 sq ft of available space.
At Piccadilly Lights W1 we obtained planning consent to replace the six screens with Europes most technically advanced digital screen maintaining the heritage of the site while giving advertisers innovative ways to interact with more than 100 million passersby each year.
CocaCola committed to continuing its 60 year residence and will be joined by Samsung and
We have three remaining advertising opportunities and are in discussion with other major brands to complete the lineup.
Well be launching the new screen at this major tourist attraction in November.
49 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report 49 Landsec Annual Report 2017
In 2015 to reduce risk we started a disposal programme of weaker assets after we had completed asset management plans to maximise value.
The majority of these sales were executed last year and we successfully completed the programme this year with disposals totalling 46m.
Trading property disposals of 135m include sales at Nova Victoria SW1 following completion of residential units further disposals at Kings Gate SW1 and the disposal of our remaining interest in the Kodak land at Harrow.
Sales of other investments totalled 13m.
Net rental income Net rental income in the London Portfolio has increased by 10m from 275m to 285m with additional income from recently completed developments largely offset by lost income from properties sold last year.
Income from our developments contributed an additional 28m this year principally at 1 New Street Square EC4 20 Eastbourne Terrace W2 and Nova Victoria SW1.
We also benefited from a full years income at The Zig Zag Building SW1 1 and 2 New Ludgate EC4 and 62 Buckingham Gate SW1.
The increase in the likeforlike portfolio of 4m reflects new lettings and settled rent reviews partly offset by reduced income at Piccadilly Lights following the start of refurbishment.
Overall these increases are largely offset by a 21m reduction in net rental income from disposals since 1 April 2015 most notably Thomas More Square E1 Times Square EC4 and Haymarket House SW1.
Net rental income Table 26 31 March 31 March
Likeforlike investment properties 203 199 4 Proposed developments Development programme 16 5 11 Completed developments 62 45 17 Acquisitions since 1 April Sales since 1 April 2015  21 21 Nonproperty related income 2 4 2 Net rental income 285 275 10 On a proportionate basis.
Outlook
In the current uncertain environment investment demand is likely to be lower for all but the very best assets.
In the occupational market we expect net effective rental values to weaken but demand from dynamic businesses to continue for high quality resilient space.
Were well prepared for these conditions with a portfolio of assets designed to meet the needs of these customers.
Were ready to add to our portfolio when the time is right.
Our team is tracking around 2bn of opportunities building up our intelligence network ready for a future investment phase.
In addition were preparing 1.4 million sq ft of future development opportunities for when conditions are right to proceed.
50 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Portfolio review Our results 0.8% Valuation deficit 4.7 % Ungeared total property return outperformed its IPD Quarterly Universe sector benchmark at 1.1% Investment lettings 4m Development lettings 2.8% Likeforlike voids 31 March 2016 2.0% 0.4% Units in administration 31 March 2016 0.5% On a proportionate basis.
Actions and outcomes Focus for 201617 Progress in 201617 Focus for 201718 Outperform IPD sector benchmark Outperforming IPD sector benchmark Growing likeforlike net rental income Progressing lettings at Westgate Oxford Selly Oak
Progressing the Plaza reconfiguration at Bluewater to time and budget
Oxford after achieving practical completion on time and on budget Integrating the three newly acquired outlet centres Further developing the Community
Programme beyond its current focus on construction with 75 people being supported into jobs in retail Improving energy management in support of 2030 corporate commitments The total return of the Retail Portfolio was 4.7% outperforming its IPD sector benchmark at 1.1% Progress lettings at Westgate Oxford Selly Oak Birmingham and the White Rose Leeds leisure extension Westgate Oxford 68% prelet Selly Oak 73% prelet and White Rose leisure extension 100% let Resolution to grant planning consent at Worcester Woods Planning consent at Worcester Woods rejected Achieve planning consent and progress lettings for Glow space at Bluewater Kent Planning consent for Glow space at Bluewater achieved.
Space 69% prelet Progress to time and budget at our committed developments Westgate Oxford on time and budget Expand the
Employment
Programme to other retail sites Expanded the
Employment
Programme to St Davids Cardiff White Rose and Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth and secured employment for 49 candidates 51 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Its been a productive year in our Retail business.
In a challenging retail and economic environment weve delivered a good set of results.
Scott Parsons Managing Director Retail Portfolio We went into the year with a portfolio well matched to the evolving needs and expectations of our customers.
52 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Despite uncertainty in the wider market retail destinations that provide consumers with a great experience held up well.
Retailers and consumers use of online retailing continues to influence demand for physical space and inflation is now putting pressure on consumer spending.
However weve continued to see good demand for the best space in the right locations.
Buy
Our acquisitions during the year were limited to a small number of properties adjacent to space we own.
Since the year end weve acquired a portfolio of three outlet centres for 333m which alongside our existing outlet centres at Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth and The Galleria Hatfield establishes our position as the leading owner manager of outlets in the UK.
Develop
Our Westgate Oxford development with The Crown Estate is on time and on budget for opening in October 2017.
Weve made good progress on lettings with 80% of the scheme now prelet or in solicitors hands.
The latest brands to sign up include Uniqlo Cath Kidston Levis and Molton Brown.
Weve also invested to ensure the sustainability of the development including extending our Community Employment Programme so local disadvantaged people will continue to benefit from job opportunities after the centre opens.
At Selly Oak Birmingham 91% of the retail is either prelet or in solicitors hands demonstrating occupier support for this potential retail and student housing scheme.
Manage
This year weve secured 15m of investment lettings.
Our likeforlike portfolio is virtually full with voids of just 2.8% and a weighted average lease term of 8.2 years.
We have strong relationships with vibrant customers from groundbreaking startups to global brands.
Trinity Leeds continues to be the beating heart of the city and weve brought new brands to the centre including Lindt Cte Brasserie and Indian street food operator Mowgli.
Were also creating an upsized unit for New Look and expanding the centres vibrant leisure offer with two new operators.
At White Rose Leeds the demise of BHS enabled us to deliver a 55000 sq ft Next store doubling its previous space.
We also upsized space for JD Sports Pandora Schuh and Holland and Barrett.
Construction of our leisure extension is now complete and fully let with the six new restaurants and IMAX cinema units being fitted out to open later this year.
At Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth we introduced Armani and Coach to build on the centres strong aspirational offer.
We also opened one of the first Under Armour athleisure outlet stores in the UK.
At Bluewater Kent we delivered a 40000 sq ft flagship for HandM who had outgrown their existing unit.
Weve continued to broaden the wide range of retail brands on offer with eight new openings including Mint Velvet and Michael Kors and upgraded stores for LK Bennett and Jigsaw.
Online retailer Missguided also committed to Bluewater.
We started construction of the Plaza leisure reconfiguration this year and expect to complete by December.
The project enables us to bring new leisure operators to Bluewater and the scheme is 80% prelet or in solicitors hands with Showcase taking a lease for a four screen extension.
Weve also continued to invest in the Learning Shop which connects retailers and local unemployed people.
53 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Throughout the year we developed new relationships and ideas to keep the customer experience fresh and exciting.
For example we attracted on trend operators out of central London and into regional locations including Dirty Bones and SticksnSushi at Westgate.
We brought Mercedes into St Davids Cardiff and Buchanan Galleries Glasgow.
Cycle brand Ribbles popup at St Davids was so successful theyre looking at more sites.
In total we brought 150 popup stores and kiosk operators into our assets this year.
Our retail parks are well matched to customers needs and remain 100% let.
Our
Sell
Disposals totalled 219m during the year.
We sold the Ealing Filmworks development site to a residential developer crystallising an element of the development profit up front without risk.
As we continue our focus on familyorientated leisure assets we sold our two drinksled city centre leisure schemes The Printworks Manchester and The Cornerhouse Nottingham.
And since the year end weve sold our 50% interest in Clapham Shopstop SW11 to our former joint venture partner.
In February 2016 Accor exercised its right to break the leases on seven of their 29 hotels.
All seven hotels have since been sold at a premium to their investment values and the remaining Accor leases where breaks werent exercised now extend to 2031.
Net rental income Net rental income reduced by 14m from 329m to 315m.
This was largely due to disposals since 1 April 2015.
These include The Cornerhouse Nottingham and The Printworks Manchester both sold in the current year and retail parks in Gateshead Dundee and Derby a leisure park in Maidstone and a supermarket in Crawley all sold in the second half of last year.
The increase in our likeforlike portfolio of 6m is due to a combination of new lettings improved turnover performance and a reduction in bad debt provisions compared to last year.
1.6% Footfall in our shopping centres was down 1.6% national benchmark down 2.5% 1.7% Same centre nonfood retail sales taking into account new lettings and occupier changes were up 1.7% national benchmark for same centre physical store nonfood retail sales down 1.9% national benchmark for all retail sales including online up 0.3% 1% Same store nonfood retail sales were down 1.1% national benchmark for same store physical store nonfood retail sales down 2.2% 10.3% Retailers rent to sales ratio in our portfolio was 10.3% with total occupancy costs including rent rates service charges and insurance representing 17 .6% of sales Key indicators Net rental income Table 27 31 March 31 March
Likeforlike investment properties 295 289 6 Proposed developments Development programme  1 1 Completed developments Acquisitions since 1 April Sales since 1 April 2015 9 28 19 Nonproperty related income 9 10 1 Net rental income 315 329 14 On a proportionate basis.
Outlook
Current uncertainty and rising costs will continue to affect consumer confidence and retailers readiness to invest and expand.
As a result we expect letting activity to larger occupiers of retail space and leisure operators to slow in the year ahead.
However we believe that the best physical stores will play a critical role for retailers not least in enabling them to create memorable brand experiences and to engage with their customers.
Internet sales provide competition to physical space but were also seeing opportunities to help brands develop their multichannel offer.
Well remain alert to buying opportunities over the next 12 months but our focus will be on enhancing the space and offer at our most successful destinations launching Westgate Oxford in October and successfully integrating the three new outlet centres into the portfolio.
54 Landsec Annual Report 2017 The Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a five year period to March 2022 taking account of the Groups current position and the potential impact of our principal risks.
The Directors have determined five years to be the most appropriate period for the viability assessment as it fits well with the Groups development and leasing cycles and is broadly aligned to the maturity of the Groups floating rate debt facilities.
Our financial planning process comprises a budget for the next financial year together with a forecast for the following four financial years.
Achievement of the one year budget has a greater level of certainty and is used to set nearterm targets across the Group.
Achievement of the five year plan is less certain than the budget but provides a longerterm outlook against which strategic decisions can be made.
The financial planning process considers the Groups profitability capital values gearing cash flows and other key financial metrics over the plan period.
These metrics are subject to sensitivity analysis in which a number of the main underlying assumptions are flexed to consider alternative macroeconomic environments.
Additionally the Group also considers the impact of potential structural changes to the business in light of varying economic conditions such as significant additional sales and acquisitions or refinancing.
The Directors consider the key principal risks that could impact the viability of the Group to be Customers  Market cyclicality Development  Liability structure and Financing .
We have considered the potential impact of these on the Groups ability to remain in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due through a viability scenario .
The viability scenario assesses the impact of considerably worse macroeconomic conditions than are currently expected.
In London it is assumed that rental values are impacted by an excess of available space in the market while in Retail inflationary pressure on consumer spending together with a faster migration to online sales maintain downward pressure on rental values.
In London rental values are assumed to fall for three financial years before starting to recover in the final two years of the plan.
In Retail rental values are assumed to fall for the next four financial years and only start to recover slowly in the final year.
Where voids occur these are expected to take longer to fill across the portfolio.
The fall in rental values together with an outward movement on yields results in lower rental income and a significant fall in capital values over the next two financial years.
In this viability scenario we assume that any uncommitted forecast acquisitions disposals or developments do not take place.
Similarly we assume no uncommitted debt refinancing takes place and no new debt or bank facilities are raised.
We have assessed the impact of these assumptions on the Groups key financial metrics over the period including profitability net debt loantovalue ratios and available financial headroom.
The scenario represents a significant contraction in the size of the business over the five year period considered with net asset value falling by around 35% at the lowest point.
However our assessment is that such a scenario would not threaten the viability of the
The Group would be required to renew a minimum of 1bn of its debt facilities at the end of the period considered but the Directors consider this would be possible considering the Groups expected loantovalue ratio and the range of alternative financing options if bank facilities were not available.
Based on this assessment the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to March 2022.
This Strategic Report was approved by the Board of Directors on 17 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Robert Noel Chief Executive The Directors confirm they have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for at least 12 months from the date of signing these financial statements.
This confirmation is made after having reviewed assumptions about future trading performance valuation projections capital expenditure asset sales and debt requirements contained within the Groups current five year plan.
The Directors also considered potential risks and uncertainties in the business credit market and liquidity risks including the availability and repayment profile of bank facilities as well as forecast covenant compliance.
Based on the above together with available market information and the Directors knowledge and experience of the Groups property portfolio and markets the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017 .
Viability
Statement
Going
Concern Governance Contents 56 Letter from the Chairman 58 Board of Directors 60 Executive Committee 61 Leadership Letter from the Chairman of the Nomination Committee 66 Effectiveness Letter from the Chairman of the Audit Committee 70 Accountability 75 Investor relations
Directors Remuneration Report
Chairmans Annual Statement
78 Remuneration at a glance 80 Annual Report on Remuneration 90 Summary of Directors Remuneration Policy Directors Report 56 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Chairman
Dear Shareholder
During the year Landsec continued to deliver against its business objectives.
Our retail assets focus on thriving shopping destinations and our teams work in partnership with our occupiers to deliver a great experience to our consumers.
Our London assets are prime and our regeneration in Victoria has been hugely successful.
Landsec is in a strong financial position with historically low levels of financial and operational gearing and a portfolio of first class enduring assets.
Board priorities Given the political events we are witnessing the Board has spent considerable time assessing the possible effects on the property Dame Alison Carnwath
Highlights
More time allocated to risk in an unpredictable year Nicholas Cadbury joined the Board Strong supportive relationships with shareholders and stakeholders Sector leadership in Health Safety and Security. from decisions which might be taken.
We continue to believe in the sustainability of our business model and the deliverability of superior relative returns.
Our revenue profit is up 5.5% and we are confident in the underlying strength and prospects for the
Consequently we are recommending a 10.1% increase in the full year dividend.
We expect a continuation of a wide range of technological innovations in the near future and we are discussing the speed at which they will affect the way we work and the requirements for our business and our customers businesses.
Examples of anticipated change range from different construction techniques and materials more sophisticated building management systems greater use of prefabrication the use of customer data and
57 Landsec Annual Report 2017 the seamless digital environment which envelops us today.
The diverse experience of our Directors has informed and expanded our debates on these matters.
The Board recognises and by its own example promotes the importance of a strong culture within the organisation and the benefits which such a culture brings to the Company and its employees.
Our recent office move puts our people at the centre of our business by providing a modern workplace with a crossfunctional and collaborative atmosphere.
I believe we will be a more efficient and effective business as a result of this move.
Furthermore during the year Rob and his executive team focused on refreshing the Companys brand to ensure that it reflects the values of our people and the aspirations of our customers.
We continue to embrace the benefits of workforce diversity and the need to prioritise the growth of leadership and development skills within our teams.
Women represent 30% of the Board and 36% of the Senior Management including the Executive Committee but we still have work to do on embracing ethnic minorities and disabled people.
The Board allocates significant time on its agenda to succession planning and talent development.
In all these ways Landsec is and will be better placed to address the pace of change.
Shareholders and stakeholders We are proud of the strength of our investor relations programme and during the year I was pleased to meet shareholders representing a significant percentage of our register in the UK and the Netherlands to discuss the business and its strategy and answer Board composition and succession planning questions.
The meetings were timely with most being held the week following the Brexit vote.
We are grateful for the time that shareholders set aside for these meetings and their feedback is always welcome.
There were other occasions at Investor Days and results presentations at which shareholders could meet me and our Nonexecutive Directors.
We have recently completed a detailed third party feedback survey of our shareholders and were reassured by the positive results.
In particular our Senior Management and execution capabilities are highly valued.
Shareholders contributed widely to the survey and provided some constructive suggestions which we are including in our Board agendas and discussions to the extent that they were not already part of our normal business.
Shareholder engagement remains a high priority for me and the management team.
We appreciate the impact which a company like Landsec can have on a wider group of stakeholders.
This is reinforced by our vision to be the best in the eyes of our customers communities employees and partners but it goes beyond that.
The expectations being placed on companies and the ways in which they are being judged are changing rapidly.
The Board debates these issues when considering specific investments and more broadly when looking at future opportunities and the role that Landsec can play in a wider sense.
You will see in other parts of this Annual Report examples of how this is put into practice throughout the business.
In our separate Sustainability Report you will see how we are building the business for the future so that we leave a strong legacy for those following us.
As part of our contribution to the wider issues of governance currently under consideration we responded to the Governments Corporate Governance Green Paper and await the outcome of that review and other governance initiatives.
Health safety and security The health safety and security of our customers employees contractors and visitors remains a top priority for us.
We work closely with our partners and maintain a safety record that is well ahead of industry benchmarks.
Our
Nova site in Victoria by the Minister of State for Disabled People Health and Work.
Reflecting the everchanging threats we remain vigilant on matters of both physical and cyber security.
Board changes and effectiveness I am delighted to welcome Nicholas Cadbury to our Board.
Nicholas joined on 1 January and brings a wealth of commercial experience that will inform our Board discussions.
As I said in my letter to you last year Kevin OByrne will be retiring from the Board later this year and when he does Nicholas will take over as Chairman of the Audit Committee having had the benefit of Kevins oversight of this years results.
I would like to convey my special thanks to Kevin for his nine years on the Board and his leadership of the Audit Committee.
We conducted an internal evaluation of our Boards effectiveness during the year.
The process followed and outcome of this review and its results are set out on page 66.
Looking ahead At Landsec we are fortunate to have a Board and Senior Management who are very experienced and exceptionally well qualified.
We are engaged with providing shareholders with attractive returns whilst giving customers a topclass property experience.
All our employees work hard and share our enthusiasm for the business and I thank them for their commitment.
Dame Alison Carnwath
I was delighted to be appointed to Landsecs Board and have been impressed by the deep knowledge throughout the Company.
My induction programme has enabled me to understand the business quickly to get to know my fellow Directors Senior Management and key advisers right from the outset and to get a good understanding of the opportunities ahead.
Nicholas Cadbury Nonexecutive Director Nicholas Cadbury joins Landsec 58 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Board of Directors Executive Directors Robert Noel Chief Executive Robert was appointed to the Board in January 2010 as Managing Director London Portfolio and became Chief Executive in April 2012.
Career A chartered surveyor and graduate of the University of Reading Robert was Property Director at Great Portland Estates plc between August 2002 and September 2009.
Prior to that he was a director of the property services group Nelson Bakewell.
He is a former director of the New West End Company and former Chairman of the Westminster Property Association.
Robert is a director of the European Public Real Estate Association EPRA.
On
5 July 2016 he was appointed a Director of the British Property Federation.
He is also a trustee of the Natural History Museum.
Skills competencies and experience Robert has over 30 years experience in a number of sectors within the property market and extensive knowledge of the London commercial property market in particular.
He has substantial executive leadership and listed company experience.
Committees Chairman of the Groups Executive Asset and Liability Health Safety and Security Investment and Sustainability Committees.
He attends the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees at the invitation of the Committee Chairmen.
Martin Greenslade Chief Financial Officer Martin joined the Board as Chief Financial Officer in September 2005.
Career A chartered accountant having trained with Coopers and Lybrand Martin was previously Group Finance Director of Alvis plc.
He has also worked in corporate finance serving as a member of the executive committee of Nordeas investment banking division and Managing Director of its UK business.
Martin is a trustee of International Justice Mission UK.
Skills competencies and experience Martin brings extensive and wideranging financial experience to the Group from the property engineering and financial sectors in the UK and overseas.
He also has extensive financial expertise particularly in relation to corporate finance and investment arrangements and significant listed company experience at board level.
His oversight responsibilities cover the Groups finance tax treasury risk management and internal audit insurance and information technology teams.
Committees A member of the Groups Executive Asset and Liability and Investment Committees.
He attends Audit Committee meetings at the invitation of the Committee Chairman.
Governance
59 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Nonexecutive Directors Dame Alison Carnwath Chairman of the Board Dame Alison was appointed to the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in September 2004 and became Chairman in November 2008.
Career Dame Alison worked in investment banking and corporate finance for 20 years before pursuing a portfolio career.
During her banking career she became the first female director of J.
Henry Schroder Wagg and Co.
Dame Alison was also a Senior Partner at Phoenix Securities and a Managing Director at Donaldson Lufkin and Jenrette.
She has served as a nonexecutive director of Friends Provident plc Gallaher Group plc Glas Cymru Cyfyngedig Welsh Water Barclays plc and Man Group plc.
Dame Alison is currently a non executive director of Zurich Insurance Group Limited Paccar Inc a Fortune 500 company and CICAP Limited and a senior advisor to Evercore Partners.
She is also a member of the UK Panel on Takeovers and Mergers and a supervisory board member and audit committee chair of the Frankfurt listed chemicals company BASF SE.
Dame Alison was appointed a Dame in 2014 for her services to business.
Skills competencies and experience Dame Alison has very significant board level experience gained across a range of industries and countries.
This enables her to create the optimal Board environment and get the best out of her fellow Directors both during and outside meetings.
She has expertise in alternative asset management banking and global manufacturing.
Committees Chairman of the Nomination Committee and a member of the Remuneration Committee.
Edward Bonham Carter Senior Independent Director Edward joined the Board as a Non executive Director in January 2014.
He was appointed Senior Independent Director on 21 July 2016.
Career Edward became Vice Chairman of Jupiter Fund Management plc in March 2014 having been Chief Executive Officer of the company since June 2007.
During his time as CEO Edward steered the company through a management buyout from its previous owners Commerzbank in 2007 and oversaw the firms listing on the London Stock Exchange in 2010.
Edward joined Jupiter in 1994 as a UK fund manager and held the position of Chief Investment Officer from 1999 to 2000.
He started his career at Schroders in 1982 as an investment analyst before moving to Electra Investment Trust in 1986 where he was a fund manager.
Edward is a Board member of The Investor Forum a trustee of the Esme Fairbairn Foundation and a trustee of the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment Trust.
Skills competencies and experience Edward has significant experience of general management as a former CEO of a private equity backed and a large listed company.
Having been a fund manager for many years he also has an excellent understanding of stock markets and investor expectations.
Committees A member of the Remuneration Committee and from 29 September 2016 a member of the Nomination Committee.
Kevin OByrne Nonexecutive Director Kevin was appointed to the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in April 2008 and held the position of Senior Independent Director from April 2012 to 21 July 2016.
Career Kevin is a chartered accountant who trained with Arthur Andersen.
He was appointed Chief Financial Officer of J Sainsbury PLC on 9 January 2017 joining them from Poundland Group PLC where he had been Chief Executive Officer from 1 July 2016 until 31 December 2016.
Formerly he was Group Finance Director of Kingfisher plc from 2008 to 2012 following which he became CEO of its BandQ and Kotas businesses in China Turkey Germany and the UK until he left that business in May 2015.
His previous roles include Group Finance Director of Dixons Retail plc and European Finance Director of The Quaker Oats Company.
Skills competencies and experience Kevin has extensive understanding of retail trends operations and insights gained during a number of senior financial and general management positions at large listed retailers.
He is a longstanding Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee who is able to use his experience gained across a property cycle to bring additional challenge to management.
Committees Chairman of the Audit Committee and a member of the Nomination Committee.
Stacey Rauch Nonexecutive Director Stacey joined the Board as a Non executive Director in January 2012.
Career Stacey is a Director Emeritus of McKinsey and Company where she served clients in the US and internationally for 24 years.
Whilst there she cofounded the New Jersey office and was the first woman to be appointed as an industry practice leader.
She was a leader in the firms Retail and Consumer Goods Practices served as the head of the North American Retail and Apparel Practice and acted as the Global Retail Practice
She retired from McKinsey and Company in September 2010 and has since then pursued a portfolio career.
Stacey has served as Chairman of the Board of Fiesta Restaurant Group Inc a NASDAQ listed company since February 2017 and as a nonexecutive director since 2012.
Former positions include nonexecutive director of CEB Inc a NYSE listed memberbased advisory company ANN Inc a NYSE listed womans specialty apparel retailer and Tops Holding Corporation.
Skills competencies and experience Stacey brings deep analytical thought to the Board with considerable expertise of retail trends and insights gained at a leading international management consultancy.
She has significant board level experience gained through non executive positions held in retail and other industries.
Committees A member of the Audit Committee and from 1 April 2017 a member of the Nomination Committee.
Cressida Hogg CBE Nonexecutive Director Cressida joined the Board as a Non executive Director in January 2014.
Career Cressida spent almost 20 years with 3i Group plc having joined them in 1995 from JP Morgan.
She cofounded 3is infrastructure business in 2005 becoming Managing Partner in 2009 and led the team which acted as Investment Adviser to 3i Infrastructure plc a FTSE 250 investment company.
She advised on all of 3i Infrastructures transactions from its flotation in 2007 through to her leaving in 2014.
Cressida was previously a member of the advisory board for Infrastructure UK the HM Treasury unit that works on the UKs longterm infrastructure priorities.
She is currently Managing Director Head of Infrastructure of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and a nonexecutive director of Anglian Water Group Limited and of Associated British Ports Holdings Ltd.
Cressida received a CBE in 2014 for services to infrastructure investment and policy.
Skills competencies and experience Cressida has a deep understanding of large longterm infrastructure projects and businesses.
She has considerable experience of investment returns general management and leadership.
Committees A member of the Remuneration Committee.
Chris Bartram Nonexecutive Director Chris was appointed to the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in August 2009.
Career Chris is a chartered surveyor.
He was Chairman and Partner of Orchard Street Investment Management LLP a leading commercial property investment manager focused on the UK market until 31 March 2015 and continued to act as an adviser to that firm until 31 March 2017.
He was a Board Counsellor of The Crown Estate until 31 December 2015 having previously served as a Board Member.
Former positions include Managing Director of Haslemere NV Chairman of Jones Lang Wootton Fund Management President of the British Property Federation and Chairman of the Bank of England Property Forum.
Chris is currently a Wilkins Fellow of Downing College University of Cambridge and an advisory board member to certain overseas entities within the Brack Capital Real Estate Group.
Skills competencies and experience Chris is a scion of the property industry with decades of property investment fund management and capital allocation experience gained across a range of businesses and disciplines within the real estate sector.
He has significant experience of general management as a former Chief Executive and Chairman of significant businesses.
Committees A member of the Audit and Nomination Committees.
Simon Palley Nonexecutive Director Simon was appointed to the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in August 2010.
Career A senior figure within the private equity industry Simon has had a successful and broad ranging career in investment banking consulting and private equity.
He started his career at Chase Manhattan before moving to Bain and Company.
He left there in 1988 to join Bankers Trust as a Vice President and moved to BC Partners a private equity firm in 1990 where he worked for 17 years rising to the position of Managing Partner.
Simon then became Chairman of the private equity firm Centerbridge Partners Europe a post he held until 2013.
He is now a nonexecutive director of UK Government Investments a Senior Adviser to TowerBrook Capital Partners and an adviser to the private equity arm of GIC.
He is an MBA graduate of The Wharton School Pennsylvania.
Simon is a trustee of the University of Pennsylvania and The Tate Foundation.
Skills competencies and experience Simon has extensive understanding of portfolio management financial metrics and the impact of interest rates on capital markets.
He has expertise in private equity and capital markets and considerable experience managing highly talented professionals.
Committees Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and a member of the Nomination Committee.
Nicholas Cadbury Nonexecutive Director Nicholas joined the Board as a Non executive Director on 1 January 2017.
Career Nicholas is Group Finance Director of Whitbread PLC a position he has held since November 2012.
Before that he held the position of Chief Financial Officer of Premier Farnell PLC which he joined in 2011 and prior to that he worked at Dixons Retail PLC in a variety of management roles including as Chief Financial Officer from 2008 to 2011.
Nicholas originally qualified as an accountant with Price Waterhouse.
Skills competencies and experience Nicholas brings wideranging and international financial and general management experience to the Group gained from working in consumer facing businesses particularly in the retail leisure and hospitality sectors.
He also has extensive commercial and operational knowledge and skills in relation to strategy and IT development.
Committees A member of the Audit
He will become Chairman of that Committee in succession to Kevin OByrne at a date to be confirmed in 2017 .
Independent as per the UK Corporate Governance Code .
60 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Committee
Scott Parsons Managing Director Retail Portfolio Scott rejoined Landsec in 2010 and was Head of Property London Portfolio before being appointed as Managing Director Retail Portfolio in April 2014.
Career Scotts career to date includes three years as Managing Partner of Brookfield Asset Management where he led their European business more than ten years at GE Capital Real Estate including as Head of Business Development and three years as Business Development Director at Landsec in his first position with the Company.
Responsibilities In his current role Scott has responsibility for Landsecs 6.1bn Retail Portfolio of shopping centres retail parks and leisure properties throughout the UK comprising some 16.7 million sq ft of accommodation.
Previously as Head of Property for Landsecs London Portfolio he led the investment asset and property management teams for the Groups office and retail space in central London.
Scott was previously a member of the Strategic Board of the New West End Company and was previously Vice President of the City Property Association.
He was appointed a Property Committee member of the RNLI in April 2016.
Committees A member of the Groups Executive Asset and Liability and Investment Committees.
Chairman of the Retail Executive Committee.
Diana Breeze Group Human Resources Director Diana joined Landsec in June 2013 as Group Human Resources Director.
Career Diana has over 20 years HR and organisational consulting experience and she has previously held a number of senior HR roles at J Sainsbury plc where she led many people focused change initiatives.
Prior to that she was a senior manager in the Human Capital practice of Accenture.
Responsibilities In her current role Diana has endtoend responsibility for the articulation and delivery of a clear people strategy for Landsec including talent reward organisational design and engagement.
Since joining the Company Diana has focused upon the key areas of talent and leadership and has implemented a number of initiatives to evolve the culture of the business.
Diana is a member of the International Advisory Board for Executive Education at the Sad Business School University of Oxford.
She also advises the Board of Trustees and is a member of the Personnel and Nominations Committees of the UK Green Building Council.
Committees A member of the Groups Executive and Sustainability Committees.
Attends Investment Committee meetings and both the Remuneration and Nomination Committee meetings at the invitation of the Committee Chairmen.
Miles Webber Director of Corporate Affairs and Sustainability Miles joined Landsec in May 2015 as Director of Corporate Affairs and
Career Before joining Landsec Miles was Head of External Affairs UK and Ireland for General Electric having previously held other senior external affairs and relations positions with them since he joined in 2005.
Prior to that he spent six years with Merrill Lynch his first two years as Vice President Corporate Communications followed by four years as Director of Public Affairs EMEA.
Responsibilities Miles broad responsibilities cover sustainability public relations both financial and businessto business internal communications public affairs investor relations and corporate marketing including brand and reputational management.
Miles is a board director of the Foreign Policy Centre and the Westminster Forum.
Committees A member of the Groups Executive and Sustainability Committees.
Attends Investment Committee meetings.
Tim Ashby Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Tim joined Landsec in September 2015 as Group General Counsel and Company Secretary.
Career Tim is a solicitor and has more than 20 years of significant legal compliance and commercial experience gained across a number of different sectors and businesses both in the UK and overseas.
He joined Landsec after five years as Group General Counsel and Company Secretary of Mothercare plc.
Before that he worked at Yum Brands KFC Pizza Hut and Taco Bell as Region Counsel for Europe and Africa and as a Senior International Counsel at PepsiCo working in various businesses in the UK Eastern Europe and Africa.
Tim started his career in private practice at Dentons where he specialised in commercial law.
Responsibilities Tim leads the Legal Company Secretarial and Real Estate Information Management teams and is responsible for legal compliance and governance activity across the Group.
He provides advice and support to the Board and its Committees and holds the Groups relationships with its external law firms and investor and shareholder bodies.
Committees A member of the Groups Executive Committee.
Attends all Board and Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committee meetings in his capacity as Company Secretary.
He also attends meetings of the Investment Committee and the Asset and Liability Committee.
Robert Noel Chief Executive Full biography on page 58 Martin Greenslade Chief Financial Officer Full biography on page 58 Colette OShea Managing Director London Portfolio Colette joined Landsec in 2003 and was Head of Development London Portfolio before being appointed its Managing Director in April 2014.
Career Colette has over 20 years property experience in London operating in investment asset management and development.
Prior to joining Landsec she was Head of Estates at the Mercers Company where she led the property team whilst also gaining extensive office retail and residential experience.
Responsibilities In her current role Colette has responsibility for Landsecs 8.3bn London Portfolio comprising some 6.5 million sq ft of London offices leisure retail and residential property both in development and asset management.
She has led the London business through its 2010 three million sq ft speculative development programme in the City and West End including the transformation of Victoria.
Colette was appointed as a Business Board Member of the Mayor of Londons London Local Enterprise Partnership for London LEAP in 2016.
Committees A member of the Groups Executive Asset and Liability and Investment Committees.
Chairman of the London Executive Committee.
Governance
61 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Board committees Board Management committees Matters reserved to the Board and delegated authorities In order to retain control of key decisions and ensure there is a clear division of responsibilities at the head of the Company between the running of the Board and the running of the Companys business the Board has identified certain reserved matters that only it can approve.
Other matters responsibilities and authorities have been delegated to its Committees and certain Management Committees as above.
The matters reserved to the Board and the terms of reference for each of its Committees which are reviewed on an annual basis can be found on the Companys website at site Any matters outside of these fall within the Chief Executives responsibility and authority.
He reports on the activities of all Management Committees through his and the Chief Financial Officers regular reports to the Board.
The Board and each Committee receive sufficient reliable and timely information in advance of meetings and are provided with or given access to all necessary resources and expertise to enable them to fulfil their responsibilities and undertake their duties in an effective manner.
Audit Committee Reviews and is responsible for oversight of the Groups financial and narrative reporting processes and the integrity of the financial statements.
It scrutinises the work of the external auditor and valuer and any significant judgements made by management.
It regularly reviews the risk management framework including the systems of risk management and internal control and the work of internal audit.
More details on pages 6874.
Remuneration Committee Reviews and recommends to the Board the executive remuneration policy and determines the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors and other members of the Executive Committee.
It also has oversight of the Groups remuneration policy for all employees.
More details on pages 7691.
Nomination Committee Reviews the structure size and composition of the Board and its Committees and makes recommendations to the Board accordingly.
It has oversight responsibility for succession planning of the Board and Senior Management and leads the process for new Board appointments.
It monitors developments in corporate governance and advises the Board accordingly.
More details on pages 6467.
Executive Committee An advisory committee that operates under the direction and authority of the Chief Executive and which comprises senior management from across the business see page opposite.
It sets the Vision for the Group and determines the strategy and culture of the Group in support of the Vision.
It assists the Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer in preparing and agreeing strategy operating plans budgets policies and procedures and managing the operational and financial performance of the Group.
It also addresses other key business and corporate related matters including competitive forces risk and reputation management branding resource allocation succession planning organisational development and employee remuneration.
Chief Executive Responsible for leadership of the Group and articulation of the Groups Vision together with developing and implementing strategy managing the overall performance of the business and ensuring an effective and motivated leadership team is in place.
He can approve transactions with a value between 10m and 20m.
More details below.
Asset and Liability
Responsible for considering the impact of proposed sales purchases developments and debt funding arrangements on the Groups balance sheet and internal control metrics over the short and medium term.
It also considers the likely impact of macroeconomic developments on the business.
From 1 April 2017 this Committee will be subsumed into the Investment Committee.
Sustainability
Committee
Responsible for developing and implementing the Groups sustainability strategy linked to and integrated with the Groups overall corporate strategy.
In doing so it also considers environmental social economic and energy issues affecting the business.
Health Safety and Security Committee Responsible for overseeing the Groups health and safety policy and operations security governance policy and procedures at all Group properties performance against targets and progress towards goals.
London and Retail Executive Committees Responsible for the financial operational and governance performance of the London and Retail business portfolios.
Each
Committee can also approve transactions up to a value of 10m.
Investment Committee Responsible for considering and approving significant investment transactions including the acquisition disposal and development of assets with a value of between 20m and It also reviews and recommends higher value transactions to the
It is responsible for implementing the annual funding strategy approved by the Board.
The role of the Board and its committees
Collectively responsible for the longterm success of the Group.
With due regard to the views of shareholders and other stakeholders including its customers communities employees and partners it provides leadership and direction to the business as a whole.
This includes establishing the culture values and ethics of the organisation setting strategy and overseeing its implementation ensuring only acceptable risks are taken and responsibility for corporate governance and the overall financial performance of the Group.
More details on pages 6263.
62 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Board composition and roles Table 28 The Board currently comprises a Nonexecutive Chairman who was independent on appointment two Executive Directors and seven Independent Nonexecutive
They are advised and supported by the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary.
Their key responsibilities are as set out in the table below Chairman Dame Alison Carnwath Responsible for leading the Board its effectiveness and governance and for monitoring and measuring progress against strategy and the performance of the Chief Executive.
Ensures Board members are aware of and understand the views and objectives of major shareholders and other key stakeholders.
Maintains a culture of openness and debate and helps set the tone from the top in terms of the purpose vision and values for the whole organisation.
Chief Executive Robert Noel Responsible for developing the Groups strategic direction for consideration and approval by the Board implementing the agreed strategy running the business daytoday and leading the executive team.
Maintains a close working relationship with the Chairman.
Chief Financial Officer Martin Greenslade Supports the Chief Executive in developing and implementing strategy and in relation to the financial and operational performance of the Group.
Independent
Nonexecutive
Directors
Edward Bonham Carter Kevin OByrne Chris Bartram Simon Palley Stacey Rauch Cressida Hogg CBE and Nicholas Cadbury.
Responsible for bringing an external perspective sound judgement and objectivity to the Boards deliberations and decisionmaking.
Support and constructively challenge the Executive Directors using their broad range of experience and expertise.
Monitor the delivery of the agreed strategy within the risk management framework set by the Board.
Senior Independent
Edward Bonham Carter Acts as a sounding board for the Chairman and a trusted intermediary for other Directors.
Available to discuss with shareholders any concerns that cannot be resolved through the normal channels of communication with the Chairman or the Executive Directors.
Leads the other independent Nonexecutive Directors in the performance evaluation of the
Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Tim Ashby Provides advice and assistance to the Board the Chairman and other Directors particularly in relation to corporate governance practices induction training and development.
Ensures that Board procedures are complied with applicable rules are followed and good information flow exists to the Board and its Committees.
The appointment and removal of the Company Secretary is a matter for the Board as a whole.
Board meetings and attendance Table 29 May 16 1 Apr 16 Jun 16 Jul 16 Aug 16 Sept 16 Oct 16 Nov 16 Dec 16 Jan 17 Feb 17 31 Mar 17
Director Board
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Dame Alison Carnwath 88 33 33 Robert Noel 88 Martin Greenslade 68 Kevin OByrne 78 44 33 Chris Bartram 88 44 33 Simon Palley 88 33 33 Stacey Rauch 88 44 Cressida Hogg CBE 88 33 Edward Bonham Carter 88 11 33 Nicholas Cadbury 22 11 Tim Ashby 88 Martin Greenslade attended an executive management course in Stanford California in June and July 2016.
Nicholas Cadbury joined the Board and the Audit Committee on 1 January 2017.
WEF 29 September 2016.
Governance
63 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Board activity Table 30 The diagram below shows the key areas of Board activity during the year.
Strategy property and funding Reviewed the Groups strategy in particular an indepth review of both the London and Retail businesses Debated the changing status of the property cycle including the Companys position risk profile and preparations for any business impact Considered Brexit and other political risks Reviewed the Groups performance versus budget and targets external benchmarks and by reference to its peers Reviewed performance versus Board approval for key schemes and assets acquired completed or developed Considered portfolio liquidity analysis and development exposure Considered and approved acquisitions and disposals of properties with a value in excess of 150m Considered and approved the Groups Going Concern and Viability Statements dividend policy debt funding arrangement and gearing levels Considered and approved the bond funding strategy including the bond tender and new issuance.
Governance stakeholders and shareholders Discussed the outcome of the Board evaluation and effectiveness review and agreed improvement opportunities Considered the Groups 2020 sustainability strategy including progress versus annual targets and improvements planned Reviewed regular health safety and security updates Reviewed developments in corporate governance and received key legal and regulatory updates Reviewed the investor relations strategy and considered in depth the independent report carried out which followed a consultation with our institutional investors regularly reviewed feedback from institutional shareholders roadshows and other engagement activities Reviewed the new Landsec brand proposition Received regular meeting reports from the Chairman of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees Reviewed and approved no change to the annual fees for Nonexecutive Directors Considered the Market Abuse Regulations and approved an updated Securities Dealing Code Approved the Groups Slavery and Human Trafficking statement for publication on its website Considered and agreed to continue with Defined Benefit Pension scheme Agreed the closure of the American Depositary Receipt programme.
Internal control and risk management Reviewed the Groups risk register and the effectiveness of the systems of internal control and risk management Reviewed the risk framework and reporting structure Debated significant and emerging risks including cyber security terrorism the loss of key people uncertainty arising from the Brexit process and other political risks.
Leadership and people Discussed the composition of the Board and its Committees including succession planning Agreed appointment of Edward Bonham Carter as new Senior Independent Director Considered and approved appointment of new Nonexecutive Director and Audit Committee Chairman Reviewed the development of people and potential talent in the Group including succession planning for Senior Leaders.
Financial performance Considered the financial performance of the business and approved the annual budget key performance targets and five year plan Reviewed the halfyearly and annual results and presentations to analysts and approved the Annual Report Considered the halfyearly and full year valuation of the Groups portfolio by the external valuer Reviewed the Groups tax structure and insurance programme.
Five key areas of Board activity during the year Governance stakeholders and shareholders Internal control and risk management Leadership and people Financial performance Strategy property and funding 64 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Chairman of the
Committee
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the Nomination Committee report which summarises our work over the past year.
Governance
I can report that we complied in full with the principles of the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code throughout the year.
You will find more detail regarding our compliance governance and effectiveness elsewhere in this report.
Board and Committee changes Last year I explained that Kevin OByrne who joined our Board as a Nonexecutive Director in April 2008 would be standing down as Senior Independent Director in July 2016 and would retire from the Board in 2017.
We started the external search to find Kevins successor in early 2016 appointing Spencer Stuart an independent search consultancy appointed following a tender process to assist with the recruitment.
I am delighted to say that Edward Bonham Carter became the Companys Senior Independent Director in July 2016 and that the search for a new Nonexecutive Director was successful with Nicholas Cadbury joining our Board on 1 January 2017.
Nicholas will succeed Kevin OByrne as Chairman of the Audit Committee later this year.
We will issue an announcement in due course to confirm the date of Kevins retirement.
Nicholas is CFO at Whitbread PLC and therefore has all the technical skills required to become Chairman of the Audit
However it was important to the Committee that any new Director could bring complementary nonfinancial skills and experience and Nicholas role at a consumer facing business like Whitbread  and previously at companies such as Dixons  will be a true asset to our Board discussions.
On behalf of the Committee I extend my warm welcome to Nicholas as a member of the Board.
Also Stacey Rauch joined the Nomination Committee on 1 April 2017 to broaden her perspective of and contribution to the Company.
Board composition and succession We believe that the current composition of the Board and its Committees remains appropriate for the time being but this is kept under regular review.
The Committee supports the ongoing development of Directors.
It agreed the scope of a comprehensive induction programme for Nicholas Cadbury that started when he joined the Board and was pleased to support the ongoing professional development of Martin Greenslade who attended a sixweek worldclass Executive Program at Stanford University USA last summer.
Board succession is a very live topic at Committee meetings.
In particular we discuss executive talent and leadership in the wider property industry.
Our goal is to retain and recruit the best at Board and senior leadership levels.
As a matter of prudence we monitor a range of candidates who may be suitable replacements for existing Directors.
We believe that Nonexecutive Directors should generally stay for nine years with the appointment of new Directors providing an opportunity to add diverse perspectives and skills.
However it is important to ensure that the experience gained through one property cycle is available for the next and that we have a mixture of real estate financial retail and general expertise to hand.
As such the Committee may determine occasionally that it is in the Companys best interests for a Nonexecutive Director with particular skills to stay beyond the nine year term identified in the UK Corporate Governance Code at which point some investors or governance bodies may begin to question their independence.
Should this occur we will explain the decision and the rationale to shareholders.
Finally the Committee supports the Board in its work to secure the longterm health of the Company and its strategy for success in a fast changing world.
This can only be achieved with the right people in the organisation and the Committee has considered the likely business needs of the Company and its management capability  and succession plans  at executive and senior management level.
We also recognise and support the extensive leadership development work that is being undertaken with all management levels within the Group.
Dame Alison Carnwath Chairman Chris Bartram Simon Palley Stacey Rauch Edward Bonham Carter Independent Nonexecutive Director
Successful and thorough appointment process to find Nicholas Cadbury Increased focus on changes to the governance landscape affecting the Company Thorough assessment of succession plans.
Key responsibilities Reviews the structure size and composition of the Board and its Committees and makes recommendations to the Board accordingly Oversight responsibility for succession planning of the Board and Senior Management and leads the process for new Board appointments Monitors developments in corporate governance and advises the Board accordingly.
Committee members Governance 65 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Independence and reelection to the Board The independence effectiveness and commitment of each of the Nonexecutive Directors has been reviewed by the Committee which satisfied itself on the contributions and time commitment of all the Nonexecutive Directors during the year.
On behalf of the Committee I conducted a specific review in relation to Simon Palley as he has been in office for more than six years.
The Committee was confident that Simon and each of the other Nonexecutive Directors remains independent and will be in a position to discharge their duties and responsibilities in the coming year.
With the exception of Nicholas Cadbury whose appointment is being ratified for the first time all the Directors will stand for reelection at the Annual General Meeting with the support of the Board.
Committee effectiveness I am pleased to report that the recent Board performance evaluation concluded that the Nomination Committee operated very well.
The Committee has decided to increase the number of meetings held during the year from two to four.
Partly this is in response to the ongoing internal and external succession planning work but also it is a response to the expected increase in the number and scope of governance changes.
You will find more information on these topics and the other work of the Committee and more details of the Board evaluation process and its outcomes on the following pages.
Dame Alison Carnwath Chairman Nomination Committee Dame Alison Carnwath Chairman 66 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Board evaluation 201617 Following the external evaluation of the Board and its Committees last year this years review of the Boards effectiveness was conducted internally and was led by the Chairman with the support of the Company Secretary.
In accordance with the Board evaluation cycle the evaluation this year focused on any issues raised in last years externally facilitated review and any new issues arising from this years process.
The first part of the evaluation required each Director to complete anonymously an online survey and questionnaire that focused on matters such as the Boards performance the performance of each of its Committees the nature and content of Board meetings and the relationship between the Nonexecutive and Executive Directors.
The survey included open questions that encouraged Directors to provide comments or enabled them to raise any concerns.
The output of this survey was collated and provided to each Director.
The Chairman then met separately with each Director and used the output of the survey and questionnaire together with a tailored set of questions to conduct a detailed interview.
These meetings were helpful in that they allowed the Chairman to explore in more detail some of the themes arising from the questionnaire and to obtain supplementary comments and observations.
Mr Bonham Carter as the Senior Independent Director separately evaluated the performance of the Chairman having first collated points of view and questions from the other Directors and then discussing the outcome with her.
A final report and recommendations was prepared based on the collective comments from all the Directors and this was discussed by the Board.
Separate reports were prepared for each of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees based on the feedback received and in each case the conclusions were discussed by those Committees at their meetings in March 2017.
Conclusions from this years review The conclusion from this years evaluation was that the Board and its Committees continue to operate to a high standard and work well and effectively.
The results overall ranged from positive to very positive and there were no specific concerns raised by any of the Directors to the Chairman or anonymously through the online survey.
Areas that were assessed as being particularly strong included the culture and relationships in the Boardroom the Boards collective judgement and overall performance Board information and the involvement of Directors in succession planning.
As with every high performing board the Directors continue to look for areas of improvement.
The Board will devote more time to engage in blue sky strategy discussion to supplement its existing programme and to identify the enablers that will facilitate the execution of the strategy.
The Board will ensure that its meeting agendas are forward looking in terms of the cycle and the business opportunities and retain oversight over execution of the five year plan.
Also the Board will ensure that at a time when the risk profile faced by businesses is changing rapidly its assessment of risk remains dynamic being revisited and adjusted as facts or scenarios change.
Finally regarding succession planning the overall level of skills and expertise will remain a matter of priority with particular importance attached to maintaining real estate expertise at Board level.
The Chairman will continue to lead the process of building on current strengths of the Board and innovating further to build on the points outlined above with support from the Chief Executive and Company Secretary.
Progress against targets set for 201617 In addition to considering the results of this years externally facilitated evaluation the Directors reviewed progress against the targets identified last year as set out in the table below Areas of focus for 201718 Strategy  Board meetings to allocate sufficient time to both medium and longer term strategic discussion Innovation  appreciate the impact of rapid technological development on us and our customers Risk  further develop the approach to risk especially in the context of the wider economic and political framework in which we will be operating Culture and people  provide oversight and support to management as Landsec introduces its new brand framework.
Objective Performance Board meetings to increase the amount of time allocated to risks and challenges that could impact the business particularly at a time of increasing market uncertainty This is being achieved helped by the time allocated in meetings to assess some of the unexpected events during the year and will continue this year.
Examples include external advisers addressing the Board in June and July 2016 shortly before and immediately following the EU referendum further analysis of political and economic risk at the December Board meeting and a Strategy Day agenda that was largely devoted to risks and challenges affecting or which may affect the business.
Time to be allocated to site visits supported by ongoing professional development in order to increase their level of business awareness and engagement Site visits were arranged for Directors and Directors have attended results presentations and investor days.
Review the way the Board tracks progress on previously approved major projects and initiatives using experience gained from past investment decisions We held an indepth review of each of the London and Retail operating businesses assessing past decisions current performance and future strategy.
Board Committee and Directors performance evaluation cycle Year 1
Board evaluation
Conclusions from this years review and areas identified for improvement Progress review against targets set for 201617 Areas of focus for 201718 Year 2 Review focused on Year 1 issues raised and any new issues arising Year 3 Progress reviewed generally coupled with focused questionnaire andor interviews with
the Chairman Governance
67 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Diversity policy The Board embraces diversity in its broadest sense believing that a wide range of experience background perspective skills and knowledge combine to contribute towards a high performing effective Board which is better able to support and direct the Company.
Landsec continues to make good progress in terms of greater diversity.
The addition of Mr Cadbury to the Board has meant that the percentage of women on the Board has reduced to 30% from 33% last year.
However this will reverse later in 2017 when Kevin OByrne retires and we will again be meeting the voluntary targets set by the HamptonAlexander review for women on the Board of FTSE 350 companies.
Further we are pleased to report that 36% of Senior Management in Landsec comprising the Executive Committee and Senior Leaders are women again in line with this voluntary target identified in the HamptonAlexander review.
Our mentoring programme introduced last year specifically to assist women at all levels to reach their full potential within the Company continues to operate well.
Diversity is more than just gender based and the Board will continue to focus in the coming year on this important issue in its wider context.
Landsec has set specific objectives to be achieved by 2020 including improvements in the engagement scores of its Black Asian and Minority Ethnic and LGBT employees and these objectives are supported by the Board.
Conflicts of interest The Board operates a policy to identify and where appropriate manage any potential conflicts of interest that Directors may have.
The Nomination Committee monitors the situation and determines the actions necessary to address potential conflicts of interest as detailed in the table below.
Board environment and access to appropriate information The Board environment and its culture of transparency and openness was again rated favourably in this years effectiveness review.
In addition to the Board meetings and the private sessions scheduled at each Board meeting held by the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors there are other opportunities arranged during the year when Directors meet and at which relevant items can be discussed in detail.
The Board and its Committees receive papers in a timely fashion and Directors have access to information support and advice from the Company Secretary and members of his team throughout the year.
Induction
A comprehensive induction programme exists for any newly appointed Directors and was used when Mr Cadbury joined the Board during the year.
The priorities of the induction were to provide Nicholas Cadbury with an understanding of the Groups history culture business strategy and financial position.
This included early meetings with the Chairman and the Executive Directors together with other Nonexecutive Directors and Senior
There were also meetings with external advisers to the Audit Committee of which Mr Cadbury will become Chairman later in 2017.
Professional development support and training for Directors The Board held several specific knowledge development sessions during the year on such matters as Brexit and other political and economic risk factors that may affect the business or the wider property market in the UK.
Directors continued to receive regular reports facilitating greater awareness and understanding of the Groups business and the legal regulatory and industryspecific environment in which it operates.
This is complemented by visits to properties owned managed or being developed by the Group which enable a deeper insight into the operations of the business and provide Directors with the opportunity to meet with senior and local management teams.
Board strategy The Board considers strategy throughout the year encompassing topics such as funding and capital allocation competition and emerging sectors.
Additionally the Board held its regular twoday strategy meeting in February that enabled it to explore and debate in detail a wide range of items such as the rapidly developing technology that may affect the business and its customers possible longerterm threats and challenges to the commercial property market geopolitical and macroeconomic trends.
Potential conflicts of interest Table 31
Potential conflict situation Nomination Committee decision and mitigating actions taken Dame Alison
A nonexecutive director of Zurich Insurance Company Limited with whom the Group places certain of its insurance policies and pension investments.
Since the Groups insurance programme and policy matters are handled by the Executive Directors outside of the Board and in consultation with its own independent insurance brokers the Committee concluded that in practice conflicts of interest involving Dame Alison Carnwath and Zurich Insurance were unlikely to occur.
Chris Bartram An adviser to Orchard Street Investment Management OSIM until 31 March 2017 which is in some areas of operation a competitor of the Group.
The Committee did not see any potential conflict of interest situations arising from Mr.
Bartrams advisory role at OSIM.
Kevin OByrne Chief Executive of Poundland Group PLC and Chief Financial Officer of J Sainsbury PLC both of which lease a number of retail properties from the Company around the country.
As operational matters such as retail leasing are unlikely to be considered at Board level the Committee concluded that in practice conflicts of interest involving Mr OByrne and his employers were unlikely to occur.
Mr OByrne resigned his position at Poundland on 30 December 2016 and took up his position at J Sainsbury on 9 January 2017.
Cressida Hogg
Managing Director Head of Infrastructure of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board CPPIB which is the Groups joint venture partner at a major development.
In her role Ms Hogg will not have any involvement with the development in question as this is managed by a different business unit within CPPIB.
As an additional precaution the Group will not share any sensitive information on that development with her and she has agreed not to participate in any Board discussion that relates to it.
Edward Bonham
Vice Chairman of Jupiter Fund Management plc a fund manager which evaluates investments that may or may not include those of the Group.
Jupiter is also a customer of the Group.
Mr Bonham Carters position is such that he is unlikely to be involved in the selection of particular investments and has agreed not to participate in any investment decisions which may involve the Groups securities.
Since operational matters such as office leasing are unlikely to be considered at Board level the Committee concluded that in practice conflicts of interest involving Mr Bonham Carter and his employer were unlikely to occur.
Nicholas
Cadbury
Group Finance Director of Whitbread PLC which through its Costa Coffee operations leases a number of retail properties from the Company around the country.
Since operational matters such as retail leasing are unlikely to be considered at Board level the Committee concluded that in practice conflicts of interest involving Mr Cadbury and his employer were unlikely to occur.
Nicholas Cadbury was appointed a Nonexecutive Director of the Board on 1 January 2017.
68 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Letter from the Chairman of the Audit
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to report on the key activities and focus of the Audit Committee during the year.
This will be my last report to you as Chairman of the Committee as I intend to step down later this year after nine years on the Board.
Nicholas
Cadbury who joined the Board in January will take over as the Chairman of the Committee.
The Committee monitors the integrity of the Groups reporting process and financial management.
It ensures that risks are carefully identified and assessed and that sound systems of risk management and internal control are in place.
It scrutinises the full and halfyearly financial statements before proposing them to the Board for approval and reviews in detail the work of the external auditor and valuer and any significant financial judgement made by management.
The Committee reviews the risk management framework and reports to the Board on matters of existing and emerging risk affecting the Group.
The Committee receives detailed reports from management supplemented by other conversations and meetings as appropriate during the year.
Acquisitions and disposals The Company made a number of property acquisitions and disposals during the year as it continued to execute its strategy.
The
Committee ensured that the accounting treatment of all transactions was scrutinised and appropriate.
Changing risk landscape The risk landscape has evolved during the year.
We reviewed changes at a macroeconomic and political level and a range of other risks affecting the business including cyber security and rapid technological change.
Also we considered other factors such as the market cycle the Brexit negotiation process and property and consumer trends that are relevant to our business planning in the medium to long term.
The Groups Executive Committee regularly reviews the risk register and this is used by the Committee as the basis of its risk assessment.
During the year we refreshed the risk reporting matrix within the business to provide more scope for emerging threats to be identified before they are considered as potential risks affecting the business.
We have also revised the way that risks are reported to the Board with more regular updates through the Chief Financial Officers Board report.
Internal audit The Company maintains its own risk management and internal audit function.
The
Committee again reviewed the scope skills and competencies of this function and the level of resource available to it.
We decided that the knowledge skills and resources of our internal audit team and their understanding of the business were appropriate.
However there are occasions when we require and benefit from the expertise that can be offered by specialist external advice and accordingly the Committee considered when such advice was appropriate.
We believe that the combination of internal and external advisers provides us with the best insight into areas of risk and appropriate controls and allows us to provide assurance to the Board that the system of internal processes is robust.
External valuations and valuer CBRE was appointed in 2015 to act as the Groups valuer following a tender process.
We are pleased with the level of support provided by CBRE the rigorous process that they apply to their work and their broad industry expertise and knowledge.
External auditor Ernst and Young LLP EY was appointed as the Companys auditor in 2013.
This years internal review of their effectiveness and performance concluded that they continue to operate at a high standard.
We have agreed a new fee basis for EYs services for this year and through to 201819 details of which are contained on page 71 in the Accountability section.
Based on the Committees recommendation the Board is proposing that EY be reappointed to office at this years AGM.
AQRT
During the year an Audit Quality Review Team AQRT from the FRC undertook an inspection of EYs audit of the Groups financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2016.
As part of that process I spoke with the AQRT to share my and the Audit Committees perspectives on the quality of EYs audit and its delivery on commitments made by the audit firm as part of the audit tender process.
On completion of the review the Audit Committee received and considered the AQRTs final report on its inspection and discussed it with Eamonn McGrath the audit partner at EY.
The report does not give the Committee any concerns over the quality objectivity or independence of the audit.
Fair balanced and understandable The Committee assessed and recommended to the Board that taken as a whole the Companys 2017 Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable.
Viability Statement The Viability Statement together with the rationale behind the chosen five year time horizon is set out on page 54.
The Committee considered whether there should be any change to the period chosen for the Statement particularly in the context of any implications resulting from the UKs decision to leave the EU but was of the opinion that five years remained appropriate.
UK Corporate Governance CodeFRC Guidance on Audit Committees The Committee considered its compliance with the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code and the FRC Guidance on Audit Committees.
We believe that we have addressed both the spirit and the requirements of both this conclusion is supported by our external auditor.
Kevin OByrne Chairman Stacey Rauch Chris Bartram Nicholas Cadbury Independent Nonexecutive Director
Reviewed changing risk factors and reporting matrix Assessment of skills and competencies of internal audit Quality and appropriateness of property valuation process.
Key responsibilities Monitors the integrity of the Groups reporting process and financial management Ensures that risks are carefully identified and assessed and that sound systems of risk management and internal control are in place Scrutinises the full and halfyearly financial statements Reviews in detail the work of the external auditor and valuer and any significant financial judgement made by management Reviews the risk management framework.
Committee members Governance 69 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Committee effectiveness During the year the Board carried out an internally facilitated evaluation of its performance and that of its Committees.
This evaluation confirmed that the Committee continued to operate at a high standard with clear priorities welldefined responsibilities and clarity around its workplan.
The year ahead I have referred already to the rapidly changing environment in which the Company operates with important political and economic changes to follow from the decision to leave the EU.
The increasing pace of technological change is both a threat and opportunity that we assess on a regular basis.
The Committee will continue to work with management and provide clear reports to the Board to ensure that it addresses these issues in a way that is consistent with the Companys culture and values.
I would like to thank the other members of the Committee together with management and EY for their support during the year.
Audit Committee  new Chairman As I mentioned earlier this is my last year as Chairman of the Audit Committee.
I have thoroughly enjoyed my time at Landsec and would like to thank the Chairman my fellow Directors and the Companys management external advisers and shareholders for the support that I have received throughout my tenure.
A rigorous process was followed by the Nomination Committee in appointing my successor Nicholas Cadbury.
Nicholas will be replacing me later this year as Chairman of this Committee.
As the CFO of Whitbread PLC a highlyregarded customerfacing company in the FTSE 100 with an extensive property portfolio Nicholas has the knowledge and technical skills and recent and relevant financial experience to lead this Committee.
Nicholas will have the benefit of having been a member of the Audit Committee through the yearend process and supported by his induction programme I am confident this continuity will ensure a smooth transition.
I hope that you find this review and the report that follows a helpful explanation of the work of the Committee during the year.
Kevin OByrne Chairman Audit Committee Kevin OByrne Chairman Audit Committee 70 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Structure and operations The Audit Committees structure and operations including its delegated responsibilities and authority are governed by terms of reference which are reviewed annually and approved by the Board.
To maintain effective communication between all relevant parties and in support of its activities the Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Director of Risk Management and Internal Audit the partner and representatives of the Companys external auditor Ernst and Young LLP EY and other members of the senior finance team regularly attend Committee meetings.
The Company Chairman and all Non executive Directors are invited to attend meetings when the Groups external valuer CBRE makes property valuation presentations.
The Committee has private sessions with the internal and external audit teams.
In addition the Committee Chairman has private and informal sessions with the audit teams and the valuer to ensure that open lines of communication exist in case they wish to raise any concerns outside of formal meetings.
Nicholas Cadbury has participated in these meeting following his appointment as a Director in January 2017.
The Committee members collectively have a broad range of financial commercial and property sector expertise that enables them to provide oversight of both financial and risk matters and to advise the Board accordingly.
Kevin OByrne and Nicholas Cadbury are the members determined by the Board as having recent and relevant financial experience for the purposes of satisfying the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Committee works to a structured programme of activities and meetings to coincide with key events around the Companys financial calendar.
Following each meeting the Committee Chairman reports on the main discussion points and findings to the Board.
External auditor EY as the external auditor is engaged to conduct a statutory audit and express an opinion on the Companys and the Groups financial statements.
Their audit includes a review and test of the systems of internal control which produce the information contained in the financial statements and a review by EY of the asset valuation process and methodology using its own chartered surveyors more details below in each case to the extent necessary to express an audit opinion. management systems.
Internal audit the scope of the internal audit plan and resourcing requirements the independence appropriateness and effectiveness of internal audit.
External property valuation the quality and appropriateness of the halfyearly and full year external valuation of the Groups property portfolio together with an assessment of the methodology applied the independence and effectiveness of the external valuer.
Other
Groups regulatory and legislative environment.
Significant financial matters During the year the Committee considered the appropriateness of significant financial matters made in connection with the financial statements as set out on pages 72 and 74.
Audit Committee activity The key areas of Committee activity during the year included the planning monitoring reviewing and approving of the following Financial reporting the quality appropriateness and integrity of the halfyearly and full year financial statements the information underlying assumptions and stress test analysis presented in support of Going Concern and the Viability Statement the consistency and appropriateness of the financial control and reporting environment the dividend policy and the payment of dividends with due regard to the Companys REIT status the fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Annual Report and any other financial statements such as the halfyearly statement.
External audit the scope of the external audit plan the independence and objectivity of EY the quality and effectiveness of EYs audit services the level of fees paid to EY in accordance with the policy for the provision of nonaudit services EYs reappointment to office as external auditor.
Risk management and internal control the scope of the internal control and risk management programme the results of internal audit reviews and the progress made against agreed management actions
71 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Effectiveness of the external audit Following the issue of the Companys Annual Report the Director of Risk Management and Internal Audit conducts a performance evaluation and effectiveness review of the external audit.
This is conducted against structured guidelines in consultation with the Executive Directors and members of the senior finance team and with due regard to the latest Audit Quality Inspection Report on EY issued by the Financial Reporting Council
This years review will again include an audit quality assessment based on the new Practice Aid guidelines also issued by the FRC.
The Committee Chairman meets privately with the audit engagement partner before the Committee considers the results of the review.
During the year an Audit Quality Review Team AQRT from the FRC undertook an inspection of EYs audit of the Groups financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2016.
The report did not give the Committee any concerns over the quality objectivity or independence of the audit.
EY successfully completed their audit for the financial year.
The Committees preliminary view is that in line with the conclusions from last years performance review EY had again performed their audit services effectively efficiently and to a high standard.
Areas identified for development will be shared with them for inclusion in their audit and service delivery plans going forward.
Audit plan In respect of the audit for the financial year under review EY presented their proposed audit plan prepared in consultation with senior management and the Director of Risk Management and Internal Audit to the Committee for consideration and approval.
The objective was to ensure that their work remained aligned to the Groups structure and strategy.
The audit plan was again risk and materiality focused challenge based and designed to provide valuable insights beyond the audit.
Objectivity and independence The Committee is responsible for monitoring and reviewing the objectivity and independence of the external auditor.
In undertaking its annual assessment the Committee has reviewed the confirmation from EY that they maintain appropriate internal safeguards in line with applicable professional standards the mitigation actions taken by the Company in seeking to safeguard EYs independent status including the operation of policies designed to regulate the amount of non audit services provided by EY and the employment of former EY employees the tenure of the audit engagement partner not being greater than five years the internal performance and effectiveness review of EY referred to above the outcome of the independent AQRT review referred to above.
Taking the above review into account the Committee concluded that EY remained objective and independent in their role as external auditor.
Audit tendering EY were first appointed to the office of auditor following a competitive tender process in respect of the 201314 financial year.
Having undertaken such a process the Company has complied with The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 Article 7.1 published by the CMA on 26 September 2014.
Under current regulations the Company will be required to retender the audit by no later than the 202324 financial year.
However the Committee proposes to review the situation at the same time as the current audit engagement partner Eamonn McGrath is due to rotate.
Mr McGrath has held the role of the Companys audit engagement partner for four years and will relinquish this position during the 201819 financial year and following completion of the 201718 financial statements.
There are no contractual restrictions in relation to the Companys choice of external auditor.
On the recommendation of the Audit Committee the Board is proposing a resolution at this years Annual General Meeting that EY be reappointed to office for a further year.
Audit fee The Committee reviewed the level of fees payable to EY for audit services as the terms agreed for the original engagement had expired.
It was agreed that the audit fees payable to EY for the audit and half year review for 201617 would be 800000 up from 793000 in 201516 with an increase of 25000 in each of the two following financial years subject to business and audit requirements remaining consistent year on year.
Nonaudit services To help safeguard EYs objectivity and independence the Company operates a nonaudit services policy which sets out the circumstances and financial limits within which they may be permitted to provide certain nonaudit services such as assurance work on which they will not be required to provide an audit opinion.
The Committee monitors compliance with the policy including the prior approvals required for nonaudit services which are as follows Table 32
Aggregate during the year CFO 0  25000 100000 Audit Committee
Committee 100000 290000 Details of the fees charged by EY during the year can be found in note 8 to the financial statements.
Total fees for nonaudit services including the half year review and other assurance related services amounted to 248000.
This sum represented 42% of the total Group audit fees and 34% of the total audit fees payable by the Group to EY during the year including the audit of its joint ventures.
No nonaudit fees were approved or paid on a contingent basis.
72 Landsec Annual Report 2017 External valuations and valuers The valuation of the Groups property portfolio including properties held within the development programme and in joint ventures is undertaken by independent external valuers.
The Group provides input such as source data and support to the valuation process.
CBRE have been the Companys principal valuer since September 2015.
The valuation helps to determine a significant part of the Groups net asset value reported performance and Senior Management remuneration.
Accordingly the scrutiny of each valuation and the valuers independence objectivity and effectiveness represents such an important part of the Committees work.
Valuations for the full and half year were presented to the Committee by CBRE.
These were reviewed and challenged by management and the Committee with reference to CBREs approach methodology valuation basis and underlying property and market assumptions.
Other Nonexecutive Directors attended the final presentation.
The Committee Chairman and Nicholas Cadbury also met separately with CBRE.
Additionally CBRE met with EY and exchanged information independently of management.
EY has experienced chartered surveyors on its team who consider the valuers qualifications and assess and challenge the valuation approach assumptions and judgements made by them.
Their audit procedures are targeted at addressing the risks in respect of the valuations and the potential for any undue management influence in arriving at them.
This year EY identified 36 properties comprising 69% of the portfolio by valuation for substantive review by its valuation experts primarily on the basis of their value type risk profile and location.
EY performed site visits for a sample of assets and completed analytical reviews over the input data for the valuations comparing this to market data.
The Committee reviewed their findings.
An internal evaluation of CBREs performance and effectiveness will be conducted after the yearend results are finalised and annually thereafter with the results reported on the following year.
A fixedfee arrangement subject to adjustment for acquisitions and disposals is in place with CBRE for the valuation of the Groups properties and given the importance of their work we have disclosed the fees paid to them in note 9 to the financial statements.
The total valuation fees paid by the Company to CBRE during the year represented less than 5% of their total fee income for the year.
Significant financial matters The Committee reviewed two significant financial matters in connection with the financial statements namely the valuation of the Groups property portfolio and revenue recognition.
Further details are set out in table 33 on page 74.
These items were considered to be significant taking into account the level of materiality and the degree of judgement exercised by management and in respect of the valuation the external valuer.
The Committee discussed these with both parties as well as EY.
In addition the Committee considered took action and made onward recommendations to the Board as appropriate in respect of other key matters including the Viability Statement the Going Concern basis on which the financial statements are prepared accounting for property acquisitions and disposals bond buy back and new issue maintenance of the Groups REIT status and other specific areas of individual property and audit focus.
The Committee was satisfied that all issues had been fully and adequately addressed that the judgements made were reasonable and appropriate and had been reviewed and debated with the external auditor who concurred with the approach taken by management.
Risk management framework The Board is responsible for determining both the nature and extent of the Groups risk management framework and the risk appetite that is acceptable in seeking to achieve its strategic objectives.
The framework and the ongoing process in place for identifying evaluating and managing the principal risks faced by the Group are described on pages 4245.
These are regularly reviewed by the Board.
Primary responsibility for operation of the Companys internal control and risk management systems which extend to include financial operational and compliance controls and accord with the FRCs 2014 Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting has been delegated to management.
These systems have been designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve the Groups business goals and can provide only reasonable not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
During the year the Committee commissioned an external report to be carried out on the Companys risk management framework and the approach to risk.
No major weaknesses were identified but a number of recommendations were suggested and considered by the
These will be implemented in the coming year.
Internal control The key elements of the Groups internal control are as follows an established organisation structure with clear lines of responsibility approval levels and delegated authorities a disciplined management and committee structure which facilitates regular performance review and decisionmaking a comprehensive strategic review and annual planning process a robust budgeting forecasting and financial reporting process various policies procedures and guidelines underpinning the development asset management financing and main operations of the business together with professional services support including legal human resources information services tax company secretarial and health safety and security a compliance certification process from management conducted in relation to the halfyearly and full year results and business activities generally a quarterly selfcertification by management confirming that key internal controls within their area of responsibility have been operating effectively a risk management and internal audit function whose work spans the whole Group a focused postacquisition review and integration programme to ensure the Groups governance procedures standards and control environment are implemented effectively and on time a financial and property information management system.
Governance
73 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Risk management
Under the overall supervision of the Committee there are several subcommittees and work groups that oversee and manage dayto day risk within the business.
The Group has a Director of Risk Management and Internal Audit with a direct reporting line to the Audit Committee Chairman who provides regular oversight of risk matters evaluates emerging risks that may affect the business and monitors compliance to ensure that any mitigating actions are properly managed and completed.
The Committee in consultation with management agrees the annual work plan including any assistance that may be required from external specialists of the risk management and internal audit function to ensure alignment with the needs of the business and compliance with its governance charter.
Additionally the Committee receives and discusses on a quarterly basis the Groups risk register including significant and emerging risks and how exposures have changed during the period summary reports and progress against agreed actions from internal audit on their review of the effectiveness of various elements of the internal control system maintained by the Group.
Effectiveness
The Board has undertaken a robust assessment of the principal risks faced by the Group including those that could threaten the business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
Assisted by the Committee the Board also reviewed the effectiveness of the systems of internal control and risk management in place throughout the year and up to the date of this report.
This took into account the valuable assurance work undertaken by the risk management and internal audit function which is supplemented by external specialist resource as necessary and the relevant process controls and testing work undertaken by EY as part of their halfyearly review and full year audit.
No weaknesses or control failures significant to the Group were identified.
Where areas for improvement were identified new procedures have been introduced to strengthen the controls and will themselves be subject to regular review as part of the ongoing assurance process.
Fair balanced and understandable The Committee applied this year the same due diligence approach adopted in previous years in order to assess one of the key Code requirements in respect of the Annual Report.
This included the establishment of an editorial team who were responsible for preparing compiling and verifying the content and through regular review meetings with the Executive Directors ensuring that consistent reporting and appropriate links existed between key messages and sections of the Annual
A specific paper was presented to the Committee and the Board to assist in its challenge and testing of a fair balanced and understandable assessment.
Taking the above into account together with the views expressed by EY the Committee recommended and in turn the Board confirmed that the 2017 Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Companys position performance business model and strategy.
Whistleblowing policy The Committee reviews the Groups arrangements incorporated within a specific policy which allow employees to report concerns about suspected impropriety or wrongdoing whether financial or otherwise within the Group on a confidential basis and anonymously if preferred.
These include an independent third party reporting facility comprising a telephone hotline and an online process.
Any matters reported are investigated by the Company Secretary and escalated to the Committee as appropriate.
During the year there were no whistleblowing incidents reported.
The Company runs a whistleblowing awareness campaign every year and the arrangements also form part of the induction programme for new employees.
The policy and facilities have been extended to cover key suppliers and the requirements of the new legislation covering slavery and human trafficking reporting.
Bribery and corruption policy The Board has a zero tolerance policy for bribery and corruption of any sort.
The Company in operating the policy gives regular training to staff on the procedures highlighting areas of vulnerability.
New employees are required to complete an online training module when they join.
Our principal suppliers are required to have similar policies and practices in place within their own businesses.
74 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Significant financial matters considered How the Committee addressed the matters Table 33 Valuation of the Groups property portfolio including properties held within the development programme and in joint arrangements The valuation of the Groups property portfolio is a major determinant of the Groups performance and drives an element of the variable remuneration for senior management.
Although the portfolio valuation is conducted externally by an independent valuer the nature of the valuation estimates is inherently subjective and requires the making of significant judgements and assumptions by management and the valuer.
Significant assumptions and judgements made by the valuer in determining valuations may include the appropriate yield based on recent market evidence changes to market rents ERVs what will occur at the end of each lease the level of nonrecoverable costs and alternative uses.
Development valuations also include assumptions around costs to complete the development the level of letting at completion incentives lease terms and the length of time space remains void.
The Audit Committee adopts a formal approach by which the valuation process methodology assumptions and outcomes are reviewed and robustly challenged.
This includes separate review and scrutiny by management the Committee Chairman and the Committee itself.
The Group uses CBRE a leading firm in the UK property market as its principal valuer.
It also includes EY as the external auditor which is assisted by its own specialist team of chartered surveyors who are familiar with the valuation approach and the UK property market.
EY met with CBRE separately from management and their remit extends to investigating and confirming that no undue influence has been exerted by management in relation to the external valuer arriving at its valuations.
CBRE submits its valuation report to the Committee as part of the halfyearly and full year results process.
They were asked to attend and present their report to the Board and to highlight any significant judgements made or disagreements which existed between themselves and management.
There were none.
The valuer proposed changes to the values of our properties and developments during the year which were discussed by the Committee in detail and accepted.
Based on the degree of oversight and challenge applied to the valuation process the Committee concluded that the valuations had each been conducted appropriately independently and in accordance with the valuers professional standards.
Revenue recognition Certain transactions require management to make judgements as to whether and to what extent they should be recognised as revenue in the year.
Market expectations and revenue profit based targets may place pressure on management to distort revenue recognition.
This may result in overstatement or deferral of revenues to assist in meeting current or future targets or expectations.
The Committee and EY considered the main areas of judgement exercised by management in accounting for matters related to revenue recognition including timing and treatment of rents incentives surrender premia and other property related revenue.
EY reviewed and tested individual transactions on a sample basis to ensure there was a contractual relationship and consistency of accounting treatment between last year and this year.
It performed data analytics over the whole population of leases in the Groups portfolio analysing data held in the Groups document and property management system.
In its assessment the Committee in consultation with EY considered all relevant facts challenged the recoverability of occupier incentives the options that management had in terms of accounting treatment and the appropriateness of the judgements made by management.
These matters had themselves been the subject of prior discussion between EY and management.
The Committee having consulted with EY concurred with the judgements made by management and were satisfied that the revenue reported for the year had been appropriately recognised.
The above description of the significant financial matters should be read in conjunction with the Independent Auditors Report on pages 97102 and the significant accounting policies disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
Further details on significant accounting judgements and key estimations of uncertainty can be found in note 2 to the financial statements on page 108.
Governance
75 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Approach to investor relations The Board is committed to maintaining an open dialogue with shareholders and recognises the importance of that relationship in the governance process.
The Chairman supported by the Executive Directors has overall responsibility for ensuring effective communication with shareholders.
The Company has a comprehensive investor relations programme designed for institutional investors private shareholders and debt investors which aims to help existing and potential investors understand the Groups business strategy and performance.
Shareholder feedback is provided to the Board to ensure that they understand the objectives and views of major investors.
The Company approaches its debt investor relations on a partnership basis ensuring that any feedback is considered and the Company takes into account best practice guidance from the Investment Association.
During the year the programme of investor events included Institutional shareholders programme Meetings with principal shareholders The Executive Directors had meetings with shareholders representing more than half the register by value during the year The Chairman maintained contact with principal shareholders and undertook her usual biennial investor roadshows in the UK and the Netherlands The geographic spread of the programme covered Europe North America South Africa and the Far East The Senior Independent Director and other Nonexecutive Directors were available to meet with shareholders Institutional shareholders were invited to attend the Companys full year and half yearly results presentations.
Investor conference The investor conference is held annually and focuses on the Retail and London portfolios in alternate years.
This year the conference was held in Victoria SW1 and focused on the London Portfolio with senior management presenting updates on all aspects of its business.
The day included tours of five of our buildings in Victoria including a visit to Nova.
The conference also provided an opportunity for attendees to meet the management teams in the business The presentations and an audio recording of the conference were made available on the corporate website to enable nonattendees to access the information provided.
Investor tours and presentations In addition to our annual investor conference we hosted various presentations and tours of some of our major assets in the Retail and London portfolios.
These tours were conducted at Bluewater Kent Trinity Leeds White Rose Leeds Westgate Oxford key properties in Victoria SW1 and 20 Fenchurch Street EC3 We conducted 12 sales team meetings during the year which provided the Executive Directors with the opportunity to present our strategy and performance directly to the sales teams of the major investment banks.
Industry conferences Industry conferences provide Executive Directors with a chance to meet a large number of investors on a formal and informal basis.
Conferences attended this year included the UBS Global Property JP Morgan and Bank of America Merrill Lynch conferences in London the Bank of America Merrill Lynch conference in New York the Kempen conferences in Amsterdam and New York and the Citi Conference in Miami.
Other initiatives The Chairman and Chief Executive held a dinner for the senior heads of equities from UK institutions.
Private shareholders programme Private shareholders are encouraged to give feedback to and communicate with the Directors through the Company Secretary.
During the year they were also able to meet Directors at the United Kingdom Shareholders Association meeting and at the Annual General Meeting.
Debt investors programme Credit side institutional investors and analysts Our treasury team held nondeal specific meetings with credit side institutional investors and analysts after the half year and full year results In addition the team met with around 40 accounts as part of the deal roadshow for the bond tender and new issue exercise in JanuaryFebruary of this year.
Banks
Regular dialogue is maintained with our key relationship banks including at least bi annual meetings with our treasury team and inhouse dinners hosted by the Executive and Nonexecutive Directors Our treasury team also actively engaged with potential lenders.
Credit rating agencies During the year business and financial updates were provided by our treasury team and senior management to Standard and Poors Fitch Ratings and Moodys Further information on our debt investors can be found at siteinvestors.
Annual General Meeting AGM The 2016 AGM provided all shareholders with an opportunity to question the Board and the Chairmen of each Board Committee on matters put to the meeting including the Annual Report.
Shareholders who attended the AGM received a strategic progress update from the Chairman and a presentation from the Chief Executive on the business activities and performance of the Group over the preceding year.
The results of voting at general meetings are published on the Companys website siteinvestors.
Independent feedback on investor relations During the year the Board commissioned Rivel an independent adviser to conduct an investor audit of investor perceptions of the Company its management strategy governance and the investor relations programme.
An investor relations audit usually takes place every two years.
Rivel interviewed over 50 investors based in the UK Europe and North America to obtain their views on management and business performance.
The results were presented to the Board with suggestions and improvements being taken forward by management.
The perception study found that investors have a very high degree of confidence in management and there was broad support for the Companys strategy.
The investor relations department also received feedback from analysts and investors during the year through the Groups corporate advisers.
The Company Secretary also received feedback on governance matters directly from investors and shareholder bodies.
The information was shared with the Board to help members develop their understanding of shareholders needs and expectations.
Other disclosures Other disclosures required by paragraph 7.2.6 of the Disclosure and Transparency Rules and the Companies Act 2006 are set out in the Directors Report on pages 9294.
The Governance report was approved by the Board on 17 May 2017.
On behalf of the Board Tim Ashby Group General Counsel and Company Secretary 76 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Remuneration
Report
Chairmans
Annual
Statement
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to introduce the Directors Remuneration Report for the year.
The political and economic uncertainty to which I alluded last year has certainly accelerated in some unexpected ways beginning with the UKs decision to leave the European Union.
Although the UK economy has continued to perform well overall the property industry has been impacted by wavering consumer and business confidence.
We believe our decision to complete speculative development earlier than others remains the right one.
The priorities over the past year have been to lengthen lease terms in London offices and to lease up our development programme including Westgate Oxford due to open in
Behind the scenes we have also been active in ensuring that the business is in the best possible position  financially culturally reputationally and capabilitywise  to take advantage of new opportunities to deliver shareholder value.
As I have highlighted previously the remuneration outcomes for the executives at Landsec are largely driven by outperformance versus our peers and do not always reflect our absolute performance.
For Total Property Return our performance is compared to IPD a widelyused industry benchmark over both a one year and three year period for the calculation of bonus and LTIP outturns respectively.
Over one year we estimate that we will have slightly underperformed the benchmark which now encompasses all Marchvalued properties within IPD.
Over a three year period where we are still measured against a sector weighted index of the IPD Quarterly Universe I am pleased to say we have outperformed the benchmark.
To have achieved this while putting the business on such a strong financial footing is a very good performance.
In terms of Total Shareholder Return we are measured over a three year period and were disappointed not to outperform our peer group.
Simon Palley Chairman Dame Alison Carnwath Edward Bonham Carter Cressida Hogg CBE Independent Nonexecutive Director
Reviewed and approved the remuneration outcomes for 201617 for Executive Directors and the Executive Committee Gathered insight on the sentiment of shareholders and other key stakeholders as context for planning the review of the remuneration policy in 2018 Oversaw the approach to the reporting of gender pay.
Key responsibilities Reviews and recommends to the Board the executive remuneration policy Determines the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors and other members of the Executive Committee Oversight of the Groups remuneration policy for all employees.
Committee members Simon Palley Chairman Remuneration Committee Governance 77 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Our relative share price has been impacted by a number of factors including sentiment towards our market sectors particularly London and no exposure to continental Europe at a time of sterling devaluation.
Following positive feedback from shareholders we have chosen to lay out the report in a very similar way to last year.
The full details of the Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders in 2015 are contained in the back section of the Annual Report on pages 175 to 179.
For ease of reference a summary of the proposed implementation of the policy for 201718 is included within the Directors Remuneration Report on page 90.
We have included the key information including an at a glance summary of the outturns for the year immediately following my statement.
More detail on remuneration outcomes for the year The annual bonus for the year was slightly above target for Executive Directors but below last years outturn.
The performance can be summarised as follows As I mentioned above our measure of Total Property Return now uses a broader and unweighted IPD benchmark of all March valued properties.
The benchmark was not available at the time of writing but we expect to slightly underperform resulting in no payment from this element of the bonus.
The revenue profit performance was again very strong significantly above our threshold set in 2015.
This reflects increased rents from our successful development programme and lower interest costs more than outweighing rent lost through disposals last year.
There has also been strong ongoing discipline around the management of costs.
This element of the plan paid out in full.
Performance against the specific business objectives was more mixed.
Retail had a strong performance with high demand for space at Westgate Oxford and the successful preletting of the extension to White Rose Leeds as particular highlights.
In London where the impact of current political and economic uncertainty on demand has been more keenly felt the ambitious development letting targets have been challenging to meet.
Other corporate objectives have focused on evolving the culture through the office move and pressing ahead with our ambitious sustainability agenda and these have largely been met.
When this performance was combined with the strong performance against their individual objectives the total bonus payout was 88.1% of salary for Robert Noel 58.7% of maximum and 86.1% for Martin Greenslade 57.4% of maximum both lower than last year.
Turning to the LongTerm Incentive Plan which is for performance over the three years to 31 March 2017 the outturn is as follows Our Total Property Return of 12.7% per annum over the three years outperformed that of our benchmark the sectorweighted IPD Quarterly Universe which was 11.5% per annum.
As a result this element vests in full.
However our Total Shareholder Return over the same period was 9.2% versus 16.2% for the comparator group.
This element of the LTIP  therefore does not vest.
Therefore in total 50% of the 2014 awards will vest.
Looking forward Later this year we will be consulting with shareholder representatives on our Remuneration Policy in preparation for the binding vote at next years AGM.
Executive pay is an area that is attracting a great deal of focus from many quarters including government.
As ever we are very keen to work within the spirit of stakeholder sentiment while ensuring that any proposals continue to drive the right behaviours from our executives who remain completely focused on the delivery of our stated goal  To outperform our peer group in terms of total shareholder return through the property cycles .
I look forward to discussions with some of you in the coming year.
Simon Palley Chairman Remuneration Committee 78 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Fixed pay Annual bonus outturns Total Property Return Revenue Profit
Individual
Individual  max 20% Individual  actual 17% TPR  max 39% TPR  actual 0% Rev Profit  max 39% Rev Profit  actual 39% KPIs  max 52% KPIs  actual 32%
Robert Noel 2017 Total 000 Chart 36 Total Property Return Revenue Profit
Individual
Individual  max 20% Individual  actual 17% TPR  max 39% TPR  actual 13.5% Rev Profit  max 39% Rev Profit  actual 39% KPIs  max 52% KPIs  actual 31% Robert Noel 2016 Total 000 Chart 38 Total Property Return Revenue Profit
Individual
Individual  max 20% Individual  actual 17% TPR  max 39% TPR  actual 13.5% Rev Profit  max 39% Rev Profit  actual 39% KPIs  max 52% KPIs  actual 31% Martin Greenslade 2016 Total 000 Chart 39 Total Property Return Revenue Profit
Individual
Individual  max 20% Individual  actual 15% TPR  max 39% TPR  actual 0% Rev Profit  max 39% Rev Profit  actual 39% KPIs  max 52% KPIs  actual 32% Martin Greenslade 2017 Total 000 Chart 37
Robert Noel 000 Chart 34 Base pay Pension Benefits tel40tel800 900 1000 Martin Greenslade 000 Chart 35 Base pay Pension Benefits tel40tel800 900 1000 Governance 79 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Long Term Incentive Plan outturns Summary of Remuneration outturns versus target and actual Robert Noel 000 Chart 44 Maximum Actual Fixed pay Ontarget Base salary 28.4% Benefits 0.8% Longterm incentives 39.2% Pension 7.1% Annual bonus 24.5% Percentages are of the actual.
Martin Greenslade 000 Chart 45 Fixed pay Ontarget Maximum Actual Base salary 27.9% Benefits 1.1% Longterm incentives 40% Pension 6.9% Annual bonus 24.1% Percentages are of the actual.
Total Shareholder Return Total Property Return Total Shareholder Return  max 50% Total Shareholder Return  actual 0% Total Property Return  max 50% Total Property Return  actual 50% Robert Noel 2017 Total 000 Chart 40
Total Shareholder Return Total Property Return Total Shareholder Return  max 50% Total Shareholder Return  actual 0% Total Property Return  max 50% Total Property Return  actual 13% Robert Noel 2016 Total 000 Chart 42 Total Shareholder Return Total Property Return Total Shareholder Return  max 50% Total Shareholder Return  actual 0% Total Property Return  max 50% Total Property Return  actual 13% Martin Greenslade 2016 Total 000 Chart 43 Total Shareholder Return Total Property Return Total Shareholder Return  max 50% Total Shareholder Return  actual 0% Total Property Return  max 50% Total Property Return  actual 50%
Martin Greenslade 2017 Total 000 Chart 41 80 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Report on
The Annual Report on Remuneration describes how the Directors Remuneration Policy The Policy approved by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting in July 2015 has been applied in the financial year ended 31 March 2017 and how it will be applied in the financial year commenced 1 April 2017.
During the course of 201617 the Remuneration Committee was engaged in a number of key matters including Determining salary increases for the Executive Directors and Executive Committee members together with the overall level of salary increases for employees across the Group Setting and subsequently reviewing the outcomes for corporate business unit and personal targets under the annual bonus scheme for Executive Directors and Executive Committee members Dates of appointment for Directors Table 46 Name Date of appointment Date of contract Executive Directors Robert Noel 1 January 2010 23 January 2012 Martin Greenslade 1 September 2005 9 May 2013 Nonexecutive Directors Dame Alison Carnwath 1 September 2004 13 May 2015 Kevin OByrne 1 April 2008 13 May 2015 Chris Bartram 1 August 2009 13 May 2015 Simon Palley 1 August 2010 13 May 2015 Stacey Rauch 1 January 2012 13 May 2015 Edward Bonham Carter 1 January 2014 13 May 2015 Cressida Hogg 1 January 2014 13 May 2015 Nicholas Cadbury 1 January 2017 1 January 2017 Single total figure of remuneration for each Director 000 Audited Table 47 Basic salary
Pension allowance Annual bonus paid in cash Annual bonus deferred into shares
Longterm incentives vested
201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 Executive Directors Robert Noel 769 754 21 2tel377 293 383 1659 1726 1062 285 2721 2011 Martin Greenslade 500 491 19 2tel245 181 249 1075 1128 719 193 1794 1321 Basic salary is stated as a per annum figure based on current annual salary at the end of 201617.
Actual salaries paid in the year were 766156 Robert Noel and 498724 Martin Greenslade .
Benefits consist of a car allowance private medical insurance income protection and life assurance premiums.
The pension allowance shown is a cash emolument of 25% of base salary.
The annual bonus for 201516 was estimated in last years report and therefore the amounts for the bonus deferred into shares have been adjusted to reflect actual values.
The impact of the adjustment was a reduction of 3527 for Robert Noel and a reduction of 2296 for Martin Greenslade.
The longterm incentives for 201617 have been calculated using a share price of 10.35 which is the threemonth average to 31 March 2017 .
The longterm incentives vesting in 201516 were estimated in last years report so have been adjusted to reflect actual values.
The impact of the adjustment was a reduction of 31076 for Robert Noel and a reduction of 21021 for Martin Greenslade.
Reviewing and determining the outturns against the performance conditions and subsequent vesting outcome of awards granted under the LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP and Matching Share Plan MSP in 2013 Determining the annual level of LTIP andor MSP grants to Executive Directors Executive Committee members and senior management Remuneration outcomes for Directors during the year In this section we explain the pay outcomes for Directors in relation to the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
Table 47 shows the payments we expect to make and then tables 49 and 50 give more detail on how we have measured the performance outcomes with respect to the annual bonus and LTIP in the context of value created for shareholders.
1.1 Directors emoluments Audited The basis of disclosure in the table below is on an accruals basis.
This means that the annual bonus column includes the amount that will be paid in June 2017 in connection with performance achieved in the financial year ended 31 March 2017.
It should be noted that the annual bonus figure has been estimated for the purposes of the table as final data on the Companys Total Property Return versus the peer group using the benchmark i. all Marchvalued properties will not be available until after the date of this reports publication.
The estimate has been derived from the most up todate performance information available and any payment made will be based on the final performance data when received and verified.
The values shown for the 2014 LTIP awards vesting for the three year performance period ended 31 March 2017 are based on estimated achievements against the performance measures and calculated using the average share price for the quarter then ended.
The actual share price is not known at the time of writing as the awards do not formally vest until July 2017.
Monitoring Directors compliance with the Companys share ownership guidelines Monitoring developments in stakeholder sentiment on executive pay and corporate governance more generally including participating in consultation exercises where appropriate.
Unless otherwise stated narrative and tables are unaudited.
Governance
81 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Single total figure of remuneration for each Director 000 Audited Table 48 Fees Benefits
Annual bonus paid in cash Annual bonus deferred into shares
Longterm incentives vested Total 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 201617 201516 Nonexecutive Directors Dame Alison Carnwath 375 350         375 350   375 350 Kevin OByrne 92.8 95         92.8 95   92.8 95 Chris Bartram 70 67 .5         70 67 .5   70 67 .5 Simon Palley 85 80         85 80   85 80 Stacey Rauch 70 67 .5         70 67 .5   70 67 .5 Edward Bonham Carter 76.8 67 .5         76.8 67 .5   76.8 67 .5 Cressida Hogg 70 67 .5         70 67 .5   70 67 .5 Nicholas Cadbury 17.4          17.4    17.4 1.2 Annual bonus outturn In the year under review each Executive Director had the potential to receive a maximum annual bonus of up to 150% of base salary.
Of this 130% was dependent on meeting Group targets and 20% dependent on meeting personal targets.
All targets were set at the beginning of the year.
The following table confirms the targets and their respective outcomes.
The ontarget bonus expectation is 75% of salary.
Annual bonus outturn Table 49
Percentage of base salary maximum Assessment
Total Property Return  The Groups ungeared Total Property Return TPR relative to an IPD benchmark comprising all Marchvalued properties excluding
Total benchmark value c.
170bn.
39.0  The Groups Total Property Return for the year was 3.9% an under performance of 0.7% versus the estimated IPD benchmark Therefore none of this element is likely to pay out.
Share in longterm real growth in Group revenue profit.
39.0  Revenue profit for the year 382m significantly exceeded the threshold level set in 2015 This element therefore paid out in full.
Key business targets Development lettings  specific targets were set for both the London and Retail portfolios with a focus on the London developments and Westgate Oxford opening in 2017 and the extension of White Rose Leeds.
Net effective rather than headline rents were used as the key measure of performance.
18.2  The outturn is calculated on the basis of a threshold of 23.4m and a maximum of 34.0m Both the Retail lettings targets at Oxford and Leeds were exceeded while London lettings achieved threshold levels.
28m was achieved in total.
This element of the bonus therefore paid out at 66.4% of the maximum.
Residential sales  specific targets were set for the Victoria residential developments.
4.2  The outturn is calculated on the basis of a threshold of 65m.
Achievement is calculated on a straightline basis from threshold to the maximum of 102m The Group secured relevant sales of 51m which was below threshold This element of the bonus therefore was not paid.
Project budgets  specific aggregate and individual budget targets were set for projects in both London and Retail Nova New Street Square 20 Eastbourne Terrace and White Rose.
6.2  Although three out of four of the named developments were completed to target budgets one Nova was not This element of the bonus therefore was not paid.
Customers  recognising the importance of creating a truly customerfocused culture specific targets were set around the rollout of internal and external customer excellence programmes.
An improvement to already high customer satisfaction scores was also sought.
7.8  The proposed rollout of the internal customer excellence programme was delayed to coincide with the launch of the new Landsec brand in June However a programme of external customer engagement activities has been delivered and customer satisfaction scores in London and Retail were maintained This element of the bonus therefore paid out at 66.6% of the maximum.
People  ensuring that the office move to Victoria was maximised as an opportunity to embed the purpose vision and values and create a step change in a more collaborative and innovative culture to be measured through movement in before and after employee surveys versus a recognised external benchmark.
5.2  The relevant survey scores improved by 35% This element of the bonus therefore paid out in full.
The outturn is adjusted to take account of the performance of trading properties and the capital and income extracted from Queen Annes Gate SW1 through a bond issue in 2009.
82 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Annual bonus outturn continued
Percentage of base salary maximum Assessment
Sustainability  clear progress in delivery of the agenda via the rollout of internal training programmes and the commencement of measurable energy reduction initiatives in the most energyintensive sites.
5.2  In order to achieve maximum payout three levels of sustainability training including a core mandatory module completed by at least 95% of employees needed to be delivered.
In addition quantifiable energy reduction initiatives should be identified for implementation in two thirds of our most energyintensive sites The target on training was achieved in full and energy reduction initiatives were identified in 88% of energyintensive sites This element of the bonus therefore paid out in full.
Community Employment Programme  a target was set to secure permanent employment for 170 target and 188 maximum candidates on the Community Employment Programme.
5.2  Employment was secured for 186 candidates on the programme across the Group This element of the bonus therefore paid out at 85% of maximum.
130.0 Total Group elements 71.1 Executive Directors personal targets Each Executive Director received a number of personal targets which included Creating and embedding a new public affairs agenda Creating and activating a new corporate brand Ensuring that Landsecs culture is further developed through a successful office move Positive feedback from the annual shareholder survey Continued focus on talent development and succession Review of the funding strategy in preparation for increased investment activity.
20.0 Each Executive Director was scored against objectively measurable targets set at the beginning of the year.
The outturn was as follows Robert Noel 17.0 Martin Greenslade Total 150.0 Robert Noel Martin Greenslade 1.3 LongTerm Incentive Plan and Matching Share Plan outturns The table below summarises how we have assessed our LTIP performance achievement over the three years to 31 March 2017.
Awards granted in 2014 under the LTIP for this period are subject to performance conditions that measure and compare the Groups relative performance against its peers in terms of Total Property Return TPR and Total Shareholder Return TSR with each measure representing 50% of the total award.
Please see table 61 for more detail on how vesting levels are determined.
The performance calculation for awards granted in 2014 and vesting in 2017 are illustrated below LongTerm Incentive Plan and Matching Share Plan outturns Table 50
Target
Percentage of base salary maximum Assessment Percentage of maximum Ungeared Total Property Return 75  75 maximum shares pledged The Groups Total Property Return over the three year period was 12.7% per annum compared with the performance of the sectorweighted IPD Quarterly Universe of 11.5% per annum.
Therefore this element vests in full.
Total Shareholder Return 75  75 maximum shares pledged The Groups Total Shareholder Return over the three year period was 9.2% versus that of the comparator group at 16.2%.
As this return was below the benchmark this element of the total award does not vest.
The outturn is adjusted to take account of the performance of trading properties and the capital and income extracted from Queen Annes Gate SW1 through a bond issued in 2009.
In total therefore 50% of the awards made in 2014 will vest in July 2017.
For awards granted in 2015 the Groups performance over the two years to 31 March 2017 would if sustained over the three year period to 31 March 2018 result in 0% of the LTIP share awards vesting.
For awards granted in 2016 performance over the one year period to 31 March 2017 would if sustained over the second and third years of the period to 31 March 2019 result in 22.4% of the LTIP share awards vesting.
Governance
83 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Total Shareholder Return  comparator groups Table 51 Year of award Nametel 2017 Assura PLC Big Yellow Group PLC Capital and Counties Properties PLC CLS Holdings PLC Daejan Holdings PLC Derwent London PLC FandC Commercial Property Trust Ltd Grainger PLC Great Portland Estates PLC Hammerson PLC Hansteen Holdings PLC Intu Properties PLC Kennedy Wilson Europe PLC Londonmetric Property PLC NewRiver REIT PLC Redefine International REIT PLC Safestore Holdings PLC Segro PLC Shaftesbury PLC St Modwen Properties PLC The British Land Company PLC Tritax Big Box REIT PLC UK Commercial Property Trust UNITE Group PLC Workspace Group PLC As proposed to apply for awards to be made this year under the LTIP .
Table 53
Element of pay
Percentage of maximum achieved % 000 Base salary 769 na 769 Pension 192 na 192 Benefits 21 na 21 Annual bonus Company Performance element 999 54.7 546 Individual element 154 85.0 131 Longterm incentives 2125 50.0 1062 Total 4260 2721 292939 of the annual bonus will be deferred into shares for one year.
Value of shares vesting in 2017 calculated on basis of the 10.35 average share price for the three month period to 31 March 2017 .
Unaudited Table 55
Element of pay
Percentage of maximum achieved % 000 Base salary 500 na 500 Pension 125 na 125 Benefits 19 na 19 Annual bonus Company Performance element 650 54.7 356 Individual element 100 75.0 75 Longterm incentives 1437 50.0 719 Total 2831 1794 180680 of the annual bonus will be deferred into shares for one year.
Value of shares vesting in 2017 calculated on basis of the 10.35 average share price for the three month period to 31 March 2017 .
Fixed pay Ontarget Maximum Actual Base salary 28.4% Benefits 0.8% Longterm incentives 39.2% Pension 7.1% Annual bonus 24.5% Robert Noel 000 Chart 52 Chief Executive Fixed pay Ontarget Maximum Actual Base salary 27.9% Benefits 1.1% Longterm incentives 40% Pension 6.9% Annual bonus 24.1% Martin Greenslade 000 Chart 54 Chief Financial Officer Percentages are of the actual.
1.4 Individual outcomes by Executive Director versus Target and Maximum 84 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Directors interests Audited 2.1 Total shareholding Details of the Directors interests including those of their immediate families and connected persons in the issued share capital of the Company at the beginning and end of the year are set out in the table below.
It also shows the value of each Directors interest compared to the required holding value under the Companys share ownership guidelines.
Directors shares AuditedTable 56
SalaryFee
Required holding value
1 April 2016
31 March 2017
Value of holding Robert Noel 766156 1915390 260508 293849 61939 3111861 Martin Greenslade 498724 997448 386223 386233 40927 4090207 Dame Alison Carnwath 375000 375000 147005 151338 1602669 Kevin OByrne 92807 92807 11552 11552 122336 Chris Bartram 70000 70000 14478 14478 153322 Simon Palley 85000 85000 17061 17061 180676 Stacey Rauch 70000 70000 8000 8000 84720 Edward Bonham Carter 76756 76756 10000 10000 105900 Cressida Hogg 70000 70000 10000 10000 105900 Nicholas Cadbury 70000 70000  1900 20121 Using the closing share price of 10.59 on 31 March 2017 .
Requirement for the Chief Executive to own shares with a value of 2.5x base salary within five years of appointment.
Requirement for other Executive Directors to own shares with a value of 2.0x base salary within five years of appointment.
Requirement for Nonexecutive Directors to own shares with a value of 1.0x their annual fee within three years of appointment.
Outstanding share awards held by Executive Directors Audited The table below shows the LTIP share awards granted and the LTIP and MSP awards vested during the year to the Executive Directors together with the outstanding and unvested LTIP and MSP share awards at the year end.
From 2015 MSP awards for Executive Directors have been discontinued.
Outstanding LTIP and MSP share awards and those which vested during the year AuditedTable 57
31 March
Market price at award date
Shares vested
Vesting date Robert Noel LTIP shares 2016 0807tel964 14798 962 08072016 2017 01072014 1039 102638 01072017 2018 10082015 1335 170240 10082018 2019 27062016 1005 229453 Matching shares 2016 0807tel964 14798 962 08072016 2017 01072014 1039 102638 Martin Greenslade LTIP shares 2016 08072013 921 76416 10010 962 08072016 2017 01072014 1039 69431 01072017 2018 10082015 1335 110816 10082018 2019 27062016 1005 149361 Matching shares 2016 08072013 921 76416 10010 962 08072016 2017 01072014 1039 69431 01072017 Governance 85 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Directors options over ordinary shares Audited The options over shares set out below for Martin Greenslade relate to the Companys Savings Related Share Option Scheme.
The Scheme is open to all qualifying employees including Executive Directors and under HMRC rules does not include performance conditions.
AuditedTable 58 Exercisedlapsed during year Number of options at 1 April
Number of options granted in year to 31 March 2017 Exercise price per share p
Market price at exercise Number of options at 31 March 2017
Martin Greenslade 1060 848.5     1060 082017  022018 878 1024.0     878 082018  022019 1938 1938 Application of Policy for 201617 Executive Directors base salaries Having conducted a detailed benchmarking exercise of both the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer roles in 2015 the Committee concluded that no formal exercise was necessary this year in line with emerging best practice.
It has therefore awarded both Executive Directors a base salary increase of 2%.
This is in line with the average increase received by employees across the Group excluding promotions and exceptional increases.
Accordingly the following salary increases will take effect from 1 June 2017 Executive Directors Table 59
From 1 June 2017 000 % increase Average % increase over five years including 201718 Robert Noel 769 784 2.0 3.1 Martin Greenslade 500 510 2.0 2.2 Nonexecutive Directors fees The fees for Nonexecutive Directors were reviewed In December 2015 following a market benchmarking exercise and took effect from 1 April 2016.
They have remained unchanged for 201617.
When Nicholas Cadbury was appointed to the Board on 1 January 2017 he received the published base fee of 70000 per annum.
Nonexecutive Directors fees Table 60 Chairman 375.0 Nonexecutive Director 70.0 Audit Committee Chairman 20.0 Remuneration Committee Chairman 15.0 Senior Independent Director 10.0 86 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Performance targets for the coming year Table 61 Metric Link to strategy and value for shareholders Performance measure Performance range LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP Total Shareholder Return 50.0% of overall award.
Rewards our outperformance of the returns generated by our listed company peers Encourages efficient use of capital through good sector allocation and appropriate gearing Based on a market capitalisation of 8.4bn a 3% per annum outperformance over three years would generate approximately 0.8bn of value for shareholders over and above that which would have been received had we performed in line with our comparator group of property companies within the FTSE 350 Real Estate Index.
Measured over a period of three financial years The Groups total shareholder return TSR relative to an index based on a comparator group comprising all of the property companies within the FTSE 350 Real Estate Index weighted by market capitalisation excludes Landsec 10% of the overall award vests for matching the index and 50% of the overall award for outperforming it by 3% per annum.
Vesting is on a straightline basis between the two.
Threshold Matching the performance of the index Target Outperformance of the index by 1.3% per annum Maximum 3% or more per annum outperformance of the index for maximum vesting.
Ungeared Total Property Return 50.0% of overall award.
Rewards sustained outperformance by our portfolio compared with the industrys commercial property benchmark Incentivises increasing capital values and rental income Capital value growth is reflected in an increased net asset value which is the measure with the strongest correlation to share price On the basis of a portfolio with a value of 14.4bn 1% per annum outperformance over three years generates approximately 0.4bn of value over and above that which would have been received had the portfolio performed in line with the benchmark.
Measured over a period of three financial years The Groups ungeared Total Property Return TPR relative to an IPD benchmark comprising all March valued properties.
Total benchmark value c.
170bn excluding Landsec 10% of the overall award vests for matching the benchmark and 50% of the overall award vesting where we outperform the benchmark by 1% per annum.
Vesting is on a straightline basis between the two.
Threshold Matching the performance of the benchmark Target Outperformance of the benchmark by 0.4% per annum Maximum Outperformance of the benchmark by 1% or more per annum.
Annual bonus Ungeared Total Property Return 26.0% of award or 39.0% of salary.
Rewards annual outperformance by our portfolio compared with the industrys commercial property benchmark Incentivises increasing capital values and rental income Capital value growth is reflected in an increased net asset value which is the measure with the strongest correlation to share price On the basis of a portfolio with a value of 14.4bn 2% outperformance would generate approximately 0.3bn of return over and above the returns of commercial property within our sectors.
The Groups ungeared Total Property Return TPR relative to an IPD benchmark comprising all March valued properties.
Total benchmark value c.
170bn excluding Landsec 6% of the overall award for matching the benchmark and 26% of the overall award for outperforming the benchmark by 2%.
Payment is on a straightline basis between the two.
Threshold Matching the performance of the benchmark Target Outperformance of the benchmark by 0.7% for the year Maximum Outperformance of the benchmark by 2% for the year for the maximum award.
Absolute growth in revenue profit 26.0% of award or 39.0% of salary.
Encourages above inflation growth in income profits yearonyear on the basis of a new three year plan set in 2015 Adjustment for significant net investmentdisinvestment gives a likeforlike view of performance Encourages sustainable dividend growth and cover over the medium term.
Once the Group has met a threshold level on revenue profit a portion 5% of the excess is contributed to the bonus pool for the Group.
This will be capped at 26% of the overall award.
Will be confirmed in 2018 report.
Governance
87 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Performance targets for the coming year continued Metric Link to strategy and value for shareholders Performance measure Performance range Annual bonus  specific business targets Completion and letting of Westgate Oxford 6.9% of award or 10.4% of salary.
A high profile new opening and key driver of income and revenue profit in the future Proves the value of the development and drives capital growth.
Specific threshold and stretch targets have been set for the Oxford development leasing and project completion on time and on budget.
Will be confirmed in 2018 report.
Completion of leasing of the London Development Programme 6.9% of award or 10.4% of salary.
Key driver of income revenue profit and capital growth.
Specific leasing targets have been set for individual assets in London with the broad objective of fully letting the new developments.
Will be confirmed in 2018 report.
Replacement and leasing of the Piccadilly Lights screens 3.5% of award or 5.2% of salary.
Ensures that momentum is maintained behind the delivery of a key iconic project.
Specific threshold target and outperformance objectives have been set aiming at replacing and fully letting all screens.
Will be confirmed in 2018 report.
Customercentricity
5.3% of award or 7.8% of salary.
Ensures that the needs of customers both current and future are at the heart of our culture ways of working and decisionmaking.
Completion of major internal programme to fully embed customercentric behaviours Internal activation of the new brand Measurement of the impact of the programme by an independent third party Consumer satisfaction scores.
Significant improvement in both internal and consumer satisfaction scores is required for maximum payout.
Diversity  achieving real progress on our stated 2020 targets 3.5% of award or 5.2% of salary.
Allows us to attract and retain the diverse talent in terms of gender ethnicity and background necessary to fully anticipate the changing needs of our customers.
Measurable progress by the end of March 2018 towards our stated 2020 targets around gender balance ethnicity and data transparency.
For maximum two out of four targets achieved by 2018 with measurable progress towards the other two.
Innovation  extending our business capability and embedding the innovation value 2.7% of award or 3.9% of salary.
Ensures that we remain sufficiently futurefacing in our strategic focus ensuring the longterm sustainability of the business.
Evidence will be sought to demonstrate clear outputs from the innovation capability.
Tangible examples of innovation will be required and will be stated in 2018 report.
Community Employment Programme 3.5% of award or 5.2% of salary.
A key way in which Landsec can deliver on its commitment to the communities in which it operates and create a sustainable future by building a skilled workforce.
A target has been set around securing permanent employment for an increased number of candidates by extending the programme beyond its current focus on Construction.
Threshold A further 156 candidates into employment Target A further 174 candidates into employment Maximum A further 194 candidates into employment.
Environment  driving energy management initiatives across the portfolio 2.7% of award or 3.9% of salary.
Key to our longterm sustainability and reputation as a responsible business.
Clear targets have been set around the implementation of energy reduction initiatives in a high proportion of our highest consuming sites.
Threshold Commence implementation in 40% of identified sites Target Commence implementation in 60% of identified sites Maximum Commence implementation in 80% of identified sites and identify further opportunities.
Individual targets for Executive Directors 13.0% of award or 20.0% of salary.
Ensures that each Executive Director focuses on his individual contribution in the broadest sense aligned with but not limited to specific business targets Encourages a focus on personal development.
A mix of shortterm individual goals set at the beginning of the year.
Will be confirmed in 2018 report.
88 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Comparison of Chief Executive pay to Total Shareholder Return The following graph illustrates the performance of the Company measured by Total Shareholder Return share price growth plus dividends paid against a broad equity market index over a period of eight years.
As the Company is a constituent of the FTSE 350 Real Estate Index this is considered to be the most appropriate benchmark for the purposes of the graph.
An additional line to illustrate the Companys performance compared with the FTSE 100 Index over the previous eight years is also included.
Adjacent to this chart is a table showing how the single figure of total remuneration for the Chief Executive has moved over the same period.
It should be noted that Robert Noel became Chief Executive in March 2012.
Total Shareholder Return Unaudited Chart 62 This graph shows the value to March 2017 of 100 invested in Land Securities Group PLC on 31 March 2009 compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE 100 and FTSE 350 Real Estate Indices on the same date.
Source Datastream Thomson Reuters .
Chief Executive remuneration over eight years Table 63 Year Chief Executive Single figure of total remuneration Annual bonus award against maximum opportunity %
2017 Robert Noel 2721 58.8 50.0 2016 Robert Noel 2014 67 .5 13.1 2015 Robert Noel 4776 94.5 84.7 2014 Robert Noel 2274 71.0 62.5 2013 Robert Noel 2678 86.0 76.1 2012 Francis Salway 2769 24.0 85.9 2011 Francis Salway 1798 39.0 27.5 2010 Francis Salway 1694 34.0 50.0 Under the policy covering the years 20102012 shown in the table bonus arrangements for Executive Directors comprised three elements an annual bonus with a maximum potential of 100% of basic salary a discretionary bonus with a maximum potential of 50% of basic salary and an additional bonus with a maximum potential of 200% of salary.
The first two elements were subject to an overall aggregate cap of 130% of basic salary with the overall amount of the three elements capped at 300% of basic salary.
2012 73.4% of the maximum opportunity was awarded under annual bonus with no awards made under the discretionary bonus or additional bonus.
2011 94.5% of the maximum opportunity was awarded under the annual bonus discretionary bonus of 60% of the maximum opportunity with no awards made under the additional bonus.
2010 77% of the maximum opportunity was awarded under the annual bonus discretionary bonus of 50% of the maximum opportunity with no awards made under the additional bonus.
5tel25telMar09Mar10 Mar11 Mar12 Mar13 Mar14 Mar15 Mar16 Mar17 Land Securities Group PLC FTSE 100 FTSE 350 Real Estate Value  rebased 304.0 303.0 Governance 89 Landsec Annual Report 2017 The context of pay in Landsec Pay across the Group a.
Senior Management During the year under review bonuses including discretionary bonuses for our 16 most senior employees excluding the Executive Directors ranged from 37.6% to 74.5% of salary 2016 40.1% to 114.2%.
The average bonus was 55.6% of salary 2016 67.0%.
The LTIP and MSP awards made to Senior Management vested on the same basis as the awards made to Executive Directors. b.
All other employees The average pay increase for all employees including the Executive Directors was 2.0%.
Including salary adjustments and promotions for employees below the Board this rose to 2.4%.
The ratio of the salary of the Chief Executive to the average salary across the Group excluding Directors was 131 76866858683.
Table 64 % change
Bonus % Chief Executive 2.0 No change 10.9 Average employee 2.4 No change 5.7 The relative importance of spend on pay The chart below shows the total spend on pay for all Landsec employees compared with our returns to shareholders in the form of dividends Table 65
March 2017 March 2016 m % change Spend on pay Dividend paid Including base salaries for all employees bonus and sharebased payments.
See note 11 to the financial statements.
Dilution
Awards granted under the Companys longterm incentive arrangements which cover those made under the LTIP  MSP  Deferred Share Bonus Plan and the Executive Share Option Plan are satisfied through the funding of an Employee Benefit Trust administered by an external trustee which acquires existing Land Securities Group PLC shares in the market.
The Employee Benefit Trust held 792556 shares at 31 March 2017.
The exercise of share options under the Savings Related Share Option Scheme which is open to all employees who have completed more than one months service with the Group can be satisfied by the allotment of newly issued shares.
At 31 March 2017 the total number of shares which could be allotted under this Scheme was 354783 shares which represents significantly less than 1% of the issued share capital of the Company.
Remuneration Committee meetings The Committee met four times over the course of the year and all of the members attended all meetings.
Simon Palley chaired the Committee and the other members during the year were Dame Alison Carnwath Edward Bonham Carter and Cressida Hogg.
The Committee meetings were also attended by the Chief Executive the Group Human Resources Director and the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary who acted as the Committees Secretary.
Over the course of the year the Committee received advice on remuneration and ancillary legal matters from Aon Hewitt.
It has also made use of various published surveys to help determine appropriate remuneration levels and relied on information and advice provided by the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary and the Group Human Resources Director.
Aon Hewitt has voluntarily signed up to the Remuneration Consultants Group Code of Conduct.
The Committee is satisfied that the advice it receives is independent and objective.
Aside from some support in benchmarking roles below the Board for pay review purposes Aon Hewitt has no other connection with the Group.
For the financial year under review it received fees of 76290 in connection with its work for the Committee.
Results of the voting on the Directors Remuneration Report at the AGM in 2016 The votes cast on the resolutions seeking approval in respect of the Directors Remuneration Report at the Companys 2016 AGM were as follows Table 66
For % of votes
Number of votes withheld To approve the Annual Report on Remuneration for the year ended 31 March 2017 99.37 0.63 133717 A vote withheld is not a vote at law.
The Directors Remuneration Report was approved by the Board on 17 May 2017 and signed on its behalf by Simon Palley Chairman of Remuneration Committee 90 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Remuneration
Policy
Approach to Policy As stated in last years report some revisions were made to the Companys longterm incentive arrangements in 2015.
The Directors Remuneration Policy Policy for Executive and Nonexecutive Directors was then put to a binding shareholder vote at the Annual General Meeting AGM on 23 July 2015 and received a 98.8% vote in favour.
It therefore took formal effect from that date replacing the previous policy approved by shareholders at the 2014 Application of the Policy in 201718 Policy element Table 67 Application in 201718 Base salary Details on p175 The increase in current salaries for the Executive Directors will be 2% in line with the increase to overall employee pay across the Group in 2017.
Therefore the new annual gross salaries will be 784041 for Robert Noel and 510367 for Martin Greenslade.
These will be effective from 1 June 2017.
Benefits
Details on p175 No changes to the current benefit arrangements which mainly covers annual holiday entitlement car allowance life assurance private medical cover and income protection insurance are proposed during the year.
Pension
Details on p175 The 25% of base salary gross payment to each Executive Director by way of annual pension contribution will continue.
Annual bonus Details on p176 The maximum bonus potential for the Executive Directors will remain at 150% of salary.
No changes are proposed to the weighting of the elements of the plan which remain at 26% based on the Companys Total Property Return performance versus that of the market 26% based on the Companys Revenue Profit performance 35% based on delivery of specific business objectives for the year 13% based on the delivery of individual targets.
LongTerm Incentive Plan awards and Matching Share Plan awards for 2017 vesting Details on p177 The value of this years LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP award to the Executive Directors will not exceed the current individual limit of 300% of salary.
Outstanding LTIP and Matching Share Plan awards granted in 2014 will vest later in 2017 subject to the performance conditions set at the time and the plan rules under which they were granted.
In September 2016 in common with many other companies and primarily to give the participants greater flexibility over the timing of exercise the Committee approved the granting of LTIP awards from 2017 onwards as nilcost share options with a seven year exercise period.
It also agreed that outstanding awards should also vest as nilcost options and that dividends could be accrued on vested options where they are subject to a two year holding period but not thereafter.
Savings Related Share Option Scheme Details on p177 The Executive Directors and all other eligible employees will be entitled to participate in the Companys Savings Related Share Option Scheme which is operated in line with current UK HMRC guidelines.
Share Ownership Guidelines Details on p177 The existing share ownership levels i.
250% of salary for the Chief Executive and 200% of salary for the Chief Financial Officer will continue to apply.
Executive Director Recruitment and Termination Provisions Details on p179 External recruitment and termination activity during the year is currently not envisaged however should this occur the Policy will apply as stated.
Service Agreements and Letters of Appointment Details on p179 If new Service Agreements or variations to existing ones are required over the course of the year the Policy will apply as stated.
Any new Nonexecutive Director joining the Board will be contracted under a Letter of Appointment as per the Policy.
Nonexecutive Directors fees Details on p178 As the fees for Nonexecutive Directors were reviewed in late 2015 no further revisions will take place over the course of the year.
The annual fee for Dame Alison Carnwath as Chairman remains at 375000 and the annual base fee for all other Nonexecutive Directors remains at 70000.
These have been in effect since 1 April 2016.
Additional fees also apply for Committee chairmen and these remain unchanged.
AGM and intended to remain in place for three years.
The Policy set out in the Additional Information section of this Report therefore remains in force until 2018 when any proposed revisions will be discussed with shareholders and their views sought well in advance of the
A summary statement on the planned application of the Policy in 2017 is shown in table 67 below.
The Remuneration Committees primary objective when setting the Policy is to provide competitive pay arrangements which promote the longterm success of the Company.
To achieve this the Committee takes account of the responsibilities experience performance and contribution of the individual as well as levels of remuneration for individuals in comparable roles elsewhere.
The Committee also takes into account the views expressed by shareholders and institutional investors best practice expectations and monitors developments in remuneration trends.
The Policy places significant emphasis on the need to achieve stretching and rigorously applied performance targets with a significant proportion of remuneration weighted towards performance linked variable pay.
The Committee operates within the Policy at all times.
It also operates the various incentive plans and schemes according to their respective rules and consistent with normal market practice the UK Corporate Governance Code and as applicable the Listing Rules.
Within the Policy the Committee will retain the discretion to look at performance in the round  including withholding or deferring payments in certain circumstances where the outcomes for Directors are clearly misaligned with the outcomes for shareholders.
Any specific circumstances which necessitate the use of discretion will always be explained clearly in the following years Annual
Report on Remuneration.
No such discretion was exercised by the Committee during the year under review.
The table on pages 175179 provides more detail on the discretion reserved to the Committee for each element of the remuneration package.
Governance
91 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Fixed and variable pay reward scenarios Total opportunity at maximum and target levels The charts that follow illustrate the remuneration opportunity provided to each Executive Director at different levels of performance for the coming year.
Fixed and variable pay reward scenarios 000 Chart 68 Fixed pay Annual bonus Fixed pay Ontarget Maximum Fixed pay Ontarget Maximum Longterm incentives
Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer
Fixed pay 22% Annual bonus 26% Longterm incentives 52% Percentages are of the maximum .
Maximum value does not include share price movement between the date of grant and any vesting of longterm incentives.
In developing the above scenarios the following assumptions have been made Fixed and variable pay reward scenarios Table 69 Fixed pay  Consists of the latest base salary benefits and pension allowances Pension allowance calculated at 25% of new base salary
Benefits
Pension
Total fixed Robert Noel Chief Executive 784 21 196 1001 Martin Greenslade Chief Financial Officer Ontarget award Based on what a Director would receive if performance was in line with expectations Annual bonus pays out at 50% of the maximum LTIP is assumed to vest at 50% of the total award.
Maximum award Annual bonus pays out in full LTIP vests in full.
Payment schedule The following table illustrates in which financial years the various payments in the charts are actually madereleased to Executive Directors.
For illustration purposes only the table assumes that the annual bonus payment is equivalent to at least 100% of salary.
Payment schedule Table 70 Financial year Base year Base year 1 Base year 2 Base year 3 Base year 5 Element of remuneration received.
Base salary
Pension.
The annual bonus targets are measured and the first portion of the annual bonus i.
The remainder is deferred into nilcost options.
The first deferred portion of the annual bonus i.
100% of salary vests.
The final portion of the annual bonus i.
LTIP awards vest but remain subject to a two year holding period.
Holding period on LTIP awards ends.
Annual bonus cash and deferred shares and vested and unvested LTIP awards are subject to withholding and recovery provisions.
92 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Report
Results and dividends The results for the year are set out in the financial statements on pages 103154.
The Company has paid three quarterly interim dividends to shareholders for the year under review each of 8.95p per ordinary share.
These comprised two payments totalling 17.90p as a Property Income Distribution PID and one payment 8.95p as a normal dividend i. nonPID.
The Board has recommended a final dividend for the year of 11.7p per ordinary share payable wholly as a PID net of withholding tax where appropriate making a total dividend for the year of 38.55p per share representing an increase of 10.1% compared with the prior year.
Subject to shareholders approval the final dividend will be paid on 27 July 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 23 June 2017.
The Board has also declared a first quarterly dividend in respect of the 201718 financial year of 9.85p per ordinary share payable wholly as a PID net of withholding tax where appropriate to be paid on 6 October 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 8 September 2017.
A Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP election is currently available in respect of all dividends paid by the Company.
Events since the balance sheet date Since 31 March 2017 the Group has redeemed the 273m Queen Annes Gate bond in its entirety at a premium of 63m.
The redemption was financed through existing Group facilities.
On 13 April 2017 the Groups joint arrangement the Metro Shopping Fund Limited Partnership Metro completed the sale of ShopStop Clapham Junction LLP to DV4 a fund owned by Delancey Real Estate Asset Management Limited Delancey.
On the same date Delancey sold its stake in Metro to Invesco Real Estate European Fund.
The partnership was subsequently renamed The Southside Limited Partnership and the 85m thirdparty debt in the fund was repaid in full.
On 15 May 2017 the Group acquired three retail outlet centres from Britel Fund Trustees Limited as trustee of the BT Pension Scheme.
The three assets Freeport Braintree Clarks Village Street and Junction 32 were acquired for a total consideration of 333m.
Directors
The names and biographical details of the current Directors all of whom held office throughout the year except for Nicholas Cadbury see below and the Board Committees of which they are members are set out on pages 58 and 59.
Kevin OByrne ceased to act as the Companys Senior Independent Director following the Companys Annual General Meeting AGM on 21 July 2016.
Edward Bonham Carter was appointed to that position as his immediate successor.
The Directors present their report and audited accounts for the year ended 31 March 2017.
Additional disclosures Other information that is relevant to this report and which is also incorporated by reference including information required in accordance with the UK Companies Act 2006 and Listing Rule 9.8.4R can be located as follows Table 71 Likely future developments in the business Pages 1617 Employee engagement Page 40 Going Concern and Viability Statement Page 54 Governance Pages 5594 Capitalised interest Page 116 Financial instruments Page 138 Credit market and liquidity risks Pages 139142 Related party transactions Page 153 Greenhouse gas emissions Page 166 Company status Land Securities Group PLC is a public limited liability company incorporated under the laws of England and Wales.
It has a premium listing on the London Stock Exchange main market for listed securities LONLAND and is a constituent member of the FTSE 100 Index.
The Company is a Real Estate Investment Trust REIT .
It is expected that the Company which has no branches will continue to operate as the holding company of the Group.
Disclaimer
The purpose of this Annual Report is to provide information to the members of the Company and it has been prepared for and only for the members of the Company as a body and no other persons.
The Company its Directors and employees agents and advisers do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person to whom this document is shown or into whose hands it may come and any such responsibility or liability is expressly disclaimed.
A cautionary statement in respect of forwardlooking statements contained in this Annual Report appears on the inside back cover of this document.
Nicholas Cadbury was appointed an independent Nonexecutive Director of the Board on 1 January 2017 and joined the Audit Committee with effect from that same date.
He will become Chairman of the Audit Committee in succession to Kevin OByrne who is expected to step down from the Board at some point during 2017.
The Service Agreements of the Executive Directors and the Letters of Appointment of the Nonexecutive Directors are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
Brief details of these are also included in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 7691.
Appointment and removal of Directors The appointment and replacement of Directors is governed by the Companys Articles of Association Articles the UK Corporate Governance Code Code the Companies Act 2006 Act and related legislation.
The
Board may appoint a Director either to fill a casual vacancy or as an addition to the Board so long as the total number of Directors does not exceed the limit prescribed in the Articles.
An appointed Director must retire and seek election to office at the next AGM of the
In addition to any power of removal conferred by the Act the Company may by ordinary resolution remove any Director before the expiry of their period of office and may subject to the Articles by ordinary resolution appoint another person who is willing to act as a Director in their place.
In line with the Code and the Boards policy all Directors are required to stand for reelection at each AGM.
Directors powers The Board manages the business of the Company under the powers set out in the
These powers include the Directors ability to issue or buy back shares.
Shareholders authority to empower the Directors to make market purchases of up to 10% of its own ordinary shares is sought at the AGM each year see below.
The Articles can only be amended or new Articles adopted by a resolution passed by shareholders in general meeting by at least three quarters of the votes cast.
Directors interests Save as disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report none of the Directors nor any person connected with them has any interest in the share or loan capital of the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
At no time during the year ended 31 March 2017 did any Director hold a material interest directly or indirectly in any contract of significance with the Company or any subsidiary undertaking other than the Executive Directors in relation to their Service Agreements.
Governance
93 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Directors indemnities and insurance The Company has agreed to indemnify each Director against any liability incurred in relation to acts or omissions arising in the ordinary course of their duties.
The indemnity applies only to the extent permitted by law.
A copy of the deed of indemnity is available for inspection at the Companys registered office and will be available at the 2017 AGM.
The Company has in place appropriate Directors and Officers Liability insurance cover in respect of potential legal action against its Directors.
Share capital The Company has a single class of share capital which is divided into ordinary shares of nominal value 10p each all ranking pari passu.
No other securities have been issued by the Company.
At
31 March 2017 there were 801244628 ordinary shares in issue and fully paid.
Further details relating to share capital including movements during the year are set out in note 34 to the financial statements.
At the Companys AGM held on 21 July 2016 shareholders authorised the Company to make market purchases of ordinary shares representing up to 10% of its issued share capital at that time and to allot shares within certain limits approved by shareholders.
These authorities will expire at the 2017 AGM see below and a renewal of that authority will be sought.
Shareholders holding 3% or more of the Companys Issued Share Capital Table 72 Shareholder name Number of ordinary shares Percentage of total voting rights attaching to issued share capital BlackRock Inc.
70396617 8.91 Norges Bank Investment Management 50911003 6.44 State Street Global Advisors Ltd 34475813 4.37 Legal and General Investment Management Ltd 26891758 3.40 The Vanguard Group Inc.
26387704 3.33 The total number of voting rights attaching to the issued share capital of the Company on 31 March 2017 is 790749497 .
ACS HR Solutions Share Plan Services Guernsey Limited is a shareholder who acts as the trustee Trustee of the Companys offshore discretionary Employee Benefit Trust EBT.
It is used to purchase Land Securities Group PLC ordinary shares in the market from time to time for the benefit of employees including for satisfying outstanding awards under the Companys various employee share plans.
The
EBT purchased a total of 500000 shares in the market during the year for an aggregate consideration of 4.92m including all dealing costs and released 851336 shares to satisfy vested share plan awards.
At 31 March 2017 the EBT held 792556 Land Securities Group PLC shares in trust.
A dividend waiver is in place from the Trustee in respect of all dividends payable by the Company on shares which it holds in trust.
Further details regarding the EBT and of shares issued pursuant to the Companys various employee share plans during the year are set out in note 35 to the financial statements.
Save as disclosed above the Company did not purchase any of its own shares during the year under review and no treasury shares were cancelled.
Accordingly the 10495131 ordinary shares held in Treasury at 31 March 2017 remained unchanged from those held at the beginning of the year.
Substantial shareholders As at 31 March 2017 the Company had been notified under the Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR 5 of the following holdings of voting rights in its issued share capital The Company received no further DTR notifications by way of change to the above information or otherwise during the period from 1 April to 17 May 2017 being the period from the year end through to the date on which this report has been signed.
Information provided to the Company under the DTR is publicly available to view via the regulatory information service on the Companys website.
Shareholder voting rights and restrictions on transfer of shares All the issued and outstanding ordinary shares of the Company have equal voting rights with one vote per share.
There are no special control rights attaching to them save that the control rights of ordinary shares held in the EBT can be directed by the Company to satisfy the vesting of outstanding awards under its various employee share plans.
In relation to the EBT the Trustee has agreed not to vote any shares held in the EBT at any general meeting.
If any offer is made to all shareholders to acquire their shares in the Company the Trustee will not be obliged to accept or reject the offer in respect of any shares which are at the time subject to subsisting awards but will have regard to the interests of the award holders and will have power to consult them to obtain their views on the offer.
Subject to the above the Trustee may take such action with respect to the offer as it thinks fit.
The Company is not aware of any agreements or control rights between existing shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
The rights including full details relating to voting of shareholders and any restrictions on transfer relating to the Companys ordinary shares are set out in the Articles and in the explanatory notes that accompany the Notice of the 2017
These documents are available on the Companys website at site 94 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Change of control There are a number of agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover.
None of these are considered significant.
The
Companys share plans contain provisions that take effect in such an event but do not entitle participants to a greater interest in the shares of the Company than created by the initial grant or award under the relevant plan.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment or otherwise that occurs specifically because of a takeover.
Human rights and equal opportunities The Company operates a Human Rights Policy which aims to recognise and safeguard the human rights of all citizens in the business areas in which we operate.
We support the principles set out within both the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights UDHR and the International Labour Organizations Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at
Our Policy is built on these foundations including without limitation the principles of equal opportunities collective bargaining freedom of association and protection from forced or child labour.
The Policy has been extended to take account of the new Modern Slavery Act that came into force in October 2015 and requires the Company to report annually on its workforce and supply chain specifically to confirm that workers are not enslaved or trafficked.
The Companys first slavery and human trafficking statement relating to the financial year ended 31 March 2016 was approved by the Board on 29 September 2016 and posted on the Companys website on 30 September 2016.
Landsec is an equal opportunities employer and our range of employment policies and guidelines reflects legal and employment requirements in the UK and safeguards the interests of employees potential employees and other workers.
We do not condone unfair treatment of any kind and offer equal opportunities in all aspects of employment and advancement regardless of race nationality gender age marital status sexual orientation disability religious or political beliefs.
The
Company recognises that it has clear obligations towards all its employees and the community at large to ensure that people with disabilities are afforded equal opportunities to enter employment and progress.
The Company has therefore established procedures designed to provide fair consideration and selection of disabled applicants and to satisfy their training and career development needs.
If an employee becomes disabled wherever possible Landsec takes steps to accommodate the disability by making adjustments to their existing employment arrangements or by redeployment and providing appropriate retraining to enable continued employment in the Group.
Further information regarding the Companys practical safeguarding of human rights and promotion of equal opportunities is included as part of the Social review in the Strategic Report on page 38.
Political donations No political donations were made in the year 201516 nil.
Auditor and disclosure of information to the auditor So far as the Directors are aware there is no relevant audit information that has not been brought to the attention of the Companys auditor.
Each Director has taken all reasonable steps to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that such information was provided to the auditor.
A resolution to confirm the reappointment of Ernst and Young LLP as auditor of the Company will be proposed at the 2017 AGM.
The confirmation has been recommended to the Board by the Audit Committee and EY has indicated its willingness to remain in office.
2017 Annual General Meeting This years AGM will be held at the earlier time of 10.00 am on Thursday 13 July 2017 at 80 Victoria Street London SW1E 5JL.
Chairman Notice of Meeting and explanatory notes in respect of the resolutions proposed accompanies this Annual Report.
The Directors Report was approved by the Board on 17 May 2017.
By Order of the Board Tim Ashby Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Land Securities Group PLC Company number  Governance 95 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Statement of Directors Responsibilities
97 Independent Auditors Report
103 Income statement Statement of comprehensive income 104 Balance sheets Statement of changes in equity 106 Statement of cash flows Notes to the financial statements Financial statements 96 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Statement of Directors Responsibilities The Annual Report 2017 contains the following statements regarding responsibility for the financial statements and business reviews included therein.
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group and parent company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit and loss of the Group and the Company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information state that the Group and Company has complied with IFRS as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements of IFRS is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups and Companys financial position and performance and prepare the Groups and Companys financial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and to enable them to ensure that the Annual Report complies with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Directors responsibility statement under the Disclosure and Transparency Rules Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed below confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Company financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position performance and cash flows of the Company and the Strategic Report contained in the Annual Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties faced by the Group and Company.
Directors statement under the UK Corporate Governance Code Each of the Directors confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups and Companys position performance business model and strategy.
A copy of the financial statements of the Group is placed on the Companys website.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of statutory and audited information on the Companys website at site Information published on the internet is accessible in many countries with different legal requirements.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors of Land Securities Group PLC as at the date of this Annual Report are as set out below Dame Alison Carnwath Chairman Robert Noel Chief Executive Martin Greenslade Chief Financial Officer Edward Bonham Carter Senior Independent Director Kevin OByrne Chris Bartram Simon Palley Stacey Rauch Cressida Hogg CBE Nicholas Cadbury Nonexecutive Directors The Statement of Directors Responsibilities was approved by the Board of Directors on 17 May 2017 and is signed on its behalf by Robert Noel Martin Greenslade
Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Financial Statements
97 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Independent Auditors Report
To the members of Land Securities Group PLC Our opinion on the financial statements In our opinion Land Securities Group PLCs Group financial statements and Parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent companys affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended The Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union The Parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
What we have audited Land Securities Group PLCs financial statements comprise Group Parent company Consolidated balance sheet as at 31 March 2017 Balance sheet as at 31 March 2017 Consolidated income statement for the year then ended Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year then ended Statement of changes in equity for the year then ended Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year then ended Statement of cash flows for the year then ended Related notes 1 to 39 to the financial statements Related notes 1 to 39 to the financial statements Overview of our audit approach Risks of material misstatement  The valuation of investment property including properties within the development programme and investment properties held in joint ventures Revenue recognition including the timing of revenue recognition the treatment of rents incentives and recognition of trading property proceeds.
Audit scope  The Group solely operates in the United Kingdom and operates through two segments London and Retail both of which were subject to the same audit scope.
This included the Group audit team performing direct audit procedures on joint venture balances included within the Group financial statements.
Materiality  Overall Group materiality of 61m which represents 0.5% of the carrying value of investment properties line item in the Group balance sheet at 31 March 2017 Specific materiality of 21m which represents 5% of adjusted profit before tax is applied to account balances not related to investment properties either wholly owned or held within joint ventures .
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
98 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Our assessment of risk of material misstatement We identified the risks of material misstatement described below as those that had the greatest effect on our overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and the direction of the efforts of the audit team.
In addressing these risks we have performed the procedures below which were designed in the context of the financial statements as a whole and consequently we do not express any opinion on these individual areas.
Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee The valuation of the investment property portfolio including properties within the development programme and investment properties held in joint ventures 2017 12144m in investment properties and 1763m the Groups share in investment properties held in joint ventures 2016 12358m in investment properties and 1630m in investment properties held in joint ventures Refer to the Accountability section of the Annual Report pages 7074 Accounting policies page 119120 Note 14 of the Financial Statements pages 121123 and Note 16 of the Financial Statements pages 124129 The valuation of investment property including properties within the development programme and investment properties held in joint ventures requires significant judgement and estimates by management and the external valuer.
Any input inaccuracies or unreasonable bases used in these judgements such as in respect of estimated rental value and yield profile applied could result in a material misstatement of the income statement and balance sheet.
There is also a risk that management may influence the significant judgements and estimates in respect of property valuations in order to achieve property valuation and other performance targets to meet market expectations or bonus targets.
Our audit procedures around the valuation of investment property included We evaluated the Groups controls over data used in the valuation of the investment property portfolio and managements review of the valuations.
We evaluated the competence of the external valuer which included consideration of their qualifications and expertise.
We met with the Groups external valuer to discuss their valuation approach and the judgements they made in assessing the property valuation such as estimated rental value yield profile and other assumptions that impact the value.
For a sample of properties we performed testing over source documentation provided by the Group to the external valuer.
This included agreeing a sample of this documentation back to underlying lease data and vouching costs incurred to date in respect of development properties.
We also assessed the reasonableness of the costs to complete information in respect of properties in the course of development by comparing the total forecast costs to contractual arrangements and approved budgets.
We included Chartered Surveyors on our audit team who reviewed and challenged the valuation approach and assumptions for a sample of properties which comprised 69% of the market value of investment properties including investment properties held in joint ventures.
Our Chartered Surveyors compared the equivalent yields applied to each property to an expected range of yields taking into account market data and asset specific considerations.
They also considered whether the other assumptions applied by the external valuer such as the estimated rental values voids tenant incentives and development costs to complete were supported by available data such as recent lettings and occupancy levels.
Together with our Chartered Surveyors we met with the external valuer to discuss the findings from our audit work described above and to seek further explanations as required.
We also discussed the impact of current market conditions including Brexit on the property valuations.
We conducted analytical procedures by comparing assumptions and the value of each property in the portfolio on a yearonyear basis by reference to our understanding of the UK real estate market external market data and asset specific considerations to evaluate the appropriateness of the valuations adopted by the Group.
We investigated further the valuations of some properties which included further discussions with management and where appropriate obtaining evidence to support the movement in values and involvement of our Chartered Surveyors.
We attended meetings between management and the external valuer to assess for evidence of undue management influence and we obtained a confirmation from the external valuer that they had not been subject to undue influence from management.
We utilised our analytical procedures and work of the Chartered Surveyors described above in order to assess for evidence of undue management influence.
We performed site visits accompanied by our Chartered Surveyors for a sample of properties in the development programme which enabled us to assess the stage of completion of and gain specific insights into these developments.
We met with development directors and project managers for major properties in the development programme and assessed project costs progress of development and leasing status and considered the reasonableness of the forecast costs to complete included in the valuations as well as identified contingencies exposures and remaining risks.
We corroborated the information provided by the development directors and the project managers through valuation review site visits and cost analysis.
We also reviewed development feasibilities and monthly development reporting against budget.
Scope of our procedures We performed full scope audit procedures over valuation of the whole of investment property including properties within the development programme and investment properties held in joint ventures.
We have audited the inputs assumptions and methodology used by the external valuer.
We conclude that the methodology applied is reasonable and that the external valuations are an appropriate assessment of the market value of investment properties at 31 March 2017.
Our Chartered Surveyors concluded that the sample of valuations they reviewed were within a reasonable range.
We conclude that management provided an appropriate level of review and challenge over the valuations but did not identify evidence of undue management influence.
Independent Auditors Report
99 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Revenue recognition including the timing of revenue recognition the treatment of rents incentives and recognition of trading property proceeds 2017 587m rental income and 62m trading property sales proceeds 2016 603m rental income and 195m trading property sales proceeds Refer to the Accountability section of the Annual Report pages 7074 Accounting policies page 113 and Note 6 of the Financial Statements page 113 Market expectations and revenue profit based targets may place pressure on management to distort revenue recognition.
This may result in overstatement or deferral of revenues to assist in meeting current or future targets or expectations.
Our audit procedures over revenue recognition included We carried out testing relating to controls over revenue recognition and the treatment of rents which have been designed by the Group to prevent and detect fraud and errors in revenue recognition.
This included testing the controls governing approvals and changes to lease terms and the upload of this information to the Groups property information management system.
We also performed controls testing on the billings process.
We selected a sample of new or amended lease agreements in the year and agreed the data input into PIMS the property management information system including lease incentive clauses.
We performed detailed testing for a sample of revenue transactions by agreeing them back to lease agreements.
This included focusing upon incentives included within lease agreements and we critically assessed whether the appropriate accounting treatment had been followed.
Detailed analytical procedures were performed on the recognition of revenue including rents incentives and other property related revenue to assess whether revenue had been recognised in the appropriate accounting period.
We agreed a sample of lease agreements to the schedules used to calculate straightlining of revenue in accordance with SIC 15 Operating Leases  Incentives and corroborated the arithmetical accuracy of these schedules and the resulting amounts in revenue for straightlining of tenant lease incentives.
We challenged the assessment of recoverability of tenant lease incentives receivable balance by evaluating the financial viability of the major tenants with related lease incentive debtors.
We assessed whether the revenue recognition policies adopted complied with IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
We performed audit procedures specifically designed to address the risk of management override of controls including journal entry testing which included particular focus on journal entries which impact revenue.
We tested a sample of trading property proceeds recognised during the year through agreement to contracts and cash to bank in order to verify that revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer.
Scope of our procedures The whole Group was subject to full scope audit procedures over revenue.
We audited the timing of revenue recognition treatment of rents and incentives and recognition of trading property proceeds and assessed the risk of management override.
Based upon the audit procedures performed we concluded that revenue has been recognised on an appropriate basis in the year.
Compared to the prior year there have been no changes to our assessment of the risks of material misstatement.
The scope of our audit Tailoring the scope The Group solely operates in the United Kingdom and operates through two segments London and Retail both of which were subject to the same audit scope.
The Group audit team performed all the work necessary to issue the Group and Parent company audit opinion including undertaking all of the audit work on the risks of material misstatement identified above.
Our application of materiality We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
Materiality
The magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
100 Landsec Annual Report 2017 The table below sets out the materiality performance materiality and threshold for reporting audit differences applied on our audit Basis Materiality Performance materiality Audit differences Overall 0.5% of carrying value of investment properties 2016 62m 2016 46m 3m 2016 3m Account balances not related to investment properties either wholly owned or held within joint ventures Profit before tax excluding the impact of the net deficit on revaluation of investment properties either wholly owned or held within joint ventures and the impact of the redemption of medium term notes Adjusted PBT 2016 21m 2016 16m 1m 2016 1m When establishing our overall audit strategy we determined a magnitude of uncorrected misstatements that we judged would be material for the financial statements as a whole.
We determined that the carrying value of investment property would be the most appropriate basis for determining overall materiality given that the Groups investment property balance accounts for around 82% of the Groups total assets 2016 82% and the fact that key users of the Groups financial statements are primarily focused on the valuation of the investment property portfolio.
This provided a basis for determining the nature timing and extent of risk assessment procedures identifying and assessing the risk of material misstatement and determining the nature timing and extent of further audit procedures.
We have determined that for other account balances not related to investment properties either wholly owned or held within joint ventures a misstatement of less than materiality for the financial statements as a whole could influence the economic decisions of users.
We have determined that materiality for these areas should be based upon profit before tax of 112m excluding the impact of the net deficit on revaluation of investment properties either wholly owned or held within joint ventures of 146m and the impact of the redemption of medium term notes of 170m Adjusted PBT as overall materiality is applied to the net deficit on revaluation.
We believe that it is appropriate to use a profit based measure as profit is also a focus of users of the financial statements.
This year the calculation of Adjusted PBT excludes the impact of the redemption of medium term notes given this is expected to be a nonrecurring item.
During the course of our audit we reassessed initial materiality and as the actual carrying value of investment properties was in line with that which we had used as the initial basis for determining overall materiality our final materiality was consistent with the materiality we calculated initially.
Performance materiality The application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgement is that overall performance materiality and specific performance materiality i. should be 75% 2016 75% of the respective materiality.
We have set performance materiality at this percentage due to our past experience of the audit that indicates a lower risk of misstatements both corrected and uncorrected.
Our objective in adopting this approach is to confirm that total detected and undetected audit differences do not exceed our materiality for the financial statements as a whole.
Reporting threshold An amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all uncorrected audit differences in excess of 3m 2016 3m as well as audit differences in excess of 1m 2016 1m that relate to our specific testing of the other account balances not related to investment properties which are set at 5% of their respective planning materiality.
We also agreed to report differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the Parent companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Independent Auditors Report
101 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 96 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs .
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion The part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and Based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit The information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements The Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception ISAs UK and Ireland reporting We are required to report to you if in our opinion financial and nonfinancial information in the annual report is Materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or Apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or Otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to report whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired in the course of performing the audit and the Directors statement that they consider the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the entitys performance business model and strategy and whether the annual report appropriately addresses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee that we consider should have been disclosed.
We have no exceptions to report.
Companies Act 2006 reporting In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have identified no material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We are required to report to you if in our opinion Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or The Parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or Certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have no exceptions to report.
Listing Rules review requirements We are required to review The Directors statement in relation to going concern and longerterm viability set out on page 54 and The part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the companys compliance with the ten provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review.
We have no exceptions to report.
102 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Statement on the Directors assessment of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the entity ISAs UK and Ireland reporting We are required to give a statement as to whether we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to The Directors confirmation in the annual report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity The disclosures in the annual report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated The Directors statement in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements and The Directors explanation in the annual report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the entity will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
Eamonn McGrath Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP  Statutory Auditor
17 May 2017
The maintenance and integrity of the Land Securities Group PLC web site is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditor does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditor accepts no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the web site.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Independent Auditors Report
103 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Income statement for the year ended 31 March 2017 Statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 Marchtel
Revenue profit Capital and other items
Revenue profit Capital and other items
Revenue 6 721 6tel942 Profit on disposal of investment properties  19 19  75 75 Loss on disposal of investment in joint venture  2 2 Profit on disposal of other investment  13 13 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 14  186 186  739 739 Operating profit 479 114 365 485 861 1346 Share of posttax profit from joint ventures Finance income 10 37  37 35  35 Finance expense 10 155 204 359 178 66 244 Profit before tax 382 270 112 362 974 1336 Taxation 12  1 1  2 2 Profit attributable to owners of the parent 382 269 113 362 976 1338 Earnings per share attributable to owners of the parent Basic earnings per share 5 14.3p 169.4p Diluted earnings per share 5 14.3p 168.8p 2017 2016
Total
Total
Profit attributable to owners of the parent 113 1338 Items that will not be subsequently reclassified to the income statement Net remeasurement lossgain on defined benefit pension scheme 32 12 18 Deferred tax creditcharge on remeasurement above 2 3 Other comprehensive lossincome attributable to owners of the parent 10 15 Total comprehensive income attributable to owners of the parent 103 1353 104 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Group Company
Noncurrent assets Investment properties 14 12144 12358 Intangible assets 19 36 38 Net investment in finance leases 18 165 183 Investments in joint ventures 16 1734 1668 Investments in subsidiary undertakings 28   6205 6200 Trade and other receivables 26 123 86 Other noncurrent assets 29 51 44 Total noncurrent assets 14253 14377 6205 6200 Current assets Trading properties 15 122 124 Trade and other receivables Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits Cash and cash equivalents 23 30 25 Total current assets Total assets 14844 14990 6226 6221 Current liabilities Borrowings 21 404 19 Trade and other payables 27 302 289 1394 1037 Other current liabilities 30 7 19 Total current liabilities 713 327 1394 1037 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 21 2545 2854 Trade and other payables 27 25 28 Other noncurrent liabilities 31 9 47 Redemption liability 36 35 Total noncurrent liabilities 2615 2964 Total liabilities 3328 3291 1394 1037 Net assets 11516 11699 4832 5184
Capital and reserves attributable to owners of the parent Ordinary shares Share premium 79telCapital redemption reserve Own shares 9 14 Sharebased payments Merger reserve   374 374 Retained earnings 10615 10801 3548 3898 Total equity 11516 11699 4832 5184 The loss for the year of the Company was 68m 2016 profit of 331m.
The financial statements on pages 103 to 154 were approved by the Board of Directors on 17 May 2017 and were signed on its behalf by R M Noel M F Greenslade
Balance sheets at 31 March 2017 Financial Statements 105 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Attributable to owners of the parent Group
Share premium
Own
Share based payments
Total equity At 1 April 12 9 9709 10606 Total comprehensive income for the financial year      1353 1353 Transactions with owners Sharebased payments  1  16 2 6 13 Dividends paid to owners of the parent      255 255 Acquisition of own shares    18   18 Total transactions with owners of the parent  1  2 2 261 260 At 31 March 14 11 10801 11699 Total comprehensive income for the financial year      103 103 Transactions with owners Sharebased payments  1  11 3  9 Dividends paid to owners of the parent      289 289 Acquisition of own shares    6   6 Total transactions with owners of the parent  1  5 3 289 286 At 31 March 9 8 10615 11516
Ordinary
Share premium
Share based payments
Retained earnings
At 1 April 816 5099 Profit for the year ended 31 March 2016      331 331 Sharebased payments  1  2  6 9 Dividends paid to owners of the parent      255 255 At 31 March 898 5184 Loss for the year ended 31 March 2017      68 68 Sharebased payments  1  3  7 5 Dividends paid to owners of the parent      289 289 At 31 March 548 4832 Available for distribution.
Statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 March 2017 106 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Group Company
Cash flows from operating activities Net cash generated from operations 13 464 451 Interest received 15 21 Interest paid 152 197 Capital expenditure on trading properties 12 32 Disposal of trading properties 69 190 Other operating cash flows 2 1 Net cash inflow from operating activities 386 432 Cash flows from investing activities Investment property development expenditure 46 118 Acquisition of investment properties 16 103 Other investment property related expenditure 80 100 Disposal of investment properties 245 1221 Disposal of other investment 13 Cash contributed to joint ventures 16 67 62 Net loan advances to joint ventures 16 45 106 Loan repayments by joint ventures 16 54 14 Distributions from joint ventures 16 44 63 Other investing cash flows 19 40 Net cash inflow from investing activities 83 849 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from new borrowings net of finance fees 356 249 Repayment of borrowings 21 391 806 Issue of medium term notes net of finance fees 21 698 Redemption of medium term notes 21 690 400 Premium payable on redemption of medium term notes 21 137 26 Refinancing of derivative financial instruments 4 Dividends paid to owners of the parent 11 289 262 Other financing cash flows 7 26 Net cash outflow from financing activities 464 1271 Increase in cash and cash equivalents for the year 5 10 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 25 15 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 23 30 25 Statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 March 2017 Financial Statements 107 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Section 1  General This section contains a description of the Groups significant accounting policies that relate to the financial statements as a whole.
A description of accounting policies specific to individual areas e. investment properties is included within the relevant note to the financial statements.
This section also includes a summary of new European Union EU endorsed accounting standards amendments and interpretations that have not yet been adopted and their expected impact on the reported results of the Group.
Basis of preparation and consolidation Basis of preparation These financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis and in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU IFRS IFRIC Interpretations and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The financial statements have been prepared in Pounds Sterling rounded to the nearest one million which is the presentation currency of the Group Land Securities Group PLC and all its subsidiary undertakings and under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of investment property availableforsale investments derivative financial instruments and pension assets.
During the year the Group has reviewed the presentation of the financial statements and has made some changes with the intention of simplifying the way in which the Groups results are presented.
One of the main changes is from reporting to the nearest hundred thousand pounds to reporting to the nearest million pounds.
Additionally certain insignificant line items that were previously presented separately in the financial statements have been aggregated.
Where line items have been aggregated in the primary statements explanatory notes providing a breakdown of the aggregated balances are included in the notes to the financial statements.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Although these estimates are based on managements best knowledge of the amount event or actions actual results ultimately may differ from those estimates.
Further details on the Groups significant accounting judgements and estimates are included in note 2.
Land Securities Group PLC the Company has not presented its own statement of comprehensive income and separate income statement as permitted by Section 408 of Companies Act 2006.
The merger reserve arose on 6 September 2002 when the Company acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Land Securities PLC.
The merger reserve represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the nominal value of the shares issued by the Company to acquire Land Securities PLC.
The merger reserve does not represent a realised or distributable profit.
The capital redemption reserve represents the nominal value of cancelled shares.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 incorporate the financial statements of the Company and all its subsidiary undertakings.
Subsidiary undertakings are those entities controlled by the Company.
Control exists where an entity is exposed to variable returns and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
The results of subsidiaries and joint ventures acquired or disposed of during the year are included from the effective date of acquisition or to the effective date of disposal.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries and joint ventures which differ from Group accounting policies are adjusted on consolidation.
Where instruments in a subsidiary held by third parties are redeemable at the option of the holder these interests are classified as a financial liability called the redemption liability.
The liability is carried at fair value the value is reassessed at the balance sheet date and movements are recognised in the income statement.
Joint arrangements are those entities over whose activities the Group has joint control established by contractual agreement.
Interests in joint arrangements are accounted for as either a joint venture or a joint operation.
A joint arrangement is accounted for as a joint venture when the Group along with the other parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the arrangement.
Interests in joint ventures are equity accounted.
The equity method requires the Groups share of the joint ventures posttax profit or loss for the year to be presented separately in the income statement and the Groups share of the joint ventures net assets to be presented separately in the balance sheet.
A joint arrangement is accounted for as a joint operation when the Group along with the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities relating to the arrangement.
Joint operations are accounted for by including the Groups share of the assets liabilities income and expenses on a linebyline basis.
Intragroup balances and any unrealised gains and losses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Unrealised gains arising from transactions with joint ventures are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in the joint venture concerned.
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
108 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Significant accounting judgements and estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to exercise judgement in applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas where the Group considers the judgements to be most significant involve assumptions or estimates in respect of future events where actual results may differ from these estimates.
These areas are as follows Valuation of investment and trading properties page 120 Accounting for property acquisitions and disposals page 120 Compliance with the Real Estate Investment Trust REIT taxation regime and the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities page 117 Amendments to IFRS The accounting policies used in these financial statements are consistent with those applied in the last annual financial statements as amended where relevant to reflect the adoption of new standards amendments and interpretations which became effective in the year.
These amendments have not had an impact on the financial statements.
A number of new standards and amendments to standards have been issued but are not yet effective for the Group.
The most significant of these and their potential impact on the Groups accounting are set out below IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective from 1 April 2018  the standard will be applicable to service charge income other property related income trading property sales proceeds and proceeds from the sale of investment properties but not rental income arising from the Groups leases with tenants.
Based on the transactions impacting the current financial year and future known transactions the Group does not expect the adoption of IFRS 15 to have a material impact on the Groups reported results.
However we will continue to assess new transactions as they arise to the date of adoption.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective from 1 April 2018  the standard applies to classification and measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities impairment provisioning and hedge accounting.
The Group is in the process of assessing the impact of IFRS 9 but adoption of the new standard may impact the measurement and presentation of the Groups financial liabilities.
IFRS 16 Leases effective from 1 April 2019  the adoption of this standard is not expected to significantly impact the recognition of rental income earned under the Groups leases with tenants.
The Group holds a small number of operating leases as a lessee which are affected by this standard however these are not material to the financial statements.
Financial Statements 109 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Section 2  Performance This section focuses on the performance of the Group for the year including segmental information earnings per share and net assets per share together with further details on specific components of the income statement and dividends paid.
Our property portfolio is a combination of properties that are wholly owned by the Group part owned through joint arrangements and properties owned by the Group but where a third party holds a noncontrolling interest.
Internally management review the results of the Group on a basis that adjusts for these different forms of ownership to present a proportionate share.
The Combined Portfolio with assets totalling 14.4bn is an example of this approach reflecting the economic interest we have in our properties regardless of our ownership structure.
We consider this presentation provides a better explanation to stakeholders of the activities and performance of the Group as it aggregates the results of all of the Groups property interests which under IFRS are required to be presented across a number of line items in the statutory financial statements.
The same principle is applied to many of the other measures we discuss and accordingly a number of our financial measures include the results of our joint ventures and subsidiaries on a proportionate basis.
Measures that are described as being presented on a proportionate basis include the Groups share of joint ventures on a linebyline basis and are adjusted to exclude the nonowned elements of our subsidiaries.
This is in contrast to the Groups statutory financial statements where the Groups interest in joint ventures is presented as one line on the income statement and balance sheet and all subsidiaries are consolidated at 100% with any nonowned element being adjusted as a noncontrolling interest or redemption liability as appropriate.
Our joint operations are presented on a proportionate basis in all financial measures.
Our income statement has two key components the income we generate from leasing our investment properties net of associated costs including interest expense which we refer to as revenue profit and items not directly related to the underlying rental business principally valuation changes profits or losses on the disposal of properties and exceptional items which we refer to as capital and other items.
Our income statement is presented in a columnar format split into those items that relate to revenue profit and capital and other items.
The Total column represents the Groups results presented in accordance with IFRS the other columns provide additional information.
We believe revenue profit better represents the results of the Groups operational performance to stakeholders as it focuses on the rental income performance of the business and excludes capital and other items which can vary significantly from year to year.
A full definition of revenue profit is given in the glossary.
The components of revenue profit are presented on a proportionate basis in note 4.
Segmental information The Groups operations are organised into two operating segments being the London Portfolio and the Retail Portfolio.
The London Portfolio includes all our London offices and central London shops and the Retail Portfolio includes all our shopping centres and shops excluding central London shops hotels and leisure assets and retail park properties.
All of the Groups operations are in the UK.
Management has determined the Groups operating segments based on the information reviewed by senior management to make strategic decisions.
During the year the chief operating decision maker was the Executive Committee ExecCom which comprised the Executive Directors the managing directors of the Retail and London portfolios the Group General Counsel and Company Secretary the Group HR Director and the Corporate Affairs and Sustainability Director.
The information presented to ExecCom includes reports from all functions of the business as well as strategy financial planning succession planning organisational development and Groupwide policies.
The Groups primary measure of underlying profit before tax is revenue profit.
However segment profit is the lowest level to which the profit arising from the ongoing operations of the Group is analysed between the two segments.
The Group manages its financing structure with the exception of joint ventures on a pooled basis and as such debt facilities and finance expenses other than those relating to joint ventures are not specific to a particular segment.
Unallocated income and expenses Group services are items incurred centrally which are neither directly attributable nor can be reasonably allocated to individual segments.
All items in the segmental information note are presented on a proportionate basis.
A reconciliation from the Group income statement to the information presented in the segmental information note is included in table 78.
110 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Segmental information continued Revenue profit 2017 2016
London
Total
Retail
London
Total
Rental income 34tel287 650 Finance lease interest Gross rental income before rents payable 34tel296 660 Rents payable Gross rental income after rents payable 33tel293 648 Service charge income Service charge expense 60 46 106 58 47 105 Net service charge expense 4 1 5 2 1 3 Other property related income Direct property expenditure 36 30 66 45 34 79 Net rental income 31tel275 604 Indirect property expenditure 21 16 37 25 18 43 Depreciation 1 1 2  1 1 Segment profit before finance expense 29tel256 560 Joint venture finance expense 4 17 21 4 17 21 Segment profit 28tel239 539 Group services  other income 2 4 expense 42 38 Finance income 37 35 Finance expense 155 178 Revenue profit 382 362 Included within rents payable is finance lease interest payable of 1m 2016 1m and 1m 2016 nil for the Retail and London portfolios respectively.
Reconciliation of revenue profit to profit before tax 2017 2016
Total
Revenue profit 382 362 Capital and other items Valuation and profits on disposals Profit on disposal of investment properties 20 79 Loss on disposal of investment in joint venture 2 Profit on disposal of other investment 13 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 147 907 Movement in impairment of trading properties 12 16 Profit on disposal of trading properties 36 41 68 1043 Net finance expense Fair value movement on interestrate swaps 8 11 Amortisation of bondexchange derecognition adjustment 24 23 Other 2 5 Exceptional items Head office relocation 1 6 Premium payable on redemption of medium term notes 170 27 Other 1 3 Profit before tax 112 1336 Financial Statements 111 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Performance measures Three of the Groups key financial performance measures are adjusted diluted earnings per share adjusted diluted net assets per share and total business return.
In the tables below we present earnings per share and net assets per share calculated in accordance with IFRS together with our own adjusted measures and certain measures required by EPRA.
We also present the calculation of total business return.
Adjusted earnings which is a tax adjusted measure of revenue profit is the basis for the calculation of adjusted earnings per share.
We believe adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per share better represent the results of the Groups operational performance to stakeholders as they focus on the rental income performance of the business and exclude capital and other items which can vary significantly from year to year.
Adjusted net assets excludes the fair value of interestrate swaps used for hedging purposes and the bond exchange derecognition adjustment.
We believe this better reflects the underlying net assets attributable to shareholders as it more accurately reflects the future cash flows associated with our debt instruments.
Total business return is calculated as the cash dividends paid in the year plus the change in adjusted diluted net assets per share divided by the opening adjusted diluted net assets per share.
We consider this to be a useful measure for shareholders as it gives an indication of the total return on investment over the year.
EPRA measures for both earnings per share and net assets per share have been included to assist comparison between European property companies.
Earnings per share 2017 2016 Profit for the financial year
Adjusted earnings Profit for the financial year
Adjusted earnings Profit attributable to owners of the parent 113 113 113 1338 1338 1338 Taxation  1 1  2 2 Valuation and profits on disposal  68 68  1043 1043 Net finance expense Exceptional items Other  1 1  3 3 Profit used in per share calculation 113 359 382 1338 333 362 IFRS EPRA Adjusted IFRS EPRA Adjusted Basic earnings per share 14.3p 45.4p 48.4p 169.4p 42.2p 45.9p Diluted earnings per share 14.3p 45.4p 48.3p 168.8p 42.0p 45.7p The difference in the adjustment for EPRA earnings and adjusted earnings relates to the amortisation of the bond exchange derecognition adjustment which is included in EPRA earnings but excluded from adjusted earnings.
The difference in the adjustment for EPRA earnings and adjusted earnings relates to the head office relocation costs which are included in EPRA earnings but excluded from adjusted earnings.
Net assets per share 2017 2016 Net assets EPRA net assets
Net assets EPRA net assets
Net assets attributable to owners of the parent 11516 11516 11516 11699 11699 11699 Fair value of interestrate swaps  Group  2 2  32 32 Joint ventures  2 2  2 2 Bond exchange derecognition adjustment   314   368 Deferred tax liability arising on business combination  4 4  5 5 Goodwill on deferred tax liability  4 4  5 5 Net assets used in per share calculation 11516 11520 11206 11699 11733 11365 IFRS EPRA Adjusted IFRS EPRA Adjusted Net assets per share 1458p na 1418p 1482p na 1439p Diluted net assets per share 1456p 1456p 1417p 1476p 1481p 1434p For EPRA triple net assets see table 81.
112 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Performance measures continued Number of shares 2017 2016
31 March million
31 March million Ordinary shares 80telTreasury shares 10 10 10 10 Own shares 1 1 1 1 Number of shares  basic 79telDilutive effect of share options Number of shares  diluted 79telTotal business return pence pence Decreaseincrease in adjusted diluted net assets per share 17 141 Dividend paid per share in the year note 11 37 32 Total return a 20 173 Adjusted diluted net assets per share at the beginning of the year b 1434 1293 Total business return ab 1.4% 13.4% Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 113 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Accounting policy The Group recognises revenue on an accruals basis when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured and it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the Group.
Rental income including fixed rental uplifts is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Lease incentives being offered to occupiers to enter into a lease such as an initial rentfree period or a cash contribution to fitout or similar costs are an integral part of the net consideration for the use of the property and are therefore recognised on the same straightline basis.
Contingent rents being lease payments that are not fixed at the inception of a lease for example turnover rents are recorded as income in the periods in which they are earned.
Service charge income and management fees are recorded as income in the period in which they are earned.
When property is let under a finance lease the Group recognises a receivable equal to the net investment in the lease at inception of the lease.
Rentals received are accounted for as repayments of principal and finance income as appropriate.
Finance income is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining net investment in the finance lease and is recognised within revenue.
Proceeds received on the sale of trading properties are recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership transfer to the buyer.
This generally occurs on unconditional exchange or on completion particularly if completion is expected to occur significantly after exchange or if the Group has significant outstanding obligations between exchange and completion.
All revenue is classified within the Revenue profit column of the income statement with the exception of proceeds on the sale of trading properties which is presented in the Capital and other items column.
Also included in the Capital and other items column is the nonowned element of the Groups subsidiaries which is excluded from revenue profit.
Group
2017 2016
Capital and other items
Revenue profit Capital and other items
Rental income excluding adjustment for lease incentives Adjustment for lease incentives 44  44 29  29 Rental income Service charge income  94 Other property related income 32  32 36  36 Trading property sales proceeds  62 62  195 195 Finance lease interest 10  10 10  10 Other income 2  2 4  4 Revenue per the income statement 721 6tel942 The following table reconciles revenue per the income statement to the individual components of revenue presented in note 4.
Group
2017 2016
Joint ventures
Total
Group
Joint ventures
Total
Rental income 587 53 2 638 603 50 3 650 Service charge income 94 9 2 101 94 8  102 Other property related income 32 2  34 36 2  38 Trading property sales proceeds 62 72  134 195   195 Finance lease interest 10   10 10   10 Other income 2   2 4   4 Revenue in the segmental information note 787 136 4 919 942 60 3 999 This represents the interest in XLeisure which we do not own but which is consolidated in the Group numbers.
114 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Accounting policy The carrying amounts of the Groups nonfinancial assets other than investment properties are reviewed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
If any such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
An impairment loss is recognised in the income statement whenever the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of an asset is the greater of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.
The value in use is determined as the net present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from the asset discounted using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
An impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount after the reversal does not exceed the amount that would have been determined net of applicable depreciation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
All costs are classified within the Revenue profit column of the income statement with the exception of the cost of sale of trading properties amortisation of intangible assets and head office relocation costs which are presented in the Capital and other items column.
Also included in the Capital and other items column is the nonowned element of the Groups subsidiaries which is excluded from revenue profit.
Group
2017 2016
Capital and other items
Revenue profit Capital and other items
Rents payable 10  10 11  11 Service charge expense  96 Direct property expenditure 58  58 72  72 Indirect property expenditure 79  79 80  80 Cost of trading property disposals  33 33  154 154 Movement in impairment of trading properties Head office relocation Amortisation of intangible assets  2 2  1 1 Impairment of goodwill  1 1  1 1 Costs per the income statement 242 2tel410 The movement in impairment of trading properties in the years ended 31 March 2017 and 2016 relates to the reversal of previous impairment charges related to residential land where the valuers assessment of net realisable value increased over the year.
The net credit of 1m in respect of the head office relocation comprises the 2m release of an onerous lease provision following the assignment of the lease on the Groups previous head office at lower net cost than originally anticipated together with relocation costs of 1m.
The cost of 6m in the prior year reflects the creation of the provision in respect of the onerous lease and relocation costs committed to at that time.
The following table reconciles costs per the income statement to the individual components of costs presented in note 4.
Group
2017 2016
Joint ventures
Total
Group
Joint ventures
Total
Rents payable 10 1  11 11 1  12 Service charge expense 96 11 1 106 96 9  105 Direct property expenditure 58 8  66 72 7  79 Indirect property expenditure 79 2  81 80 2  82 Trading property disposals 33 65  98 154   154 Movement in impairment of trading properties 12   12 11 5  16 Head office relocation 1   1 6   6 Amortisation of intangible asset 2   2 1   1 Impairment of goodwill 1   1 1   1 Costs in the segmental information note 266 87 1 352 410 14  424 This represents the interest in XLeisure which we do not own but which is consolidated in the Group numbers.
The Groups costs include employee costs for the year of 60m 2016 64m of which 7m 2016 7m is within service charge expense and 53m 2016 57m is within indirect property expenditure of which 22m relates to Group services 2016 19m .
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 115 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Employee costs Group Salaries and wages 45 47 Employer payroll taxes 6 6 Other pension costs note 32 4 3 Sharebased payments note 33 Group
Number
The average monthly number of employees during the year was Indirect property or contract and administration 421 459 Direct property or contract services Fulltime 153 142 Parttime With the exception of the Executive Directors the Company Secretary and two employees of the Defined Benefit Pension Scheme who are employed by Land Securities Group PLC all employees are employed by subsidiaries of the Group.
During the year no Executive Directors had retirement benefits accruing under either the defined contribution pension scheme or the defined benefit scheme 2016 nil .
Information on Directors emoluments share options and interests in the Companys shares is given in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 76 to 91.
Details of the employee costs associated with the Groups key management personnel are included in note 37.
Auditor remuneration
Services provided by the Groups auditor Audit fees Audit of parent company and consolidated financial statements 0.4 0.4 Audit of subsidiary undertakings 0.3 0.3 Audit of joint ventures 0.
Nonaudit fees Audit related assurance services 0.
Other assurance services 0.
It is the Groups policy to employ the Groups auditor on assignments additional to their statutory duties where their expertise and experience with the Group are important.
Where appropriate the Group seeks tenders for services.
If fees are expected to be greater than 25000 they are preapproved by the Audit Committee.
116 Landsec Annual Report 2017 External valuers remuneration
Services provided by the Groups external valuer Year end and half year valuations  Group 0.7 0.7 Joint ventures 0.2 0.1 Other consultancy and agency services 3.2 3.9 CBRE Limited CBRE is the Groups valuer.
CBRE undertakes other consultancy and agency work on behalf of the Group.
CBRE has confirmed to us that the total fees paid by the Group represented less than 5% of its total revenues in the current year.
Net finance expense
2017 2016
Capital and other items
Revenue profit
Total
Finance income Other interest receivable 2  2 1  1 Interest receivable from joint ventures 35  35 34  34 Finance expense Bond and debenture debt 144  144 169  169 Bank and other shortterm borrowings 15  15 20  20 Fair value movement on interestrate swaps  8 8  11 11 Amortisation of bond exchange derecognition adjustment  24 24  23 23 Redemption of medium term notes  170 170  27 27 Revaluation of redemption liabilities  3 3  5 5 Other interest payable 1 1 Interest capitalised in relation to properties under development 5  5 11  11 Net finance expense 118 204 322 143 66 209 Joint venture net finance expense 21 21 Net finance expense included in revenue profit 139 164 During the year the Group purchased medium term notes MTNs with a nominal value of 690m 2016 400m for a premium of 137m 2016 The redemption premium and 30m 2016 nil of the bond exchange derecognition adjustment associated with the purchased bonds have been expensed to the income statement in the year as an exceptional item along with 1m 2016 nil of bank tender fees and the 2m 2016 1m writeoff of unamortised issue costs.
Further details are given in note 21.
Finance lease interest payable of 2m 2016 1m is included within rents payable as detailed in note 4.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 117 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Accounting policy Interim dividend distributions to shareholders are recognised in the financial statements when paid.
Final dividend distributions are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are approved by shareholders.
Ordinary dividends paid Group and Company Payment date PID Pence per share NonPID Total For the year ended 31 March 2015 Third interim 10 April 2015 7.9  7.9 63 Final 24 July 2015 8.15  8.15 64 For the year ended 31 March 2016 First interim 9 October 2015 8.15  8.15 64 Second interim 7 January 2016  8.15 8.15 64 Third interim 8 April 2016 8.15  8.15 64 Final 28 July 2016 10.55  10.55 83 For the year ended 31 March 2017 First interim 7 October 2016 8.95  8.95 71 Second interim 6 January 2017  8.95 8.95 71 Gross dividends 289 255 Dividends in statement of changes in equity 289 255 Timing difference on payment of withholding tax  7 Dividends in the statement of cash flows 289 262 A third quarterly interim dividend of 8.95p per ordinary share or 71m in total 2016 8.15p or 64m in total was paid on 7 April 2017 as a Property Income Distribution PID.
The Board has recommended a final dividend for the year ended 31 March 2017 of 11.7p per ordinary share 2016 10.55p to be paid as a PID.
This final dividend will result in a further estimated distribution of 92m 2016 83m.
Subject to shareholders approval at the Annual General Meeting the final dividend will be paid on 27 July 2017 to shareholders registered at the close of business on 23 June 2017.
The total dividend paid and recommended in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017 is therefore 38.55p per ordinary share 2016 35.0p.
A Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP has been available in respect of all dividends paid during the year.
Income tax Accounting policy Income tax on the profit for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Current tax is the tax payable on the taxable income for the year and any adjustment in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is provided in full using the balance sheet liability method on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date and are expected to apply when the asset is realised or the liability is settled.
No provision is made for temporary differences i arising on the initial recognition of assets or liabilities other than on a business combination that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit and ii relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Significant accounting judgements and estimates The Group is a Real Estate Investment Trust REIT.
As a result the Group does not pay UK corporation tax on its profits and gains from the qualifying rental business in the UK.
Nonqualifying profits and gains of the Group continue to be subject to corporation tax as normal.
In order to maintain group REIT status certain ongoing criteria must be met.
The main criteria are as follows at the start of each accounting period the assets of the tax exempt business must be at least 75% of the total value of the Groups assets at least 75% of the Groups total profits must arise from the tax exempt business and at least 90% of the notional taxable profit of the property rental business must be distributed.
118 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Income tax continued The Directors intend that the Group should continue as a REIT for the foreseeable future with the result that deferred tax is no longer recognised on temporary differences relating to the property rental business.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities require management judgement in determining the amounts if any to be recognised.
In particular judgement is required when assessing the extent to which deferred tax assets should be recognised taking into account the expected timing and level of future taxable income.
Deferred tax assets are only recognised when management believe they will be recovered against future taxable profits.
The income tax credit in the income statement comprises the movement in deferred tax on intangible assets of 1m 2016 1m credit and adjustments in respect of prior financial years of nil 2016 1m credit.
The tax for the year is lower than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained in the table below.
Group
Profit before tax 112 1336 Profit before tax multiplied by the rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 2016 20% 22 267 Exempt property rental profits and revaluations in the year 45 261 Effects of Interest rate fair value movements and other unrecognised temporary differences 31 4 Adjustment in respect of prior years  2 Nonallowable expenses and nontaxable items 6 4 Utilisation of brought forward losses 3 6 Total income tax credit in the income statement 1 2
The Groups deferred tax liability is analysed as follows Arising on business combination 4 5 Arising on pension surplus note 32 3 5 Total deferred tax 7 10 Deferred tax is calculated at the rate substantially enacted at the balance sheet date 17% 2016 18% which comes into effect from 1 April 2020.
There are unrecognised deferred tax assets on the following items due to the high degree of uncertainty as to their future utilisation by nonREIT qualifying activities.
Group
Revenue losses 2 13 Capital losses 589 643 Other unrecognised temporary differences 140 Total unrecognised deferred tax 731 656 The other unrecognised temporary differences relate to the premium paid on the redemption of the Groups medium term notes.
For further details see note 21.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 119 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Net cash generated from operations Reconciliation of operating profit loss to net cash generated from operations Group Company Operating profitloss 365 1346 30 22 Adjustments for Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 186 739 Movement in impairment of trading properties 12 11 Profit on disposal of trading properties 29 41 Profit on disposal of investment properties 19 75 Profit on disposal of other investment 13 Loss on disposal of investment in joint venture 2 Sharebased payment charge 5 8 Other 8 6 Changes in working capital Increase in receivables 17 33 Decreaseincrease in payables and provisions 12 10 30 22 Net cash generated from operations 464 451 Section 3  Properties This section focuses on the property assets which form the core of the Groups business.
It includes details of investment properties investments in joint ventures and trading properties.
Our property portfolio is a combination of properties that are wholly owned by the Group part owned through joint arrangements and properties owned by the Group but where a third party holds a noncontrolling interest.
In the Groups IFRS balance sheet wholly owned properties are presented as either Investment properties or Trading properties .
The Group applies equity accounting to its investments in joint ventures which requires the Groups share of properties held by joint ventures to be presented within Investments in joint ventures .
Internally management review the results of the Group on a basis that adjusts for these forms of ownership to present a proportionate share.
The
Combined Portfolio with assets totalling 14.4bn is an example of this proportionate share reflecting the economic interest we have in our properties regardless of our ownership structure.
We consider this presentation to better explain to stakeholders the activities and performance of the Group as it aggregates the results of all of the Groups property interests which under IFRS are required to be presented across a number of line items in the statutory financial statements.
The Groups investment properties are carried at fair value and trading properties are carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Both of these values are determined by the Groups external valuers.
The combined value of the Groups total investment property portfolio including the Groups share of investment properties held through joint ventures is shown as a reconciliation in note 14.
Accounting policy Investment properties Investment properties are properties either owned or leased by the Group that are held either to earn rental income or for capital appreciation or both.
Investment properties are measured initially at cost including related transaction costs and subsequently at fair value.
Fair value is based on market value as determined by a professional independent valuer at each reporting date.
The difference between the fair value of an investment property at the reporting date and its carrying amount prior to remeasurement is included in the income statement as a valuation surplus or deficit.
Investment properties are presented on the balance sheet within noncurrent assets.
Some of the Groups investment properties are owned through longleasehold arrangements as opposed to the Group owning the freehold.
Where the Group is a lessee and the lease transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the asset to the Group the lease is accounted for as a finance lease.
Finance leases are capitalised within investment properties at the commencement of the lease at the lower of the fair value of the property and the present value of the minimum lease payments and a corresponding liability is recorded within borrowings.
Each lease payment is allocated between repayment of the liability and a finance charge to achieve a constant rate on the outstanding liability.
The investment properties held under finance leases are subsequently carried at their fair value.
120 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Trading properties Trading properties are those properties held for sale or those being developed with a view to sell.
Trading properties are recorded at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
The net realisable value of a trading property is determined by a professional independent valuer at each reporting date.
If the net realisable value of a trading property is lower than its carrying value an impairment loss is recorded in the income statement.
If in subsequent periods the net realisable value of a trading property that was previously impaired increases above its carrying value the impairment is reversed to align the carrying value of the property with the net realisable value.
Trading properties are presented on the balance sheet within current assets.
Acquisition of properties Properties are treated as acquired when the Group assumes the significant risks and returns of ownership.
Capital expenditure and capitalisation of borrowing costs Capital expenditure on properties consists of costs of a capital nature including costs associated with developments and refurbishments.
Where a property is being developed or undergoing major refurbishment interest costs associated with direct expenditure on the property are capitalised.
The interest capitalised is calculated using the Groups weighted average cost of borrowings.
Interest is capitalised as from the commencement of the development work until the date of practical completion.
Certain internal staff and associated costs directly attributable to the management of major schemes during the construction phase are also capitalised.
Transfers between investment properties and trading properties When the Group begins to redevelop an existing investment property for continued future use as an investment property the property continues to be held as an investment property.
When the Group begins to redevelop an existing investment property with a view to sell the property is transferred to trading properties and held as a current asset.
The property is remeasured to fair value as at the date of the transfer with any gain or loss being taken to the income statement.
The remeasured amount becomes the deemed cost at which the property is then carried in trading properties.
Disposal of properties Properties are treated as disposed when the significant risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the buyer.
Typically this will either occur on unconditional exchange or on completion.
Where completion is expected to occur significantly after exchange or where the Group continues to have significant outstanding obligations after exchange the risks and rewards will not usually transfer to the buyer until completion.
The profit on disposal is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset at the beginning of the accounting period plus capital expenditure to the date of disposal.
The profit on disposal of investment properties is presented separately on the face of the income statement.
Proceeds received on the sale of trading properties are recognised within Revenue and the carrying value at the date of disposal is recognised within Costs.
Significant accounting judgements and estimates Valuation of the Groups properties The valuation of the Groups property portfolio is inherently subjective due to among other factors the individual nature of each property its location and the expected future rental revenues from that particular property.
As a result the valuations the Group places on its property portfolio are subject to a degree of uncertainty and are made on the basis of assumptions which may not prove to be accurate particularly in periods of volatility or low transaction flow in the property market.
The investment property valuation contains a number of assumptions upon which the Groups valuer has based its valuation of the Groups properties as at 31 March 2017.
The assumptions on which the property valuation reports have been based include but are not limited to matters such as the tenure and tenancy details for the properties ground conditions at the properties the structural condition of the properties prevailing market yields and comparable market transactions.
These assumptions are market standard and accord with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors RICS Valuation  Professional Standards UK 2014 revised April 2015 .
The estimation of the net realisable value of the Groups trading properties in particular the development land and infrastructure programmes is inherently subjective due to a number of factors including their complexity unusually large size the substantial expenditure required and long timescales to completion.
In addition as a result of these timescales to completion the plans associated with these programmes could be subject to significant variation.
As a result and similar to the valuation of investment properties the net realisable values of the Groups trading properties are subject to a degree of uncertainty and are determined on the basis of assumptions which may not prove to be accurate.
If the assumptions upon which the external valuer has based its valuations prove to be inaccurate this may have an impact on the value of the Groups investment and trading properties which could in turn have an effect on the Groups financial position and results.
Acquisition and disposal of properties Property transactions can be complex in nature and material to the financial statements.
To determine when an acquisition or disposal should be recognised management consider whether the Group holds the risks and rewards of ownership and the point at which this is obtained or relinquished.
Consideration is given to the terms of the acquisition or disposal contracts and any conditions that must be satisfied before the contract is fulfilled.
In the case of an acquisition management must also consider whether the transaction represents an asset acquisition or business combination.
Financial Statements 121 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Investment properties
Net book value at the beginning of the year 12358 12158 Acquisitions 14 157 Capital expenditure Investment portfolio 80 91 Developments 46 104 Capitalised interest 5 9 Disposals 205 900 Net movement in finance leases 32 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 186 739 Net book value at 31 March 12144 12358 The market value of the Groups investment properties as determined by the Groups external valuer differs from the net book value presented in the balance sheet due to the Group presenting lease incentives tenant finance leases and head leases separately.
The following table reconciles the net book value of the investment properties to the market value.
Group
2017 2016 excl.
Joint ventures
Combined
Portfolio
Group excl.
Joint ventures
Combined
Portfolio
Net book value 12144 1763 34 13873 12358 1630 34 13954 Plus tenant lease incentives 311 57 1 367 268 43  311 Less head leases capitalised 31 8  39 14   14 Plus properties treated as finance leases 238   238 220   220 Market value 12662 1812 35 14439 12832 1673 34 14471 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 186 40 1 147 739 171 3 907 Refer to note 16 for a breakdown of this amount by entity.
This represents the interest in XLeisure which we do not own but which is consolidated in the Group numbers.
The net book value of leasehold properties where head leases have been capitalised is 1169m 2016 968m.
Investment properties include capitalised interest of 206m 2016 201m.
The average rate of interest capitalisation for the year is 4.7% 2016 5.0%.
The historical cost of investment properties is 6713m 2016 6720m.
Valuation process The fair value of investment properties at 31 March 2017 was determined by the Groups independent valuer CBRE.
The valuations are in accordance with RICS standards and were arrived at by reference to market evidence of transactions for similar properties.
The valuations performed by the independent valuer are reviewed internally by senior management and relevant people within the London and Retail business units.
This process includes discussions of the assumptions used by the independent valuer as well as a review of the resulting valuations.
Discussions of the valuation process and results are held between senior management the Audit Committee and the independent valuer on a halfyearly basis.
The valuers opinion of fair value was primarily derived using comparable recent market transactions on arms length terms and using appropriate valuation techniques.
The fair value of investment properties is determined using the income capitalisation approach.
Under this approach forecast net cash flows based upon current market derived estimated rental values market rents together with estimated costs are discounted at market derived capitalisation rates to produce the valuers opinion of fair value.
The average discount rate which if applied to all cash flows would produce the fair value is described as the equivalent yield.
Properties in the development programme are typically valued using a residual valuation method.
Under this methodology the valuer assesses the completed development value using income and yield assumptions.
Deductions are then made for estimated costs to complete including finance and developers profit to arrive at the valuation.
As the development approaches completion the valuer may consider the income capitalisation approach to be more appropriate.
122 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Investment properties continued The Group considers all of its investment properties to fall within Level 3  as defined by IFRS 13 and as explained in note 25iii.
Accordingly there have been no transfers of properties within the fair value hierarchy in the financial year.
Costs include future estimated costs associated with refurbishment or development excluding finance costs together with an estimate of cash incentives to be paid to tenants.
The table below summarises the key unobservable inputs used in the valuation of the Groups wholly owned investment properties at 31 March 2017
Estimated rental value per sq ft Equivalent yield %
Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 3.1% 4.8% 7.7%  5 14 Retail parks .5% 5.6% 10.0%  2 16 Leisure and hotels 1.8% 5.3% 8.6%  2 28
20 na na na na na na na na na Total Retail Portfolio excluding developments 5.5% 5.0% 10.0%  4 28 London Portfolio West End 2.9% 4.6% 5.0%  1 24 City 1.1% 4.6% 5.8%  31 462 Midtown 1.3% 4.5% 4.6%  1 2 Inner London .7% 5.0% 5.5% Total London offices 5.9% 4.6% 5.8%  8 462 Central London shops 1.9% 3.9% 5.8%   1
41 na na na na na na na na na Total London Portfolio excluding developments 6.9% 4.4% 5.8%  6 1 Developments income capitalisation method .1% 4.2% 4.5% Development programme .1% 4.2% 4.5% Market value at 31 March 2017  Group 12662 The Other category contains a range of low value properties of a diverse nature.
As a result it is not meaningful to present assumptions used in valuing these properties.
The sensitivities illustrate the impact of changes in key unobservable inputs in isolation on the fair value of the Groups properties
Impact on valuations of 5% change in estimated rental value Impact on valuations of 25 bps change in equivalent yield Impact on valuations of 5% change in costs
Increase
Decrease
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Total Retail Portfolio excluding developments 5370 229 216 288 263 2 2 Total London Portfolio excluding developments 6778 264 256 428 381 19 20 Developments income capitalisation method 514 16 16 33 30  17 Market value at 31 March 2017  Group 12662 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 123 Landsec Annual Report 2017 The table below summarises the key unobservable inputs used in the valuation of the Groups wholly owned investment properties at 31 March 2016
Estimated rental value per sq ft Equivalent yield %
Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 3.0% 4.7% 7.7%  9 35 Retail parks .5% 5.4% 10.0%  2 30 Leisure and hotels 1.8% 5.2% 8.1%  1 20
20 na na na na na na na na na Total Retail Portfolio excluding developments 5.5% 4.9% 10.0%  6 35 London Portfolio West End 2.9% 3.7% 5.0%  18 134 City .3% 4.5% 5.2%  10 21 Midtown 1.3% 4.4% 4.4%  2 3 Inner London .8% 4.9% 5.5%   8 Total London offices 4.9% 4.1% 5.5%  12 134 Central London shops 1.9% 4.1% 5.1%  2 7
45 na na na na na na na na na Total London Portfolio excluding developments 5.9% 4.0% 5.7%  10 134 Developments income capitalisation method 1.0% 4.1% 4.4%  37 162 Development programme 1.0% 4.1% 4.4%  37 162 Market value at 31 March 2016  Group 12832 The Other category contains a range of low value properties of a diverse nature.
As a result it is not meaningful to present assumptions used in valuing these properties.
Sensitivities
Impact on valuations of 5% change in estimated rental value Impact on valuations of 25 bps change in equivalent yield Impact on valuations of 5% change in costs
Increase
Decrease
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Total Retail Portfolio excluding developments 5560 240 236 292 287 6 7 Total London Portfolio excluding developments 5979 242 241 397 349 21 21 Developments income capitalisation method 1293 41 41 95 81 2 2 Market value at 31 March 2016  Group 12832 124 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Trading properties
Residential
Total
At 1 April Capital expenditure 10 17 27 Capitalised interest  2 2 Disposals 19 119 138 Movement in impairment 12 1 11 At 31 March Capital expenditure 17 2 19 Disposals 9 24 33 Movement in impairment 12  12 At 31 March The cumulative impairment provision at 31 March 2017 in respect of Development land and infrastructure was 67m 31 March 2016 79m and in respect of Residential was 1m 31 March 2016 1m.
Joint arrangements Accounting policy Joint arrangements are those entities over whose activities the Group has joint control established by contractual agreement.
Interests in joint arrangements are accounted for as either a joint venture or a joint operation.
The treatment as either a joint venture or a joint operation will depend on whether the Group has rights to the net assets or a direct interest in the assets and liabilities of the arrangement.
A joint arrangement is accounted for as a joint venture when the Group along with the other parties that have joint control of the arrangement has rights to the net assets of the arrangement.
Interests in joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method of accounting.
The equity method requires the Groups share of the joint ventures posttax profit or loss for the year to be presented separately in the income statement and the Groups share of the joint ventures net assets to be presented separately in the balance sheet.
A joint arrangement is accounted for as a joint operation when the Group along with the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities relating to the arrangement.
The Groups share of jointly controlled assets related liabilities income and expenses are combined with the equivalent items in the financial statements on a linebyline basis.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 125 Landsec Annual Report 2017 The Groups joint arrangements are described below Joint ventures Percentage owned and voting rights
Joint venture partner Held at 31 March 2017 20 Fenchurch Street Limited Partnership 50% London 31 March Canary Wharf Group plc Nova Victoria 50% London 31 March Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Metro Shopping Fund Limited Partnership 50% Retail 31 March Delancey Real Estate Partners Limited
Davids Limited Partnership 50% Retail 31 December Intu Properties plc Westgate Oxford Alliance Limited Partnership 50% Retail 31 March The Crown Estate Commissioners The Oriana Limited Partnership 50% London 31 March Frogmore Real Estate Partners Limited
Harvest
50% Retail 31 March J Sainsbury plc The Ebbsfleet Limited Partnership 50% London 31 March Ebbsfleet Property Limited Millshaw Property Co.
Limited
50% Retail 31 March Evans Property Group Limited West India Quay Unit Trust 50% Retail 31 March Schroder Exempt Property Unit Trust Joint operation Ownership interest
Bluewater Kent 30% Retail MandG Real Estate and GIC Lend Lease Retail Partnership Hermes and Aberdeen Asset
The following joint arrangement was sold in the year ended 31 March 2017 Joint venture Ownership interest
Countryside Land Securities Springhead Limited 50% London Countryside Properties PLC The yearend date shown is the accounting reference date of the joint venture.
In all cases the Groups accounting is performed using financial information for the Groups own reporting period and reporting date.
Nova Victoria includes the Victoria Circle Limited Partnership Nova Residential Limited Partnership and Victoria Circle Developer Limited.
On 13 April 2017  Metro Shopping Fund Limited Partnership Metro completed the sale of one of its assets to DV4 a fund owned by Delancey Real Estate Asset Management Limited Delancey .
On the same date Delancey sold its stake in Metro to Invesco Real Estate European Fund.
The partnership was subsequently renamed The Southside Limited Partnership.
On 23 September 2016 The Oriana Limited Partnership disposed of its interest in 2632 Oxford Street W1.
Harvest includes Harvest 2 Limited Partnership Harvest Development Management Limited Harvest 2 Selly Oak Limited Harvest 2 GP Limited and Harvest GP Limited.
Included within Other in subsequent tables.
At 31 March 2017  the Millshaw Property Co.
Limited was in the process of being liquidated.
West India Quay Unit Trust is held in the XLeisure Unit Trust XLeisure in which the Group holds a 95% share.
All of the Groups joint arrangements have their principal place of business in the United Kingdom.
All of the Groups joint arrangements own and operate investment property with the exception of The Ebbsfleet Limited Partnership which holds development land as trading properties and Millshaw Property Co.
Limited which disposed of its only property interest in the prior year.
The Westgate Oxford Alliance Limited Partnership Nova Victoria and The Oriana Limited Partnership are also engaged in the development of investment and trading properties.
The activities of all the Groups joint arrangements are therefore strategically important to the business activities of the Group.
All joint ventures are registered in England and Wales with the exception of the Metro Shopping Fund Limited Partnership and West India Quay Unit Trust which are registered in Jersey.
126 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Joint arrangements continued Joint ventures
Comprehensive income statement 20 Fenchurch
Limited
Partnership
100%
Victoria
100%
Shopping
Fund Limited
100%
Davids
Limited
Partnership
100%
Oxford
Alliance
Partnership
100% The Oriana
Partnership
100%
JVs Group share 50%
Group share
Group share
Gross rental income after rents payable   50 2 52 Net rental income   43 1 44 Segment profit before finance expense   41 1 42 Finance expense 22 36 8  11  39  39 Capitalised interest  25   10  18  18 Net finance expense 22 11 8  1  21  21 Revenue profit 14 10 7 27 1  20 1 21 Capital and other items Net surplusdeficit on revaluation of investment properties Profit on disposal of investment properties   2    1  1 Profit on disposal of trading properties  14     7  7 Profitloss before tax  1 68 1 69
Posttax profitloss  1 68 1 69 Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income  1 68 1 69 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% Group share of total comprehensive income  1 68 1 69 Revenue includes gross rental income before rents payable service charge income other property related income and trading properties disposal proceeds.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 127 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Joint ventures
Comprehensive income statement 20 Fenchurch
Limited
Partnership
100%
Victoria
100%
Shopping
Fund Limited
100%
Davids
Limited
Partnership
100%
Oxford
Alliance
Partnership
100% The Oriana
Partnership
100%
Group share 100%
Group share
Group share
Gross rental income after rents payable 36 Net rental incomeexpense 35 1 Segment profitloss before finance expense 33 1 Finance expense 33 29 7  6  38  38 Capitalised interest  28   6  17  17 Net finance expense 33 1 7    21  21 Revenue profit  2 Capital and other items Net surplus on revaluation of investment properties Movement in impairment of trading properties        5 5 Profit on disposal of investment properties 1     Profit before tax Taxation   1    1  1 Posttax profit Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% 50% Group share of total comprehensive income Revenue includes gross rental income before rents payable service charge income other property related income trading properties disposal proceeds and income from longterm development contracts.
128 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Joint arrangements continued Joint ventures
Balance sheet 20 Fenchurch
Limited
Partnership
100%
Victoria
100%
Shopping
Fund Limited
100%
Davids
Limited
Partnership
100%
Oxford
Alliance
Partnership
100% The Oriana
Partnership
100%
JVs Group share 50%
Group share
Group share Investment properties 104tel412 93 1722 41 1763 Noncurrent assets 104tel412 93 1722 41 1763 Cash and cash equivalents Other current assets Current assets Total assets 1155 104tel134 1948 58 2006 Trade and other payables and provisions 100 173 39 12 32 2 179 5 184 Current liabilities 100 173 39 12 32 2 179 5 184 Noncurrent liabilities   142 16  17 88  88 Noncurrent liabilities   142 16  17 88  88 Total liabilities 100 173 181 28 32 19 267 5 272 Net assets 105tel405 115 1681 53 1734 Market value of investment properties 113tel411 93 1770 42 1812 Balance sheet Investment properties 100tel248 159 1594 36 1630 Noncurrent assets 100tel248 159 1594 36 1630 Cash and cash equivalents Other current assets Current assets Total assets 109tel258 219 1827 82 1909 Trade and other payables and provisions 109 122 11 13 6 29 145 9 154 Current liabilities 109 122 11 13 6 29 145 9 154 Noncurrent financial liabilities   174    87  87 Noncurrent liabilities   174    87  87 Total liabilities 109 122 185 13 6 29 232 9 241 Net assets 98tel252 190 1595 73 1668 Market value of investment properties 107tel247 159 1637 36 1673 Net debtcash 12 12 167 7 9 26 50 6 44 The difference between the book value and the market value is the amount recognised in respect of lease incentives head leases capitalised and properties treated as finance leases where applicable.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 129 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Joint ventures
Net investment 20 Fenchurch
Limited
Partnership
50%
Victoria
50%
Shopping
Fund Limited
50%
Davids
Limited
Partnership
50%
Oxford
Alliance
Partnership
50% The Oriana
Partnership
50%
JVs Group share 50%
Group share
Group share At 1 April tel333 101 1434 Total comprehensive income Cash contributed     62  62  62 Loan advances 1 100 1    102 4 106 Loan repayments    14   14  14 Property and other distributions      56 56  56 Cash distributions   15   7 22 41 63 At 31 March tel595 73 1668 Total comprehensive income  1 68 1 69 Cash contributed     67  67  67 Loan advances 8 37     45  45 Loan repayments  37 1 16   54  54 Other distributions        12 12 Cash distributions   3   37 40 4 44 Disposal of investment        5 5 At 31 March tel681 53 1734 Capital commitments
Contracted capital commitments at the end of the year in respect of Investment properties 48 102 Trading properties Joint ventures our share 79 152 Total capital commitments 130 256 130 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Net investment in finance leases Accounting policy Where the Groups leases transfer the significant risks and rewards of owning the asset to the tenant the lease is accounted for as a finance lease.
At the outset of the lease the fair value of the asset is derecognised from investment property and recognised as a finance lease receivable.
Lease income is recognised over the period of the lease reflecting a constant rate of return.
The difference between the gross receivable and the present value of the receivable is recognised as finance income within Revenue over the lease term.
Group
Noncurrent
Finance leases  gross receivables 274 333 Unearned finance income 143 184 Unguaranteed residual value Current Finance leases  gross receivables 12 12 Unearned finance income 9 10 Net investment in finance leases 168 185 Gross receivables from finance leases due Not later than one year 12 12 Later than one year but not more than five years 49 52 More than five years 22telUnearned finance income 152 194 Unguaranteed residual value 34 34 Net investment in finance leases 168 185 The Group has leased out a number of investment properties under finance leases which range from 30 to 99 years in duration from the inception of the lease.
The fair value of the Groups finance lease receivables using a discount rate of 4.2% 2016 4.9% is 218m 2016 226m.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 131 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Intangible assets Accounting policy Intangible assets comprise goodwill and other intangible assets arising on business combinations and software used internally within the business.
Intangible assets arising on business combinations are initially recognised at fair value.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested at least annually for impairment.
Other intangible assets arising on business combinations are amortised to the income statement over their expected useful lives.
Software assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful economic lives normally five years.
Group
Goodwill
Software
Other
Total intangible assets At 1 April 2015 6  29 35 Transfer from other property plant and equipment  5  5 Capital expenditure  2  2 Amortisation  2 1 3 Impairment of goodwill on unwind of deferred tax liability 1   1 At 31 March Capital expenditure  2  2 Amortisation  1 2 3 Impairment of goodwill on unwind of deferred tax liability 1   1 At 31 March The other intangible asset relates to the Groups acquisition of its interest in Bluewater Kent in 2014 and represents the estimated fair value of the management rights for the centre.
The fair value at the date of acquisition was 30m and the asset is being amortised over a period of 20 years.
On recognition of the intangible asset the Group recognised a deferred tax liability of 6m and corresponding goodwill of the same amount.
The deferred tax liability is being released to the income statement as the intangible asset is amortised and the corresponding element of the goodwill is being tested for impairment.
132 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Section 4  Capital structure and financing This section focuses on the Groups financing structure including borrowings and financial risk management.
The total capital of the Group consists of shareholders equity and net debt.
The Groups strategy is to maintain an appropriate net debt to total equity ratio gearing and loantovalue ratio LTV to ensure that asset level performance is translated into enhanced returns for shareholders whilst maintaining an appropriate risk reward balance to accommodate changing financial and operating market cycles.
The table in note 20 details a number of the Groups key metrics in relation to managing its capital structure.
A key element of the Groups capital structure is that the majority of our borrowings are secured against a large pool of our assets the Security Group .
This enables us to raise longterm debt in the bond market as well as shorterterm flexible bank facilities both at competitive rates.
In general we follow a secured debt strategy as we believe this gives the Group better access to borrowings at a lower cost.
In addition the Group holds a number of assets outside the Security Group structure in the Nonrestricted Group.
These assets include a number of joint venture interests our interests in XLeisure and other properties where we have asset specific finance.
By having both the Security Group and the Nonrestricted Group and considerable flexibility to move assets between the two we are able to raise the most appropriate finance for each specific asset or joint venture.
Under IFRS a large part of our net debt is carried at below its final redemption amount and is increased over its life to its nominal value.
We view our capital structure as if the debt were carried at its full redemption amount see note 21 for an explanation of the bond exchange derecognition adjustment.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 133 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Capital structure
2017 2016
Joint ventures
Combined
Group
Joint ventures
Combined
Property portfolio Market value of investment properties 12662 1812 35 14439 12832 1673 34 14471 Trading properties 122 126  248 124 156  280 Total property portfolio a 12784 1938 35 14687 12956 1829 34 14751 Net debt Borrowings 2949 93  3042 2873 85  2958 Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits 21   21 19   19 Cash and cash equivalents 30 49  79 25 43  68 Fair value of interestrate swaps 2 2  4 32 2  34 Fair value of foreign exchange swaps 5   5 Net debt b 2905 46  2951 2861 44  2905 Less Fair value of interestrate swaps 2 2  4 32 2  34 Reverse bond exchange derecognition note 21 314   314 368   368 Adjusted net debt c 3217 44  3261 3197 42  3239 Adjusted total equity Total equity d 11516   11516 11699   11699 Fair value of interestrate swaps 2 2  4 32 2  34 Reverse bond exchange derecognition note 21 314   314 368   368 Adjusted total equity e 11204 2  11206 11363 2  11365 Gearing bd 25.2% 25.6% 24.5% 24.8% Adjusted gearing ce 28.7% 29.1% 28.1% 28.5% Group LTV ca 25.2% 22.2% 24.7% 22.0% Security Group LTV 28.3% 23.4% Weighted average cost of debt 4.2% 4.2% 4.9% 4.9% This represents the interest in XLeisure which we do not own but which is consolidated in the Group numbers.
134 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Accounting policy Borrowings other than bank overdrafts are recognised initially at fair value less attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition borrowings are stated at amortised cost with any difference between the amount initially recognised and the redemption value being recognised in the income statement over the period of the borrowings using the effective interest method.
Where existing borrowings are exchanged for new borrowings and the terms of the existing and new borrowings are not substantially different the new borrowings are recognised initially at the carrying amount of the existing borrowings.
The difference between the amount initially recognised and the redemption value of the new borrowings is recognised in the income statement over the period of the new borrowings using the effective interest method.
Group
31 March 2017 31 March 2016
Fixed floating
Nominal notional value
Book value
Fair value
Current borrowings
5.253% QAG Bond Secured Fixed 5.
Commercial paper Sterling Unsecured Floating LIBOR  margin Euro Unsecured Floating LIBOR  margin 261 261 261 Swiss Franc Unsecured Floating LIBOR  margin 28 28 28 US Dollar Unsecured Floating LIBOR  margin 94 94 94 Total current borrowings Noncurrent borrowings
A3 5.425% MTN due 2022 Secured Fixed 5.5 46 53 4telA10 4.875% MTN due 2025 Secured Fixed 5.0 28 34 2telA12 1.974% MTN due 2026 Secured Fixed 2.
A4 5.391% MTN due 2026 Secured Fixed 5.4 27 33 2telA5 5.391% MTN due 2027 Secured Fixed 5.
A6 5.376% MTN due 2029 Secured Fixed 5.
A13 2.399% MTN due 2031 Secured Fixed 2.
A7 5.396% MTN due 2032 Secured Fixed 5.
A11 5.125% MTN due 2036 Secured Fixed 5.
Bond exchange derecognition adjustment 314 368 2525 3144 2204 2515 3077 2138 5.253% QAG Bond Secured Fixed 5.
Syndicated bank debt Secured Floating LIBOR  margin 55 55 5telAmounts payable under finance leases Unsecured Fixed 5.
Total noncurrent borrowings 2866 3551 2545 3231 3852 2854 Total borrowings 3270 3959 2949 3250 3874 2873 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 135 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Reconciliation of the movement in borrowings
At the beginning of the year 2873 3784 Proceeds from new borrowings 361 249 Repayment of borrowings 391 806 Redemption of medium term notes 690 400 Issue of medium term notes net of finance fees 698 Amortisation of bond exchange derecognition adjustment 24 23 Bond exchange derecognition adjustment on redemption of medium term notes 30 Foreign exchange movement on nonGBP borrowings 23 23 Other 21 At 31 March 2949 2873 Medium term notes MTNs The MTNs are secured on the fixed and floating pool of assets of the Security Group.
Debt investors benefit from security over a pool of investment properties development properties and the Groups investment in Westgate Oxford Alliance Limited Partnership Nova Victoria the St.
Davids Limited Partnership and 20 Fenchurch Street Limited Partnership in total valued at 12.9bn at 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 12.6bn.
The secured debt structure has a tiered operating covenant regime which gives the Group substantial flexibility when the loantovalue and interest cover in the Security Group are less than 65% and more than 1.45 times respectively.
If these limits are exceeded the operating environment becomes more restrictive with provisions to encourage a reduction in gearing.
The interest rate is fixed until the expected maturity being two years before the legal maturity date for each MTN whereupon the interest rate for the last two years may either become LIBOR plus an increased margin relative to that at the time of issue or subject to a fixed coupon uplift depending on the terms and conditions of the specific notes.
The effective interest rate is based on the coupon paid and includes the amortisation of issue costs.
The MTNs are listed on the Irish Stock Exchange and their fair values are based on their respective market prices.
On 8 February 2017 the Group purchased 635m of MTNs for a premium of 124m.
The Group purchased 206m of its A3 MTN due in 2022 265m of its A10 MTN due in 2025 and 164m of its A4 MTN due in 2026.
On the same date the Group issued a 400m 1.974% MTN due in 2026 and a 300m 2.399% MTN due in 2031.
Costs associated with the issues of the new MTNs of 2m have been capitalised within noncurrent borrowings.
Earlier in the year the Group also purchased a further 55m of MTNs for a premium of 13m.
The Group purchased 3m of its A3 MTN due in 2022 7m of its A10 MTN due in 2025 20m of its A4 MTN due in 2026 23m of its A5 MTN due in 2027 and 2m of its A7 MTN due in 2032.
The table below summarises the aggregate purchases together with the premiums paid.
MTN purchases
31 March 2017 31 March 2016
Premium
Purchases
Premium
A8 4.875% MTN due 2019   400 26 A3 5.425% MTN due 2022 209 29 A10 4.875% MTN due 2025 272 57 A4 5.391% MTN due 2026 184 44 A5 5.391% MTN due 2027 23 6 A7 5.396% MTN due 2032 2 1 Syndicated and bilateral bank debt
Maturity as at 31 March
Drawn
Undrawn
Syndicated debt 202122 1815 1380 55 430 1760 950 Bilateral debt tel  125 485 1940 1865 55 430 1885 1435 136 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Borrowings continued At 31 March 2017 our committed revolving facilities totalled 1940m 31 March 2016 1865m.
The 75m increase in committed facilities is the result of a 435m syndicated debt facility being arranged on 14 June 2016 and a 125m bilateral debt facility being arranged on 31 January 2017 offset by the cancellation of 350m of bilateral facilities on 14 June 2016 and the cancellation of a 135m bilateral facility on 24 November 2016.
All syndicated and bilateral facilities are committed and secured on the assets of the Security Group.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 the amounts drawn under the Groups bilateral facilities and syndicated bank debt decreased by 375m.
The terms of the Security Group funding arrangements require undrawn facilities to be reserved where syndicated and bilateral facilities mature within one year or where commercial paper has been issued.
Accordingly the Groups available undrawn facilities at 31 March 2017 were 1499m 31 March 2016 1433m compared with undrawn facilities of 1885m 31 March 2016 1435m.
Queen Annes Gate Bond On 29 July 2009 the Group issued a 360m bond secured on the rental cash flows from the commercial lease with the UK Government over Queen Annes Gate QAG.
The QAG Bond is a fully amortising bond with a final maturity in February 2027 and a fixed interest rate of 5.253% per annum.
At 31 March 2017 the bond had an amortised book value of 273m 31 March 2016 289m.
Since 31 March 2017 the Group has redeemed the QAG bond in its entirety for a premium to nominal value of 63m.
Fair values The fair values of any floating rate financial liabilities are assumed to be equal to their nominal value but adjusted for the effect of exit fees payable on redemption.
The fair values of the MTNs and the QAG Bond fall within Level 1 the syndicated bilateral facilities commercial paper interestrate swaps and foreign exchange swaps fall within Level 2 and the amounts payable under finance leases fall within Level 3 as defined by IFRS 13.
The fair value of the amounts payable under finance leases is determined using a discount rate of 4.2% 31 March 2016 4.9%.
Bond exchange derecognition On 3 November 2004 a debt refinancing was completed resulting in the Group exchanging all of its outstanding bond and debenture debt for new MTNs with higher nominal values.
The new MTNs did not meet the IAS 39 conditions to be considered substantially different from the debt that they replaced.
Consequently the book value of the new debt is reduced to the book value of the original debt by the bond exchange derecognition adjustment which is then amortised to zero over the life of the new MTNs.
The amortisation is included in finance expense in the income statement.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 137 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits Accounting policy Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits represent cash held by the Group in accounts with conditions that restrict the use of these monies by the Group and as such does not meet the definition of cash and cash equivalents.
Holding cash in restricted accounts does not prevent the Group from optimising returns by putting these monies on shortterm deposit.
Group Company Cash at bank and in hand Shortterm deposits 9 8 The credit quality of monies held in restricted accounts and deposits can be assessed by reference to external credit ratings of the counterparty where the account or deposit is placed.
Group
Counterparties with external credit ratings BBB .
Cash and cash equivalents Accounting policy Cash and cash equivalents comprises cash balances deposits held at call with banks and other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and form an integral part of the Groups cash management are deducted from cash and cash equivalents for the purpose of the statement of cash flows.
Group Company Cash at bank and in hand 21 24 Shortterm deposits 9 1 Shortterm deposits The credit quality of cash and cash equivalents can be assessed by reference to external credit ratings of the counterparty where the account or deposit is placed.
Group
Counterparties with external credit ratings BBB  Landsec Annual Report 2017 Derivative financial instruments Accounting policy The Group uses interestrate and foreign exchange swaps to manage its market risk.
In accordance with its treasury policy the Group does not hold or issue derivatives for trading purposes.
All derivatives are recognised on the balance sheet at fair value.
The fair value of interestrate and foreign exchange swaps is based on counterparty or market quotes.
Those quotes are tested for reasonableness by discounting estimated future cash flows based on the terms and maturity of each contract and using market rates for similar instruments at the measurement date.
The gain or loss on derivatives are recognised immediately in the income statement within net finance expense.
The fair values of the financial instruments have been determined by reference to relevant market prices where available.
The fair values of the Groups outstanding interestrate swaps have been estimated by calculating the present value of future cash flows using appropriate market discount rates.
These valuation techniques fall within Level 2 as defined by IFRS 13.
Fair value of derivative financial instruments
Current liabilities 5 1 Noncurrent liabilities Notional amount
Interestrate swaps 400 580 Foreign exchange swaps 389 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 139 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Financial risk management
A review of the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing risk is set out in Managing risk and Our principal risks and uncertainties pages 42 to 45.
This note provides further detail on financial risk management and includes quantitative information on specific financial risks.
The Group is exposed to a variety of financial risks market risks principally interestrate risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management strategy seeks to minimise the potential adverse effects of these on the Groups financial performance and includes the use of derivative financial instruments to hedge certain risk exposures.
Financial risk management is carried out by the Groups treasury function under policies approved by the Board of Directors.
The following table summarises the Groups financial assets and liabilities into the categories required by IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures
Loans and receivables 672 684 Cash and cash equivalents 30 25 Other investments 13 14 Financial liabilities at amortised cost 3118 3047 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss 43 67 2446 2391 Financial risk factors i Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are cash and cash equivalents trade and other receivables finance lease receivables and amounts due from joint ventures.
Further details concerning the credit risk of counterparties is provided in the note that specifically relates to each type of asset.
Bank and financial institutions One of the principal credit risks of the Group arises from financial derivative instruments and deposits with banks and financial institutions.
In line with the policy approved by the Board of Directors where the Group manages the deposit only independently rated banks and financial institutions with a minimum rating of A are accepted.
For UK banks and financial institutions with which the Group has a committed lending relationship the minimum rating is lowered to BBB.
The Groups treasury function currently performs a weekly review of the credit ratings of all financial institution counterparties.
Furthermore the treasury function ensures that funds deposited with a single financial institution remain within the Groups policy limits.
Trade receivables Trade receivables are presented in the balance sheet net of allowances for doubtful receivables.
Impairment is made where there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables concerned.
The balance is low relative to the scale of the balance sheet and owing to the longterm nature and diversity of the Groups tenancy arrangements the credit risk of trade receivables is considered to be low.
Furthermore a credit report is obtained from an independent rating agency prior to the inception of a lease with a new counterparty.
This report is used to determine the size of the deposit that is required from the tenant at inception.
In general these deposits represent between three and six months rent.
Finance lease receivables This balance relates to amounts receivable from tenants in respect of tenant finance leases.
This is not considered a significant credit risk as the tenants are generally of good financial standing.
140 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Financial risk management continued ii Liquidity risk The Group actively maintains a mixture of notes with final maturities between 2022 and 2036 commercial paper and mediumterm committed bank facilities that are designed to ensure that the Group has sufficient available funds for its operations and its committed capital expenditure programme.
Management monitors the Groups available funds as follows
Cash and cash equivalents 30 25 Available facilities 1499 1433 Cash and available undrawn facilities 1529 1458 As a proportion of drawn debt 47.2% 45.0% The Groups core financing structure is in the Security Group although the Nonrestricted Group may also secure independent funding.
Security Group The Groups principal financing arrangements utilise the credit support of a ringfenced group of assets the Security Group that comprises the majority of the Groups investment property portfolio and certain investments in joint ventures.
These arrangements operate in tiers determined by LTV and interest cover ratio ICR .
This structure is most flexible at lower tiers with a lower LTV and a higher ICR and allows property acquisitions disposals and developments to occur with relative freedom.
In higher tiers the requirements become more prescriptive.
No financial covenant default is triggered until the applicable LTV exceeds 100% or the ICR is less than 1.0x.
As at 31 March 2017 the reported LTV for the Security Group was 28.3% 2016 23.4% meaning that the Group was operating in Tier 1 and benefited from maximum operational flexibility.
Management monitors the key covenants attached to the Security Group on a monthly basis including LTV ICR sector and regional concentration and disposals.
Nonrestricted Group The Nonrestricted Group obtains funding when required from a combination of intercompany loans from the Security Group equity and external bank debt.
Bespoke credit facilities are established with banks when required for the Nonrestricted Group projects and joint ventures usually on a limited recourse basis.
The table below analyses the Groups financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period at the balance sheet date to the expected maturity date.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows.
Group
Less than 1 year
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years
5 years
Borrowings excluding finance lease liabilities 531 145 537 3374 4587 Finance lease liabilities Derivative financial instruments 1 2 1 2 2 Trade payables 11    11 Capital accruals 34    34 Accruals 80    80 Amounts owed to joint ventures 6    6 Other payables 39    39 Redemption liabilities   36  3tel3577 5009 Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 141 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Less than 1 year
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years
5 years
Borrowings excluding finance lease liabilities 171 170 1186 3288 4815 Finance lease liabilities Derivative financial instruments Trade payables 6    6 Capital accruals 32    32 Accruals 79    79 Amounts owed to joint ventures 3    3 Other payables 25    25 Noncurrent trade and other payables  28   28 Redemption liabilities   35  35 318 203 1244 3377 5142 iii Market risk The Group is exposed to market risk through interest rates availability of credit and foreign exchange movements.
Interest rates The Group uses derivative products to manage its interest rate exposure and has a hedging policy that generally requires at least 80% of its existing debt plus increases in debt associated with net committed capital expenditure to be at fixed interest rates for the coming five years.
Due to a combination of factors principally the high level of certainty required under IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement  hedging instruments used in this context do not qualify for hedge accounting.
Specific interestrate hedges are also used within our joint ventures to fix the interest rate exposure on limitedrecourse debt.
Where specific hedges are used in geared joint ventures to fix the interest exposure on limitedrecourse debt these may qualify for hedge accounting.
At 31 March 2017 the Group including joint ventures had payfixed interestrate swaps in place with a nominal value of 0.5bn 2016 0.7bn and its net debt was 88.9% fixed 2016 94.9%.
Based on the Groups debt balances at 31 March 2017 a 1% increase in interest rates would increase the annual net finance expense in the income statement and reduce equity by 2m 2016 2m.
The sensitivity has been calculated by applying the interest rate change to the variable rate borrowings net of interestrate swaps and cash and cash equivalents.
Foreign exchange Foreign exchange risk arises when future commercial transactions or recognised assets or liabilities are denominated in a currency that is not the Groups functional currency.
As it is solely UK based the Group does not frequently enter into any foreign currency transactions other than in connection with its financing activities.
Where significant committed expenditure in foreign currencies is identified it is the Groups policy to hedge 100% of that exposure by entering into forward purchases of foreign currency to fix the Sterling value.
At 31 March 2017 the Group had issued 307m 118m and CHF35m of commercial paper fully hedged through foreign exchange swaps.
At 31 March 2016 the Group had no foreign currency exchange exposure.
A 10% weakening or strengthening of Sterling would therefore have nil 2016 nil impact on the Groups income statement and equity.
The Groups foreign exchange risk is therefore low.
Financial maturity analysis The interest rate profile of the Groups undiscounted borrowings after taking into account the effect of the interestrate swaps are set out below
2017 2016
Floating rate
Fixed rate
Total
Sterling 2829 58 2887 2997 253 3250 Euro  261 261 US Dollar  94 94 Swiss Franc  28 28 2829 441 3270 2997 253 3250 142 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Financial risk management continued The expected maturity profiles of the Groups borrowings are as follows
2017 2016
Floating rate
Fixed rate
Total
One year or less or on demand More than one year but not more than two years 20  20 18  18 More than two years but not more than five years 117 5tel750 More than five years 2674  2674 2463  2463 Borrowings 2829 441 3270 2817 433 3250 Effect of hedging    180 180 Borrowings net of interestrate swaps 2829 441 3270 2997 253 3250 The expected maturity profiles of the Groups derivative instruments are as follows based on notional values
2017 2016
Interest
Foreign exchange swaps
One year or less or on demand 389   180 More than five years Interestrate swaps more than five years have a term commencing from October 2017 .
Valuation hierarchy Interestrate swaps foreign exchange swaps the redemption liability and other investments are the only financial instruments which are carried at fair value.
For financial instruments other than borrowings disclosed in note 21 the carrying value in the balance sheet approximates their fair values.
The table below shows the aggregate assets and liabilities carried at fair value by valuation method
2017 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets   13 13   14 14 Liabilities  7 36 43  32 35 67
Level 1 valued using unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical financial instruments.
Level 2 valued using techniques based on information that can be obtained from observable market data.
Level 3 valued using techniques incorporating information other than observable market data.
The fair value of the Groups finance lease obligations using a discount rate of 4.2% 2016 4.9% is 42m 2016 18m.
The fair value of the redemption liability is determined as the present value of the amount the Group would be required to pay to settle the liability an exit price.
The fair value is calculated by reference to the net assets of the underlying subsidiary.
The valuation is not based on observable market data and therefore the redemption liability is considered to fall within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
The fair value of the other investments is calculated by reference to the net assets of the underlying entity.
The valuation is not based on observable market data and therefore the other investments are considered to fall within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 143 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Section 5  Working capital This section focuses on our working capital balances including trade and other receivables trade and other payables and provisions.
Trade and other receivables Accounting policy Trade and other receivables are recognised initially at fair value subsequently at amortised cost and where relevant adjusted for the time value of money.
A provision for impairment is made where there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables concerned.
If collection is expected in more than one year the balance is presented within noncurrent assets.
Group Company Net trade receivables 53 69 Property sales receivables 18 70 Tenant lease incentives note 14 311 268 Prepayments and accrued income 25 25 Amounts due from joint ventures 2 7 Other receivables Total current trade and other receivables Noncurrent amounts due from joint ventures 107 86 Noncurrent property sales receivables 16 Total trade and other receivables The accounting for lease incentives is set out in note 6.
The value of the tenant lease incentive included in current trade and other receivables is spread over the noncancellable life of the lease.
Ageing of trade receivables
Not past due Up to 30 days past due Up to 6 months past due Up to 12 months past due More than 12 months past due
As at 31 March 2017 Not impaired Impaired   Gross trade receivables As at 31 March 2016 Not impaired Impaired   Gross trade receivables The majority of the Groups trade receivables are considered past due as they relate to rents receivable from tenants which are payable in advance.
None of the Groups other receivables are past due 2016 nil.
144 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Trade and other receivables continued Movement in allowances for doubtful accounts
At the beginning of the year 16 15 Increase to provision 6 10 Decrease to provision 5 5 Utilised in the year 6 4 At 31 March 11 16 Movement in tenant lease incentives
At the beginning of the year 268 251 Revenue recognised 44 29 Capital incentives granted 1 7 Provision for doubtful receivables  2 Disposal of properties 2 17 At 31 March 311 268 Trade and other payables Group Company Trade payables 11 6 Capital accruals 34 32 Other payables 39 25 Accruals Deferred income 132 126 Amounts owed to joint ventures 6 3 Trading property deposits  18 Loans from Group undertakings   1380 1031 Total current trade and other payables 302 289 1394 1037 Noncurrent amounts owed to joint ventures  12 Noncurrent other payables  16 Noncurrent trading property deposits 25 Total trade and other payables 327 317 1394 1037 Capital accruals represent amounts due under contracts to purchase properties which were unconditionally exchanged at the year end and for work completed on investment properties but not paid for at the year end.
Deferred income principally relates to rents received in advance.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 145 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Section 6  Other required disclosures This section gives further disclosure in respect of other areas of the financial statements together with mandatory disclosures required in accordance with IFRS.
Investments in subsidiary undertakings Accounting policy Investments in subsidiary undertakings are stated at cost in the Companys balance sheet less any provision for impairment in value.
In accordance with IFRS 2  Share Based Payments the equity settled sharebased payment charge for the employees of the Companys subsidiaries is treated as an increase in the cost of investment in the subsidiaries with a corresponding increase in the Companys equity.
Company
At the beginning of the year 6200 6192 Capital contributions relating to sharebased payments note 33 5 8 At 31 March 6205 6200 A full list of subsidiary undertakings at 31 March 2017 is included on page 180.
Other noncurrent assets
Other property plant and equipment 24 5 Other investments 13 14 Pension surplus note 32 14 25 Total other noncurrent assets 51 44 Other current liabilities
Provisions 2 18 Derivative financial instruments 5 1 Total other current liabilities 7 19 146 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Other noncurrent liabilities
Provisions  6 Derivative financial instruments 2 31 Deferred tax liability 7 10 Total other noncurrent liabilities 9 47 Net pension surplus Accounting policy Contributions to defined contribution schemes are charged to the income statement as incurred.
The pension obligations arising under the Groups defined benefit pension scheme are measured at discounted present value.
The scheme assets are measured at fair value except annuities which are valued to match the liability or benefit value.
The operating and financing costs of the scheme are recognised separately in the income statement.
Service costs are spread using the projected unit credit method.
Net financing costs are recognised in the period in which they arise calculated with reference to the discount rate and are included in finance income or expense on a net basis.
Remeasurement gains and losses arising from either experience differing from previous actuarial assumptions or changes to those assumptions are recognised immediately in other comprehensive income.
Defined contribution schemes The charge to operating profit for the year in respect of the defined contribution scheme was 3m 2016 2m.
Defined benefit scheme The Pension and Assurance Scheme of the Land Securities Group of Companies the Scheme is a registered defined benefit final salary scheme subject to the UK regulatory framework for pensions including the Scheme Specific Funding requirements.
The Scheme is operated under trust and as such the Trustees of the Scheme are responsible for operating the Scheme and they have a statutory responsibility to act in accordance with the Schemes Trust Deed and Rules in the best interest of the beneficiaries of the Scheme and UK legislation including trust law.
The Trustees and the Group have the joint power to set the contributions that are paid to the Scheme.
In setting contributions to the Scheme the Trustees and the Group are guided by the advice of a qualified independent actuary on the basis of triennial valuations using the projected unit credit method.
As the Scheme is closed to new members the current service cost is expected to increase as a percentage of salary of the Scheme members under the projected unit credit method as members approach retirement.
A full actuarial valuation of the Scheme was undertaken on 30 June 2015 by the independent actuaries Hymans Robertson LLP .
This valuation was updated to 31 March 2017 using where required assumptions prescribed by IAS 19 Employee Benefits .
The next full actuarial valuation will be performed as at 30 June 2018.
As a result of the 30 June 2015 valuation the employer contribution rate increased from 1 April 2016 to 43.1% from 36.1% of pensionable salary to cover the costs of accruing benefits.
It was agreed that no further deficit contributions were required from the Group.
Employee contributions are paid by salary sacrifice and therefore appear as Group contributions.
In the year ended 31 March 2017 employee contributions were 8.0% 2016 8.0% of monthly pensionable salary.
The Group expects to make total employee and employer contributions of around 1m 2016 1m to the Scheme in the year to 31 March 2018.
All deathinservice and incapacity benefits arising during employment are wholly insured.
No postretirement benefits other than pensions are made available to employees of the Group.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 147 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Analysis of the amounts charged to the income statement
Analysis of the amount charged to operating profit Current service cost 1 1 Charge to operating profit 1 1 Analysis of amount credited to net finance expense Interest income on plan assets 8 7 Interest expense on defined benefit scheme liabilities 7 7 Net credit to finance income 1 Analysis of the amounts recognised in other comprehensive income
Analysis of gains and losses Net remeasurement gainslosses on scheme assets 29 12 Net remeasurement lossesgains on scheme liabilities 41 30 Net remeasurement lossgain 12 18 Cumulative net remeasurement loss recognised in other comprehensive income 39 27 The net surplus recognised in respect of the defined benefit scheme can be analysed as follows
Equities Bonds  Government Bonds  Corporate Insurance contracts Cash and cash equivalents  1 1 2 Fair value of scheme assets 10telFair value of scheme liabilities 232 190 Net pension surplus 14 25 During the year the Scheme sold some corporate bonds and gilts to purchase a buyin policy with Just Retirement for 111m.
This insurance contract is valued as an asset using the same IAS 19 assumptions.
Insurance contracts are annuities which are unquoted assets.
All other Scheme assets have quoted prices in active markets.
The Scheme assets do not include any directly owned financial instruments issued by the Group.
Indirectly owned financial instruments had a fair value of 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
The defined benefit scheme liabilities are split 11% 2016 12% in respect of active scheme participants 25% 2016 27% in respect of deferred scheme participants and 64% 2016 61% in respect of retirees.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit scheme liabilities at 31 March 2017 is 17.3 years 2016 16.7 years.
148 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Net pension surplus continued The assumptions agreed with the Trustees of the Scheme for the triennial valuation at 30 June 2015 have been restated to the assumptions described by IAS 19 Employee Benefits .
The major assumptions used in the valuation were in nominal terms
Rate of increase in pensionable salaries 3.40 3.15 Rate of increase in pensions with no cap 3.40 3.15 Rate of increase in pensions with 5% cap 3.30 3.05 Discount rate 2.55 3.50 Inflation  Retail Price Index 3.40 3.15 Consumer Price Index 2.60 2.35 The mortality assumptions used in this valuation were
Years
Years
Life expectancy at age 60 for current pensioners  Men 30.8 29.6 Women 31.2 31.0 Life expectancy at age 60 for future pensioners current age 40  Men 33.8 33.2 Women 33.7 33.5 The sensitivities regarding the principal assumptions used to measure the Scheme liabilities are set out below.
These were calculated using approximate methods taking into account the duration of the Scheme liabilities.
Assumption Change in assumption Impact on scheme liabilities Discount rate Increasedecrease by 0.5% Decreaseincrease by 21m Rate of mortality Increase by 1 year Increase by 9m Rate of inflation Increasedecrease by 0.5% Increasedecrease by 18m As the above table demonstrates changes in assumptions can have a significant impact on the Scheme liabilities.
The assumptions agreed with the Trustees of the Scheme for the triennial valuation and subsequent interim updates differ from those prescribed by IAS 19 Employee Benefits .
Using the assumptions agreed with the Trustees would result in a balance sheet deficit for the Scheme of 8m at 31 March 2017 as opposed to a surplus of 14m.
In order to reduce risk within the Scheme 48% 2016 7% of the Scheme assets are invested in annuities that match the liabilities of some pensioners.
The assets that the Scheme holds are designed to match a significant proportion of the Scheme liabilities and the Scheme has hedged over 72% 2016 75% of the inflation and interest rate risks when measured on a gilts flat discount rate to which it is exposed.
The Company did not operate any defined contribution schemes or defined benefit schemes during the financial year ended 31 March 2017 or in the previous financial year.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 149 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Sharebased payments Accounting policy The cost of granting shares options over shares and other sharebased remuneration to employees and Executive Directors is recognised through the income statement.
All awards are equity settled and therefore the fair value is measured at the grant date.
Where the awards have nonmarket related performance criteria the Group uses the BlackScholes option valuation model to establish the relevant fair values.
Where the awards have Total Shareholder Return TSR market related performance criteria the Group has used the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model to establish the relevant fair values.
The resulting values are amortised through the income statement over the vesting period of the awards.
For awards with nonmarket related criteria the charge is reversed if it appears probable that the performance or service criteria will not be met.
The following table analyses the total cost recognised in the income statement for the year between each plan together with number of options outstanding.
2017 2016
Number millions
Number millions LongTerm Incentive Plan Deferred bonus share plan 1  1 Share award plan 1  2 Executive share option scheme A summary of the main features of each type of plan is given below.
The plans have been split into two categories Executive plans and other plans.
For further details on the Executive plans see the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 76 to 91.
Executive plans LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP The LTIP is open to Executive Directors and Senior Management with awards made at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
In addition other than for Executive Directors an award of matching shares can be made where the individual acquires shares in Land Securities Group PLC and pledges to hold them for a period of three years.
Awards of LTIP shares and matching shares are subject to the same performance criteria and normally vest after three years.
Awards may be satisfied by the issue of new shares the transfer of treasury shares other shares or nil cost options.
The awards will be issued at nil consideration subject to performance and vesting conditions being met.
The weighted average share price at the date of vesting during the year was 1006p 2016 1262p.
The estimated fair value of awards granted during the year under the scheme was 4m 2016 4m.
Deferred bonus share plan The Executive Directors and Managing Directors annual bonus is structured in two distinct parts made up of an initial payment and deferred shares.
The shares are deferred for one or two years and are not subject to additional performance criteria.
Awards are satisfied by the transfer of existing shares held by the Employee Benefit Trust EBT at nil consideration or by nil cost options.
The weighted average share price at the date of vesting during the year was 887p 2016 1227p.
The estimated fair value of awards granted during the year under the scheme was 0.8m 2016 1.5m.
Other plans Executive share option scheme ESOS The 2005 ESOS is open to managers not eligible to participate in the LTIP .
Awards are discretionary and are granted over ordinary shares of the Company at the middle market price on the three dealing days immediately preceding the date of grant.
Awards normally vest after three years and are not subject to performance conditions.
Awards are satisfied by the transfer of shares from the EBT and lapse 10 years after the date of grant.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for awards exercised during the year was 1053p 2016 1249p.
The estimated fair value of awards granted during the year under the scheme was 0.3m 2016 0.3m.
Savings related share option plan Under the savings related share option plan Executive Directors and other eligible employees are invited to make regular monthly contributions into a Sharesave plan operated by Equiniti.
On completion of the three or five year contract period ordinary shares in the Company may be purchased at a price based upon the market price at date of invitation less 20% discount.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for awards exercised during the year was 1046p 2016 1238p.
The estimated fair value of awards granted during the year under the scheme was 0.2m 2016 0.3m.
150 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Sharebased payments continued The aggregate number of awards outstanding and the weighted average exercise price are shown below Executive plans Other plans Number of awards Number of awards Weighted average exercise price
Number millions
Number millions
Pence
At the beginning of the year Granted 1 1 1  993 1229 Exercised 1 1 1  805 911 Lapsed 1     900 At 31 March 068 983 Exercisable at the end of the year   Years Years Years Years Weighted average remaining contractual life .
Executive plans are granted at nil consideration.
The number of share awards outstanding for the Group by range of exercise prices is shown below Outstanding at 31 March 2017 Outstanding at 31 March 2016 Exercise price  range
Number of awards
Weighted average exercise price Number of awards
Pence Pence
Number millions Years
1000  1199 1044 1 7 1058 1 6 1200  1399 1328  8 1328  9 1400  1565    1563  1 Executive plans are granted at nil consideration.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 151 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Fair value inputs for awards with nonmarket performance conditions Fair values are calculated using the BlackScholes option pricing model for awards with nonmarket performance conditions.
Inputs into this model for the grants under each plan in the financial year are as follows LongTerm Incentive Plan Deferred bonus share plan 2005 ESOS Savings related share option plan Year ended 31 Marchteltel 2017 2016 Share price at grant date 1005p 1325p 1005p 1245p 1005p 1328p 1191p 1280p Exercise price na na na na 1005p 1328p 953p 1024p Expected volatility 18% 16% 18% 16% 18% 16% 18% 16% Expected life 3 years 3 years 1 to 2 years 1 to 2 years 3 years 3 years 3 to 5 years 3 to 5 years Riskfree rate 0.21% 1.02% 0.15% to 0.21% 0.52% to 0.67% 0.21% 1.02% 0.35% to 0.57% 1.07% to 1.58% Expected dividend yield 3.48% 2.40% nil nil 3.48% 2.40% 2.94% 2.49% Expected volatility is determined by calculating the historic volatility of the Groups share price over the previous ten years.
The expected life used in the model has been determined based upon managements best estimate for the effects of nontransferability vestingexercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
Riskfree rate is the yield at the date of the grant of an award on a giltedged stock with a redemption date equal to the anticipated vesting of that award.
Fair value inputs for awards with market performance conditions Fair values are calculated using the Monte Carlo simulation option pricing model for awards with market performance conditions.
Awards made under the 2005 LTIP which were granted after 31 March 2009 include a TSR condition which is a marketbased condition.
The inputs into this model for the scheme are as follows Share price at date of grant Exercise price Expected volatility  Group Expected volatility  index of comparator companies
Group vs.
Year ended 31 Marchtelteltel 2016 LongTerm Incentive Plan 1005p 1325p na na 20% 20% 20% 20% 85% 85% 152 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Ordinary share capital Accounting policy Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
External costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares are shown in equity as a deduction from the proceeds.
The consideration paid by any Group entity to acquire the Companys equity share capital including any directly attributable incremental costs is deducted from equity until the shares are cancelled reissued or disposed.
Where own shares are sold or reissued the net consideration received is included in equity.
Shares acquired by the Employee Benefit Trust EBT are presented on the Group balance sheet as own shares .
Purchases of treasury shares are deducted from retained earnings.
Group and Company Allotted and fully paid Ordinary shares of 10p each 80 80 Group and Company Number of shares 2017 2016 At the beginning of the year 801164497 801032763 Issued on the exercise of options 80131 131734 At 31 March 801244628 801164497 The number of options over ordinary shares from Executive Schemes that were outstanding at 31 March 2017 was 2281006 2016 2580225.
If all the options were exercised at that date then 2281006 2016 2580225 shares would be required to be transferred from the EBT.
The number of options over ordinary shares from Other plans that were outstanding at 31 March 2017 was 1859031 2016 2071452.
If all the options were exercised at that date then 354783 new ordinary shares 2016 406021 would be issued and 1504248 shares would be required to be transferred from the EBT 2016 1665431.
Shareholders at the Annual General Meeting have previously authorised the acquisition of shares by the Company representing up to 10% of its share capital to be held as treasury shares.
During the year ended 31 March 2017 no ordinary shares 2016 nil were acquired to be held as treasury shares.
At 31 March 2017 the Group held 10495131 ordinary shares 2016 10495131 with a market value of 111m 2016 116m in treasury.
Own shares
At the beginning of the year 14 11 Acquisition of ordinary shares 6 19 Transfer of shares to employees on exercise of share options 11 16 At 31 March 9 14 Own shares consist of shares in Land Securities Group PLC held by the EBT in respect of the Groups commitment to a number of its employee share option schemes note 33.
The number of shares held by the EBT at 31 March 2017 was 792556 2016 1143892.
The market value of these shares at 31 March 2017 was 8m 2016 13m.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Financial Statements 153 Landsec Annual Report 2017
The Group has contingent liabilities in respect of legal claims guarantees and warranties arising in the ordinary course of business.
It is not anticipated that any material liabilities will arise from the contingent liabilities.
Related party transactions
During the year the Company entered into transactions in the normal course of business with other related parties as follows
Transactions with subsidiary undertakings Recharge of costs 294 272 Dividend received  400 Interest paid 55 63 Joint arrangements As disclosed in note 16 the Group has investments in a number of joint arrangements.
Details of transactions and balances between the Group and its joint arrangements are disclosed as follows
Year ended and as at 31 March 2017 Year ended and as at 31 March 2016
Net investments into joint ventures
Amounts owed to joint ventures
Net investments into joint ventures
Amounts owed to joint ventures 20 Fenchurch Street Limited Partnership 12 8 43 1 17 1 46 Nova Victoria 19  56 3 18 100 40 Metro Shopping Fund Limited Partnership  4    14 1
Davids Limited Partnership 1 16   1 14  1 Westgate Oxford Alliance Limited Partnership 9 67 10  7 62 5 The Oriana Limited Partnership  37    63 Harvest  2   1 32 The Ebbsfleet Limited Partnership  1 Millshaw Property Co.
Limited  12    3  12 West India Quay Unit Trust  1  2  2 1 2 Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of the Directors and Managing Directors who are the key management personnel of the Group is set out below in aggregate for each of the applicable categories specified in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures .
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the audited part of the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 76 to 91.
Shortterm employee benefits 5 6 Sharebased payments  Landsec Annual Report 2017 Operating lease arrangements Accounting policy The Group earns rental income by leasing its properties to tenants under noncancellable operating leases.
Leases in which substantially all risks and rewards of ownership are retained by another party the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Payments including prepayments made under operating leases net of any incentives received from the lessor are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
At the balance sheet date the Group had contracted with tenants to receive the following future minimum lease payments Not later than one year 496 464 Later than one year but not more than five years 1962 1913 More than five years 3444 3874 5902 6251 The total of contingent rents recognised as income during the year was 45m 2016 43m.
Events after the reporting period On 13 April 2017 the Groups joint arrangement The Metro Shopping Fund Limited Partnership Metro completed the sale of ShopStop Clapham Junction to DV4 a fund owned by Delancey Real Estate Asset Management Limited Delancey.
On the same date Delancey sold its stake in Metro to Invesco Real Estate European Fund.
The partnership was subsequently renamed The Southside Limited Partnership and the 85m thirdparty debt in the fund was repaid in full.
Since 31 March 2017 the Group has redeemed the 273m Queen Annes Gate bond in its entirety at a premium of 63m.
The redemption was financed through existing Group facilities.
On 15 May 2017 the Group acquired three retail outlet centres from Britel Fund Trustees Limited as trustee of the BT Pension Scheme.
The three assets Freeport Braintree Clarks Village Street and Junction 32 Castleford were acquired for a total consideration of 333m.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 continued Contents Further analysis of our business and practical information for shareholders.
156 Business analysis  Group 160 Business analysis  London 161 Business analysis  Retail 162 Sustainability reporting 168 Combined Portfolio analysis 170 Lease lengths Development pipeline and trading property development schemes 172 Alternative performance measures 172 Five year summary Acquisitions disposals and capital expenditure 175 Remuneration policy 180 Subsidiaries joint ventures and associates 183 Shareholder information 186 Key contacts and advisers 187 Glossary IBC Cautionary statement
Combined Portfolio performance relative to IPD Table 73 Total property returns  year ended 31 March 2017
PD % Retail  Shopping centres 3.6 1.1 Retail parks 1.3 1.3 Central London shops 9.8 8.6 Central London offices 2.0 2.6 Total 3.7 IPD Quarterly Universe IPD Retail Warehouses Quarterly Universe Includes leisure hotel portfolio and other Combined Portfolio value by location at 31 March 2017 Table 74
Retail parks %
Hotels leisure residential and other %
Central inner and outer London 14.6 0.2 46.7 3.4 64.9 South East and East 10.4 3.5  0.9 14.8 Midlands  0.6  0.4 1.0 Wales and South West 2.5 0.5  4.5 7.5 North North West Yorkshire and Humberside 7.1 0.9 0.1 0.5 8.6 Scotland and Northern Ireland 2.7 0.3  0.2 3.2 % figures calculated by reference to the Combined Portfolio value of 14.4bn.
Total shareholder returns Table 75 Period to 31 March 2017 5 years 3 years 1 year Land Securities Group PLC 172.2 109.2 101.9 FTSE 350 Real Estate Index 175.2 112.2 101.1 Historical TSR performance for a hypothetical investment of 100  source Thomson Reuters.
Business Analysis  Group Relative income return Capital growth Contribution of developments Contribution of purchases Contribution of disposals Impact of structure
Analysis of performance relative to IPD % Chart 77
Retail parks
Central
London shops
31 March 2017 In administration
All property
Retail parks
Central
London shops
All property 31 March .6 Voids and units in administration likeforlike % Chart 76 Attribution analysis ungeared total return 12 months to 31 March 2017  relative to IPD Quarterly Universe.
Source IPD.
Additional information 157 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Reconciliation of segmental information note to statutory reporting The table below reconciles the Groups income statement to the segmental information note note 4 to the financial statements.
The Groups income statement is prepared using the equity accounting method for joint ventures and includes 100% of the results of the Groups nonwholly owned subsidiaries.
In contrast the segmental information note is prepared on a proportionately consolidated basis and excludes the nonwholly owned share of the Groups subsidiaries.
This is consistent with the financial information reviewed by management.
Table 78 Year ended 31 March 2017
Joint ventures
Total
Revenue profit
Rental income 587 53 2 638 638 Finance lease interest 10   10 10 Gross rental income before rents payable 597 53 2 648 648 Rents payable 10 1  11 11 Gross rental income after rents payable 587 52 2 637 637 Service charge income 94 9 2 101 101 Service charge expense 96 11 1 106 106 Net service charge expense 2 2 1 5 5 Other property related income 32 2  34 34 Direct property expenditure 58 8  66 66 Net rental income 559 44 3 600 600 Indirect property expenditure 79 2  81 81 Other income 2   2 2 Profit on disposal of investment properties 19 1  20  20 Loss on disposal of investment in joint venture 2   2  2 Profit on disposal of other investment 13   13  13 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 186 40 1 147  147 Movement in impairment of trading properties 12   12  12 Profit on disposal of trading properties 29 7  36  36 Head office relocation 1   1  1 Other 3  4 1  1 Operating profit 365 90  455 521 66 Finance income 37   37 37 Finance expense 359 21  380 176 204 Share of posttax profit from joint ventures 69 69 Profit before tax 112   112 382 270 Taxation 1   1  1 Profit attributable to owners of the parent 113   113 382 269 Reallocation of the share of posttax profit from joint ventures reported in the Group income statement to the individual line items reported in the segmental information note.
Removal of the nonwholly owned share of results of the Groups subsidiaries.
The nonwholly owned subsidiaries are consolidated at 100% in the Groups income statement but only the Groups share is included in revenue profit reported in the segmental information note.
REIT balance of business To retain the Groups REIT status it must meet conditions from the REIT legislation.
At least 75% of the Groups assets and 75% of the Groups income must relate to qualifying activities.
The results of these tests at the balance sheet date are below REIT balance of business Table 79 For the year ended 31 March 2017 For the year ended 31 March 2016
Residual business
Taxexempt business
Adjusted results Profit before tax m Balance of business  75% profits test 78.7% 21.3% 85.6% 14.4% Adjusted total assets m 14088 991 15079 14256 939 15195 Balance of business  75% assets test 93.4% 6.6% 93.8% 6.2% Calculated according to REIT rules.
158 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Cost analysis Table 80 Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 m Total m Cost ratio % Total m Cost ratio % Gross rental income before rents payable 648
Managed operations 8 1.2 8 1.2 Gross rental income after rents payable 637 Tenant default 2 0.3 9 1.4 Net service charge expense 5 Void related costs 13 2.0 15 2.3 Net direct property expenditure 32 Other direct property costs 12 1.9 12 1.8 Net rental income 600 Indirect costs 39
Development expenditure 16 2.5 20 3.0 Segment profit before finance expense 561 Asset management administration and compliance Net unallocated expenses 40 Net finance expense  Group 118 Net finance expense  joint ventures 21 Revenue profit 382 65 10.0 59 9.0 Total 116m Total incl.
Total cost ratio 17.9% Head office relocation 1 6 EPRA costs incl.
Less Direct vacancy costs 12 15 EPRA excl.
Percentages represent costs divided by gross rental income including finance leases before rents payable.
This is with the exception of EPRA measures which represent costs divided by gross rental income including finance leases after rents payable.
EPRA performance measures Table 81 31 March 2017 Definition for EPRA measure Notes
EPRA measure Adjusted earnings Recurring earnings from core operational activity Adjusted earnings per share Adjusted earnings per weighted number of ordinary shares Adjusted diluted earnings per share Adjusted diluted earnings per weighted number of ordinary shares Adjusted net assets Net assets adjusted to exclude fair value movements on interestrate swaps 5 11206m 11520m Adjusted diluted net assets per share Adjusted diluted net assets per share 5 1417p 1456p Triple net assets Adjusted net assets amended to include the fair value of financial instruments and debt na 10502m Diluted triple net assets per share Diluted triple net assets per share na 1328p Net initial yield NIY Annualised rental income less nonrecoverable costs as a % of market value plus assumed purchasers costs 3.6% 4.2% Toppedup NIY NIY adjusted for rent free periods 4.2% 4.4% Voidsvacancy rate ERV of vacant space as a % of ERV of Combined Portfolio excluding the development programme 4.6% 4.0% Cost ratio Total costs as a percentage of gross rental income including direct vacancy costs 17.9% 18.1% Total costs as a percentage of gross rental income excluding direct vacancy costs na 16.2% EPRA adjusted earnings and EPRA adjusted earnings per share include the amortisation of bond exchange derecognition of 24m and the net head office relocation credit of 1m.
EPRA adjusted net assets and adjusted diluted net assets per share include the bond exchange derecognition adjustment of 314m.
Our NIY and Toppedup NIY relate to the Combined Portfolio excluding properties in the development programme that have not yet reached practical completion and are calculated by our external valuer.
EPRA NIY and EPRA Toppedup NIY calculations are consistent with ours but exclude all developments.
Our measure reflects voids in our likeforlike portfolio only.
The EPRA measure reflects voids in the Combined Portfolio excluding only the development programme.
The EPRA cost ratio is calculated based on gross rental income after rents payable whereas our measure is based on gross rental income before rents payable.
We do not calculate a cost ratio excluding direct vacancy costs as we do not consider this to be helpful.
Business Analysis  Group continued Additional information 159 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Top 12 occupiers at 31 March 2017 Table 82 % of Group rent Deloitte 5.2 Accor 5.1 Central Government 5.1 Mizuho Bank 1.7 Boots 1.5 Sainsburys 1.3 Taylor Wessing 1.2 HandM 1.2 KandL Gates 1.2 MandS 1.1 Cineworld 1.1 Telecity Group 1.1 On a proportionate basis.
PID Table Table 83 Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March 2016 Profit before tax per accounts 112 1336 Adjustment to exclude Valuation and profits on disposals 68 1043 Interest income 37 35 Amortisation of bond exchange derecognition adjustment 24 23 Redemption of medium term notes 170 26 Fair value movement on interest rateswaps 8 11 Revaluation of redemption liabilities 3 5 Impairment of goodwill 1 1 Amortisation of intangible asset Tax adjustments Capital allowances 56 53 Capitalised interest 20 26 Cumulative tax adjustments and removal of net residual tax result 2 13 Estimated tax exempt income for year 277 234 PID thereon 90% 250 211 PID dividends paid in the year 218 191 The table provides a reconciliation of the Companys profit before tax to its estimated tax exempt income 90% of which the Company is required to distribute as a PID to comply with REIT regulations.
The Company has 12 months after the year end to make the minimum distribution.
Accordingly PID dividends paid in the year may relate to the distribution requirements of previous periods.
Table 86 property holdings at 31 March 2017
Number of
Total 100.0tel 2020 Development programme Trading properties Committed development  estimated future spend m Chart 87 Estimated future spend includes the cost of residential space but excludes interest.
Financial services 16.3 Services 26.7 Retail trade 33.3 Public administration 6.1 Manufacturing 2.8 Transport communications 2.6 Wholesale trade 2.6 Other 9.6 Annual net rent breakdown by occupier business sector % Chart 84 London Portfolio 6.5 Retail Portfolio 16.7 Total 23.2 Floor space million sq ft Chart 85 160 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Top 10 office customers Table 91 % of Group rent Deloitte 5.2 Central Government including Queen Annes Gate SW1 5.1 Mizuho Bank 1.7 Taylor Wessing 1.2 KandL Gates 1.2 Telecity Group 1.1 Deutsche Bank 1.1 Bain and Co 0.8 Schlumberger Oilfield UK 0.7 Wellington Management 0.7 Office other 20.0 Total 38.8 London likeforlike  rental and capital value Table 92 trends % year ended 31 March 2017 Rental value change %
West End 2.5 4.3 City 8.1 3.1 Midtown 1.0 5.1 Inner London 0.6 7.8 Central London shops 4.7 6.9 Total London likeforlike portfolio 3.0 1.8 Rental value change excludes units materially altered during the year and Queen Annes Gate SW1.
Business Analysis  London West End Our 3.2bn West End office portfolio is dominated by our Victoria assets which include Cardinal Place SW1 Queen Annes Gate SW1 62 Buckingham Gate SW1 and developments including The Zig Zag Building SW1 and Nova Victoria SW1.
Midtown
Positioned between the City and West End our cluster of buildings at New Street Square EC4 represent our major assets and developments in Midtown.
City
Our 1.9bn City office portfolio includes assets such as One New Change EC4 and the now completed schemes at 20 Fenchurch Street EC3 and 1 and 2 New Ludgate EC4.
Inner London Includes our assets at Docklands E14 and Southwark SE1.
Central London shops This segment comprises the retail space in our London Portfolio assets.
The largest elements are Piccadilly Lights W1 and the retail space at One New Change EC4 and Cardinal Place SW1.
London offices
Mar
Sep
Mar
Mar
Sep
Mar
Mar
Sep
Central London shops In administration
Portfolio
Voids
Voids and units in administration likeforlike London Portfolio % Chart 89 West End 39 Midtown 16 City 22 Inner London 4 Central London shops 18 Other 1 London Portfolio valuation % 8.3bn Chart 88 West End offices 2.3 City offices 1.7 Midtown offices 1.2 Inner London offices 0.5 Central London shops 0.7 Other 0.1 Total 6.5 London Portfolio floor space sq ft sq ft Chart 90 Additional information 161 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Top 10 retail customers Table 96 % of Group rent Boots 1.5 Sainsburys 1.3 HandM 1.2 Cineworld 1.1 Next 1.1 Arcadia Group 1.0 MandS 0.9 Vue 0.8 Tesco 0.8 Currys and PC World 0.6 Retail other excluding Accor 37.5 Total 47.8 Retail likeforlike  rental and capital value Table 97 trends % year ended 31 March 2017 Rental value change %
Shopping centres and shops 1.6 1.3 Retail parks 0.6 4.2 Leisure and hotels 0.2 2.3 Total Retail likeforlike portfolio 1.1 0.9 Rental value change excludes units materially altered during the year.
Business Analysis  Retail Shopping centres and shops Comprises our portfolio of 13 shopping centres in major retail locations across the UK including Bluewater Kent Trinity Leeds Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth and Buchanan Galleries in Glasgow.
Retail parks Our 13 retail parks are typically located away from town centres and offer a range of retail and leisure with parking providing convenient shopping.
Assets include Westwood Cross Thanet Lakeside Retail Park and Bexhill Retail Park.
Leisure and hotels We own five standalone leisure assets and a 95% share of the XLeisure Fund which comprises 15 schemes of prime leisure and entertainment space.
We also own 25 Accor Group hotels in the UK.
Three hotels were sold after 31 March 2017.
The remaining 22 are leased to Accor for 75 years with a break clause in 2031 and 12 yearly thereafter.
Shopping centres and shops
Mar
Sep
Mar
Mar
Sep
Mar
Mar
Sep
Mar
Mar
Sep
Retail parks Leisure and hotels In administration Retail Portfolio
Voids and units in administration likeforlike Retail Portfolio % Chart 94 Shopping centres and shops 63.0 Retail parks 14.1 Leisure and hotels 22.6 Other 0.3 Retail Portfolio valuation % 6.1bn Chart 93 Shopping centres 8.2 Retail parks 2.7 Leisure and hotels 5.6 Other 0.2 Total 16.7 Retail Portfolio floor space sq ft sq ft Chart 95 162 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Sustainability reporting We see sustainability as a business advantage and are seeking to embed sustainable practices into everything we do.
We have a vision to lead the UK listed real estate sector and demonstrate best practice.
This section includes a summary of our performance against our corporate commitments and our key disclosures.
For more information please visit sitesustainability Creating jobs and opportunities
Employment Help a total of 1200 disadvantaged people to secure jobs by 2020.
Performance
Since 2011 we have secured employment for 962 people from disadvantaged backgrounds.
In 201617 183 jobs have been secured 134 in London and 49 in Retail.
Cumulative total number of jobs secured Table 98 tel800 1teltel 2017 2013 Jobs Target
Fairness Ensure the working environments we control are fair and ensure that everyone who is working on our behalf  within an environment we control  is paid at least the Foundation Living Wage by 2020.
Performance
Landsec received accreditation from the Living Wage Foundation in March 2017.
We have a milestone programme now in place so that we can meet our 2020 commitment.
Commitment
Diversity Make measurable improvements to the profile  in terms of gender ethnicity and disability  of our employee mix.
Performance
With 36% of our management being female we already exceed the recent HamptonAlexander recommendations for females at our Executive Committee and senior leader level combined percentage of 33% and female representation has increased by 1% overall.
Weve also seen an increase of 3% in employees identified as black asian or mixed ethnicity.
White 80 Other 6 Mixed 5 Black 5 Not Stated 2 Asian 2 Ethnicity % Chart 99
Health safety and security Maintain an exceptional standard of health safety and security in all the working environments we control.
Performance
This year we continued sharing best practice through our One Best Way guidelines and our Health and Safety pledge which new starters and external customers signed up to.
We also maintained our OHSAS 18001 certification the benchmark for health and safety management systems.
Additional information 163 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Efficient use of natural resources
Renewables Continue to procure 100% renewable electricity across our portfolio and achieve 3 MW of renewable electricity capacity by 2030.
Performance
Our contract with SmartestEnergy has been in place since 1 April 2016 all electricity is from 100% renewable sources.
We have agreed our new gas contract with Corona Energy which has taken effect from 1 April 2017.
We are now procuring 15% of our total volume as green gas derived from 100% waste streams.
We have set a new metric to achieve 3 MW of renewable electricity capacity by 2030.
Our current capacity is 0.6 MW following the completion of our installations at Trinity Leeds and White Rose this will rise to 1.4 MW.
Commitment
Waste Send zero waste to landfill with at least 75% recycled across all our operational and construction activities by 2020.
Performance
In 201617 we diverted 99.9% of waste from landfill and recycled 70.8%.
This is an improvement from the year before which was 99.3% and 70.3%.
Our London Portfolio continues to divert 100% from landfill with 77% of waste recycled.
In our Retail Portfolio we are diverting 99.9% from landfill and recycling 68.4%.
In construction activities for 201617 a total of 7571 tonnes of construction waste was generated.
Over 98% was recycled with less than 2% being sent to landfill.
Landsec monthly portfolio recycling rates 201416 Table 100 30% Mar 14 Sept 14 Sept 15 Mar 15 Sept 16 Mar 16 40% 50% 60% 80% 90% 70% London Retail Landsec Commitment
Carbon Reduce carbon intensity kgCO 2m by 40% by 2030 compared to a 201314 baseline for property under our management for at least two years.
Performance
We have reduced portfolio carbon intensity by 18.5% compared to our 201314 baseline.
This has been achieved via reductions in energy consumption and assisted by favourable changes in the UKs energy generation mix.
Landsec carbon emissions intensity pathway Table 80telteltel Kg CO 2 em Sector Pathway Landsec Pathway  target Landsec Pathway  actual Landsec Pathway  projected The above figure indicates our performance against the required decarbonisation pathways of our portfolio and the wider sector.
We are currently outperforming our target pathway and are on track for our 2030 commitment.
Commitment
Energy Reduce energy intensity kWhm by 40% by 2030 compared to a 201314 baseline for property under our management for at least two years.
Performance
We have reduced portfolio energy intensity by 13% compared to our 201314 baseline.
This has been achieved by savings realised from our active energy management programme.
Landsec energy intensity Table 102 5teltel14
London Retail Landsec
Baseline
Baseline
2030 target The above chart shows the energy intensity improvements we have made in our London and Retail portfolios and Landsec as whole.
Office buildings in London naturally have a much higher energy intensity than Retail assets and we have reduced London Portfolio intensity by 14% since 201314.
Our Retail Portfolio intensity has reduced by 3%.
Overall we have reduced Combined Portfolio intensity by 13% and are on track to meet our 2030 commitment.
164 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Sustainable design and innovation
Resilience Assess and mitigate sitespecific climate change adaptation risks that are material across our portfolio.
Performance
This is a new commitment for 2017 and work is in progress to assess our climate risks and determine opportunities for mitigation.
This work will be undertaken in collaboration with our Group Research and Insurance teams.
Commitment
Embodied carbon Carry out embodied carbon analysis to inform the selection and procurement of building materials to reduce environmental impacts.
Achieve at least a 15% reduction in embodied carbon.
Performance
Our Westgate Oxford development set an ultralow carbon target requiring the reduction of embodied carbon by 25777 tonnes.
Were delighted to report that weve met this target avoiding over 30000 tonnes of embodied carbon emissions.
This equates to an 18% saving exceeding our corporate commitment.
These are the emissions that would have been created if wed used the initial design which weve avoided through design development.
This means the building has avoided as many emissions as it will generate over the next 30 years.
Commitment
Biodiversity Maximise the biodiversity potential of all our development and operational sites and achieve a 25% biodiversity net gain across our five sites currently offering the greatest potential by 2030.
Performance
We are focussing our work on the five sites that offer the greatest biodiversity potential.
These are Bluewater Kent Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth St Davids Cardiff The Galleria Hatfield and White Rose
We have identified opportunities to enhance biodiversity at each of these sites and expect to begin implementation next year.
The table below lists the five sites and rating classifications Table 103
Current rating
Bluewater Kent A A Gunwharf Quays Portsmouth B B St Davids Cardiff C B The Galleria Hatfield C B White Rose Leeds B A
Wellbeing Ensure our buildings are designed and managed to maximise wellbeing and productivity.
Progress
We have conducted a trial of WELL certification on the fit out of our new headquarters at 80100 Victoria Street SW1 to learn more about the process.
The design incorporated many wellbeing features and was recognised by staff in the Leesman Workplace Survey which ranked Landsec in the top 3% of companies surveyed.
This performance will enable us to help our customers deliver WELL projects for their employees in the future.
Sustainability reporting continued Additional information 165 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Benchmarking and awards Taking part in rigorous external benchmarking of our performance helps us to track and assess our progress.
It also provides stakeholders with confidence that were turning our commitments and targets into action.
And it underlines our ambition to be a sustainability leader in our industry.
This year we received high scores from our key benchmarking schemes Benchmarking scores Table 104 Activity Performance Carbon Disclosure Project CDP 2016 A Leadership 2015 disclosure 99score B 2014 disclosure 96 score A 2013 disclosure 88score B 2012 disclosure 92score B Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark GRESB 2016 score 77% 2015 score 77% 2014 score 78% 2013 score 67% 2012 score 68% Dow Jones Sustainability Index DJSI 2016 score 76percentile ranking 92 2015 score 72percentile ranking 89 2014 score 70percentile ranking 87 2013 score 72percentile ranking 87 2012 score 70percentile ranking 85 FTSE4Good We continue to retain our established position in the FTSE4Good Index EPRA Received a Gold Award at EPRA Sustainability Awards 2016 for Sustainability Reporting REEB Offices 2016 13th out of 22 in performance league table 2015 22nd out of 23 in performance league table
2016 4th out of 13 in performance league table 2015 10th out of 13 in performance league table Community investment data Value of resources given Over 2m equivalent of time promotion and cash investment.
National Charity Partnership Over 360000 raised for partner Mencap in our threeyear partnership This year we launched a new community investment activity tool.
We anticipate that with continued employee engagement on how to use the new tool we will see increased investment statistics for the 201718 financial year.
Awards and membership Table 105 Award name Award category Date Better Society Awards 2016 Winner National Commitment to the Community Award May 2016 City of London Building of the Year Awards 2016 Winner Building of the Year Award 1and2 New Ludgate EC4 July 2016 RICS Awards 2016 Winner Best Commercial Building 1and2 New Ludgate EC4 October 2016 Leading European Architects Forum LEAF Awards 2016 Winner Developer and Development Project of the Year 1and2 New Ludgate EC4 October 2016 EMA Energy Management Awards 2016 Winner EMA Most Inspiring Energy Reduction Project 2016 NG Bailey in Collaboration with Landsec November 2016 World Architectural Festival Winner Worlds Best Office The Zig Zag Building SW1 November 2016 The City of London Clean City Awards Scheme 2017 Winner New Street Square EC4 Premier Award for Facilities Management and Chairmans Cup 20 Fenchurch Street EC3 Platinum Award January 2017 BREEAM Awards 2017 Winner BREEAM Offices Refurbishment and FitOut award March 2017 National Recycling Awards 2017 Shortlisted Team of the Y ear Award March 2017 National CSR Awards 2017 Shortlisted Clean and Green Award March 2017 Better Society Awards 2017 Shortlisted Partnership with a National Charity March 2017 Business Charity Awards 2017 Shortlisted Charity partnership  property and construction March 2017 BITC Responsible Business Awards 2017 Shortlisted Environmental Leadership Award Reaccreditation Work Inclusion Award April 2017 166 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Green building certifications Our BREEAM rated space Table 106 Feb 16 Feb 17 Total common and tenanted space m 2681066 3021432 Total space with BREEAM rating m 583919 996585 Percentage of total which is BREEAM rated 22% 33% BREEAM rating Table 107 Area m % of our total space Outstanding 4864 0.2% Excellent 534490 17.7% Very Good 218959 7.2% GoodPass 238272 7.9% The tables above outline the percentage of our portfolio rated by BREEAM and the breakdown of these ratings.
BREEAM is a wellestablished assessment method and ratings system for buildings and continues to be a valuable indicator of quality and sustainability.
It looks at a buildings performance and rates it on a scale which includes Pass Good Very Good Excellent or Outstanding.
Greenhouse gas reporting We report our full greenhouse gas GHG emissions annually in accordance to the World Resources Institutes Greenhouse Gas Protocol.
Landsec is also committed to EPRA Best Practice Recommendations for Sustainability reporting for which we have won a Gold award for three years running.
We believe that such reporting improves transparency and performance.
We report our data using an operational control approach to define our organisational boundary.
A detailed description of our reporting methodology and data including our EPRA figures can be found at sitesustainability GHG emissions are broken down into three scopes Scope 12 and 3.
Scope 1 emissions are direct emissions from activities controlled by us that release emissions into the atmosphere whereas Scope 2 emissions are indirect emissions associated with our consumption of purchased energy.
Scope 2 emissions are reported using both the locationbased and marketbased accounting methods.
Locationbased emissions are reported using UK Government Greenhouse gas reporting  Conversion factors 2016.
Marketbased emissions are reported using the conversion factor associated with each individual electricity supply as per the suppliers guidance.
Scope 1 emissions are currently reported using only the locationbased method.
Scope 3 emissions are those that are a consequence of our actions but which occur at sources we do not own or control and which are not classed as Scope 2 emissions.
The GHG Protocol identifies 15 categories of which eight are directly relevant for Landsec.
Landsec  Scope 1 and 2 emissions 201517 Table 108 Scope 1 and 2 mandatory reporting Locationbased emission factors Marketbased emission factors Emissionstel 2016 2017 Scope 1 tCO 2e 13711 16477 Scope 1 tCO 2e Scope 2 tCO 2e 64114 47066 Scope 2 tCO 2e Scope 1 and 2 tCO 2e 63543 Scope 1 and 2 tCO 2e
Scope 1 and 2 tCO 2em 0.038 Scope 1 and 2 tCO 2em CO 2e Conversion Factors  Locationbased Table 109 201516 201617 % Change Electricity 0.57492 0.51680 10.1% Natural gas 0.20928 0.20899 0.1% Combined conversion factor including welltotank and transmission and distribution factors.
The table below outlines the locationbased emission factors used for the 201617 year and how they compare to the previous year.
Landsec  Scope 1 and 2 emissions 201517 Table 110 Scope 1 tCO 2 e Scope 2 tCO 2 e 90teltel tCO Locationbased emission factors Marketbased emission factors Total GHG emissions using locationbased emission factors have dropped by 8% since the previous year.
This has been driven by a reduction in electricity consumption and the drop in national emission factors due to a cleaner energy mix.
In terms of marketbased emissions we have seen a significant reduction of 58%.
This has been due to our move to 100% renewable electricity via our contract with SmartestEnergy.
This is the first year where we have fully reported our Scope 3 emissions having worked with the Carbon Trust to establish an accurate and repeatable methodology.
We believe it was important to do so to fully understand and disclose the total emissions associated with our business.
The table below provides a breakdown of our entire emission inventory including Scope 3.
Sustainability reporting continued Additional information 167 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Landsec  Scope 1 2 and 3 emissions 201617 Table 111 GHG Scope Category
Scope 1 Scope 1 16477 2% Scope 2 Scope 2 47066 7% Scope 3 1.
Purchased goods and services PGandS 61647 9% Capital goods 283570 42% Fuel and energyrelated activities 13982 2% Upstream transportation and distribution Grouped under PGandS 0% Waste generated in operations 703 0% Business travel 360 0% Employee commuting 182 0% Upstream leased assets na 0% Downstream transportation and distribution na 0% Processing of sold products na 0% Use of sold products na 0% Endoflife treatment of sold products na 0% Downstream leased assets 258428 38% Franchises na 0% Investments na 0% The GHG Protocol splits Scope 3 emissions into 15 categories.
We assessed each one individually and decided which ones were applicable to our business.
For the categories that are applicable we have obvious hot spots which are highlighted below Landsec  Scope 3 GHG emissions 201617 % Table 112 Capital goods 45.82% Downstream leased assets 41.76% Purchased goods and services PGandS 9.96% Fuel and energyrelated activities 2.26% Others 0.20% The two largest contributing categories are Capital goods and Downstream leased assets making up 80% of our entire emissions.
Capital goods include the emissions associated with the manufacture and transport of materials used within our construction activity and Downstream leased assets are those associated with our customers within our assets.
We are working to reduce our impacts in these categories by working closer with our supply chain partners and customers on reduction strategies.
168 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Combined Portfolio analysis Likeforlike segmental analysis Table 113 Market value Valuation movement Rental income
Annualised net rent Net estimated rental value 31 March 31 March
Surplus deficit % 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 3663 3677 47 1.3% 19tel180 195 190 Retail parks 855 886 37 4.2% Leisure and hotels 1361 1323 30 2.3% Other 20 20  2.0% Total Retail Portfolio 5899 5906 54 0.9% 33tel310 330 324 London Portfolio West End 2020 2084 87 4.3% City 797 797 25 3.1% Midtown 1013 1053 50 5.1% Inner London 323 320 13 7.8% Total London offices 4153 4254 175 4.4% 17tel167 204 199 Central London shops 1267 1181 82 6.9% Other 41 45 4 7.8% Total London Portfolio 5461 5480 97 1.8% 21tel213 263 255 Likeforlike portfolio 11360 11386 151 1.4% 54tel523 593 579 Proposed developments 6 4 3 33.2% Development programme 1138 1013 14 1.3%  60 63 Completed developments 1841 1771 7 0.4%
94 90  0.4%
Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 64tel556 743 742 Properties treated as finance leases Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 638 650 Total portfolio analysis Total portfolio analysis continued Market value Valuation movement Rental income
Annualised net rent Net estimated rental value Gross estimated rental value Net initial yield 31 March 31 March
Surplus deficit % 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March % 31 March % Retail Portfolio Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 3860 3790 37 0.9% 19tel180 210 205 Shopping centres and shops 219 213 4.1% 4.2% Retail parks 861 890 40 4.5%  Retail parks 52 52 5.4% 5.1% Leisure and hotels 1384 1542 30 2.2%  Leisure and hotels 83 93 5.2% 5.3% Other 20 20  1.9%  Other 2 2 3.8% 6.3% Total Retail Portfolio 6125 6242 47 0.8% 34tel323 346 351 Total Retail Portfolio 356 360 4.5% 4.6% London Portfolio London Portfolio West End 3247 3262 103 3.2% 12tel97 156 156 West End 156 156 3.0% 2.8% City 1853 1814 14 0.8%  City 89 84 2.7% 1.7% Midtown 1336 1325 48 3.7%  Midtown 68 69 3.0% 3.0% Inner London 323 320 13 7.8%  Inner London 17 17 4.2% 2.6% Total London offices 6759 6721 178 2.8% 25tel183 328 323 Total London offices 330 326 3.0% 2.5% Central London shops 1514 1462 82 5.7%  Central London shops 69 68 2.4% 3.1% Other 41 46 4 7.9%  Other 1 1 0.9% 1.1% Total London Portfolio 8314 8229 100 1.3% 30tel233 397 391 Total London Portfolio 400 395 2.9% 2.6% Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 64tel556 743 742 Combined Portfolio 756 755 3.6% 3.5% Properties treated as finance leases Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 638 650 Represented by Represented by Investment portfolio 12628 12800 187 1.5% 58tel527 650 650 Investment portfolio 661 661 3.7% 3.7% Share of joint ventures 1811 1671 40 2.3%  Share of joint ventures 95 94 2.4% 1.7% Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 63tel556 743 742 Combined Portfolio 756 755 3.6% 3.5% Additional information 169 Landsec Annual Report 2017
The market value figures are determined by the Groups external valuer.
The valuation movement is stated after adjusting for the effect of SIC15 under IFRS.
Refer to glossary for definition.
Annualised rental income is annual rental income as defined in the glossary at the balance sheet date except that car park and commercialisation income are included on a net basis after deduction for operational outgoings.
Annualised rental income includes temporary lettings.
Annualised net rent is annual cash rent after the deduction of ground rents as at the balance sheet date.
It is calculated with the same methodology as annualised rental income but is stated net of ground rent and before SIC15 adjustments.
Net estimated rental value is gross estimated rental value as defined in the glossary after deducting expected ground rents.
Gross estimated rental value ERV  refer to glossary for definition.
The figure for proposed developments relates to the existing buildings and not the schemes proposed.
Net initial yield  refer to glossary for definition.
This calculation includes all properties including those sites with no income.
Equivalent yield  refer to glossary for definition.
Proposed developments are excluded from the calculation of equivalent yield on the Combined Portfolio.
The likeforlike portfolio  refer to glossary for definition.
Capital expenditure on refurbishments acquisitions of head leases and similar capital expenditure has been allocated to the likeforlike portfolio in preparing this table.
The development programme  refer to glossary for definition.
Net initial yield figures are only calculated for properties in the development programme that have reached practical completion.
Includes all properties acquired since 1 April 2015.
Includes all properties sold since 1 April 2015.
Likeforlike segmental analysis continued Table 114 Gross estimated rental value Net initial yield Equivalent yield Voids by ERV 31 March 31 March 31 March % 31 March % 31 March % 31 March % 31 March % 31 March % Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 203 197 4.3% 4.4% 4.8% 4.7% 3.9% 2.9% Retail parks 52 52 5.5% 5.1% 5.6% 5.4% Leisure and hotels 82 81 5.2% 5.3% 5.4% 5.5% 0.7% 0.5% Other 2 2 3.8% 6.3% 8.3% 8.2% 33.3% 21.7% Total Retail Portfolio 339 332 4.7% 4.7% 5.0% 5.0% 2.8% 2.0% London Portfolio West End 98 96 4.0% 3.8% 4.6% 4.5% 7.6% 4.7% City 41 38 3.8% 3.7% 4.8% 4.5% Midtown 50 51 4.0% 3.8% 4.5% 4.4%  0.4% Inner London 17 17 4.2% 2.6% 5.0% 4.9% Total London offices 206 202 4.0% 3.7% 4.7% 4.5% 3.6% 2.3% Central London shops 58 56 2.5% 3.5% 4.1% 4.0% 18.6% 4.9% Other 1 1 0.9% 1.0% 1.3% 1.5% 33.3% 16.7% Total London Portfolio 265 259 3.6% 3.6% 4.5% 4.4% 7.0% 2.9% Likeforlike portfolio 604 591 4.2% 4.2% 4.8% 4.7% 4.6% 2.4% Proposed developments na na na na Development programme 61 64 0.1%  4.2% 4.0% na na Completed developments 87 85 2.0% 0.8% 4.2% 4.1% na na
4 3 3.7% 3.6% 3.8% na na na
12  5.5% na na na na Combined Portfolio 756 755 3.6% 3.5% 4.7% na na na Total portfolio analysis Total portfolio analysis continued Market value Valuation movement Rental income
Annualised net rent Net estimated rental value Gross estimated rental value Net initial yield 31 March 31 March
Surplus deficit % 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March 31 March % 31 March % Retail Portfolio Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 3860 3790 37 0.9% 19tel180 210 205 Shopping centres and shops 219 213 4.1% 4.2% Retail parks 861 890 40 4.5%  Retail parks 52 52 5.4% 5.1% Leisure and hotels 1384 1542 30 2.2%  Leisure and hotels 83 93 5.2% 5.3% Other 20 20  1.9%  Other 2 2 3.8% 6.3% Total Retail Portfolio 6125 6242 47 0.8% 34tel323 346 351 Total Retail Portfolio 356 360 4.5% 4.6% London Portfolio London Portfolio West End 3247 3262 103 3.2% 12tel97 156 156 West End 156 156 3.0% 2.8% City 1853 1814 14 0.8%  City 89 84 2.7% 1.7% Midtown 1336 1325 48 3.7%  Midtown 68 69 3.0% 3.0% Inner London 323 320 13 7.8%  Inner London 17 17 4.2% 2.6% Total London offices 6759 6721 178 2.8% 25tel183 328 323 Total London offices 330 326 3.0% 2.5% Central London shops 1514 1462 82 5.7%  Central London shops 69 68 2.4% 3.1% Other 41 46 4 7.9%  Other 1 1 0.9% 1.1% Total London Portfolio 8314 8229 100 1.3% 30tel233 397 391 Total London Portfolio 400 395 2.9% 2.6% Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 64tel556 743 742 Combined Portfolio 756 755 3.6% 3.5% Properties treated as finance leases Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 638 650 Represented by Represented by Investment portfolio 12628 12800 187 1.5% 58tel527 650 650 Investment portfolio 661 661 3.7% 3.7% Share of joint ventures 1811 1671 40 2.3%  Share of joint ventures 95 94 2.4% 1.7% Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 147 1.0% 63tel556 743 742 Combined Portfolio 756 755 3.6% 3.5% 170 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Lease lengths Table 115 Weighted average unexpired lease term at 31 March 2017 Likeforlike portfolio
Years
Likeforlike portfolio completed developments and acquisitions
Years
Retail Portfolio Shopping centres and shops 6.5 6.5 Retail parks 7.6 7.6 Leisure and hotels 12.4 12.5 Other 1.9 1.9 Total Retail Portfolio 8.2 8.2 London Portfolio West End 8.0 8.0 City 6.1 10.9 Midtown 9.5 12.2 Inner London 15.8 15.8 Total London offices 8.6 10.3 Central London shops 6.8 7.2 Other 6.7 6.7 Total London Portfolio 8.3 9.9 Combined Portfolio 8.2 9.1 Mean is the rent weighted average of the unexpired lease term across all leases excluding shortterm leases.
Term is defined as the earlier of tenant break or expiry.
Development pipeline Development pipeline financial summary Table 116 Cumulative movements on the development programme to 31 March 2017 Total scheme details
Capital expendi ture incurred to date
Valuation surplus deficit to date
SIC15 rent and other adjust ments
31 March
Estimated total capitalised interest
Net income
Valuation deficit surplus for the year ended 31 March Developments let and transferred or sold Shopping centres and shops Retail parks London Portfolio 9 Developments after practical completion approved or in progress Shopping centres and shops 2 Retail parks London Portfolio 87 89 1Movement on proposed developments for the year ended 31 March 2017 Proposed developments Shopping centres and shops Retail parks 4 2  3 3 London Portfolio Total scheme details exclude properties sold in the year.
Includes profit realised on the disposal of investment properties and any surplus or deficit on investment properties transferred to trading.
For proposed development properties the estimated total capital expenditure represents the outstanding costs required to complete the scheme as at 31 March 2017 .
Includes the property at its market value at the start of the financial year in which the property was added to the development programme together with estimated capitalised interest.
For proposed development properties the market value of the property at 31 March 2017 is included in the estimated total cost.
Estimated costs for proposed schemes could still be subject to material change prior to final approval.
Net headline annual rent on let units plus net ERV at 31 March 2017 on unlet units.
Lease lengths Additional information 171 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Development pipeline Table 117
Description of use
Size sq ft
Market value
ERV
Actual estimated completion date
Forecast total development cost Developments after practical completion The Zig Zag Building SW1 Office 100 192Nov telRetail 38700 89 20 Eastbourne Terrace W2 Office 100 92May 2016 67 67 Developments approved or in progress Nova Victoria SW1 Office 50 481Apr telRetail 79200 93 Oriana W1  Phase II Retail 50 30Jul 2017 19 20 Westgate Oxford Retail 50 793Oct telProposed developments Selly Oak Birmingham Retail 50 200000 na na na 2019 na na Residential 89000 na na na 2019 na na Developments let and transferred or sold 1 New Street Square EC4 Office 100 274800 100 na 16 Oct tel1 and 2 New Ludgate EC4 Office 100 355300 100 na 24 Apr telRetail 26700 100 Oriana W1  Phase II Retail 50 41800 100 na na na na na Includes retail within Kings Gate SW1.
This represents the disposal of 2832 Oxford Street W1.
Once properties are transferred from the development pipeline we do not report on their individual value.
Where the property is not 100% owned floor areas and letting status shown above represent the full scheme whereas all other figures represent our proportionate share.
Letting % is measured by ERV and shows letting status at 31 March 2017.
Trading property development schemes are excluded from the development pipeline.
Total development cost Refer to glossary for definition.
Of the properties in the development pipeline at 31 March 2017 the only properties on which interest was capitalised on the land cost were Westgate Oxford and Nova Victoria SW1.
Net incomeERV Net incomeERV represents headline annual rent on let units plus ERV at 31 March 2017 on unlet units both after rents payable.
Trading property development schemes Table 118
Description of use
Size sq ft
Sales exchanged by unit %
Total development costs to date Forecast total development cost Kings Gate SW1 Residential 100 108600 100 95 Oct telNova Victoria SW1 Residential 50 166800 170 87 Apr telOriana W1  Phase II Residential 50 20200 18 22 Jul 2017 14 15 Westgate Oxford Residential 50 36700 59  Jul 2017 7 10 Development pipeline and trading property development schemes at 31 March 2017 172 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Income statement Table 120 Revenue 78tel737 Profitloss on disposal of investment properties 3 Lossprofit on disposal of investments in joint ventures 2  3 2 Profit on disposal of other investment 13    1 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 186 739 1771 607 197 Operating profit 365 1346 2317 1093 648 Net finance expense 322 209 228 185 175 Net gain on business combination   2 5 1 Share of posttax profit from joint ventures 6tel59 Profit before tax 112 1336 2417 1109 533 Taxation 1 2  8 Profit for the financial year 113 1338 2417 1117 533 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties
Joint ventures 4tel21
Revenue profit 38tel291 Includes our nonwholly owned subsidiaries on a proportionate basis.
Five year summary Alternative performance measures The Group has applied the European Securities and Markets Authority ESMA Guidelines on Alternative Performance Measures in these annual results.
In the context of these results an alternative performance measure APM is a financial measure of historical or future financial performance position or cash flows of the Group which is not a measure defined or specified in IFRS.
The table below summarises the APMs included in these annual results where the definitions and reconciliations of these measures can be found as well where further discussion is included.
The definitions of all APMs are included in the Glossary and further discussion of these measures can be found in the financial review.
Table 119 Nearest IFRS measure Reconciliation Revenue profit Profit before tax Note 4 Adjusted earnings Profit attributable to owners of the parent Note 5 Adjusted earnings per share Basic earnings per share Note 5 Adjusted diluted earnings per share Diluted earnings per share Note 5 Adjusted net assets Net assets attributable to owners of the parent Note 5 Adjusted net assets per share Net assets attributable to owners of the parent Note 5 Adjusted diluted net assets per share Net assets attributable to owners of the parent Note 5 Total business return na Note 5 Combined Portfolio Investment properties Note 14 Valuation surplusdeficit Net surplusdeficit on revaluation of investment properties Note 14 Adjusted net debt Borrowings Note 20 Group LTV na Note 20 Additional information 173 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Five year summary Balance sheet Table 121 Investment properties 12144 12358 12158 9848 9652 Intangible assets 36 38 35 Net investment in finance leases 16tel188 Loan investments   50 50 50 Investment in joint ventures 1734 1668 1434 1443 1301 Trade and other receivables Other noncurrent assets Total noncurrent assets 14253 14377 13944 11577 11216 Trading properties and longterm development contracts 12tel152 Trade and other receivables 41tel345 Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits Cash and cash equivalents Total current assets 59tel570 Noncurrent assets held for sale   283 Borrowings 404 19 191 513 436 Trade and other payables 302 289 367 320 364 Other current liabilities 7 19 10 12 37 Total current liabilities 713 327 568 845 837 Borrowings 2545 2854 3593 2849 3315 Trade and other payables 25 28 30 23 18 Other noncurrent liabilities 9 47 45 4 11 Redemption liability 36 35 35 33 118 Total noncurrent liabilities 2615 2964 3703 2909 3462 Net assets 11516 11699 10606 8418 7487 Net debt 2905 2861 3801 3331 3699 Market value of the Combined Portfolio 14439 14471 14031 11859 11446 Adjusted net debt 3261 3239 4172 3948 4290 Results per share Total dividend payable in respect of the financial year 38.55p 35.0p 31.85p 30.7p 29.8p Basic earnings per share 14.3p 169.4p 306.1p 142.3p 68.4p Diluted earnings per share 14.3p 168.8p 304.7p 141.8p 68.1p Adjusted earnings per share 48.4p 45.9p 41.7p 40.7p 37.0p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 48.3p 45.7p 41.5p 40.5p 36.8p Net assets per share 1458p 1482p 1343p 1069p 959p Diluted net assets per share 1456p 1476p 1337p 1065p 955p Adjusted net assets per share 1418p 1439p 1299p 1017p 907p Adjusted diluted net assets per share 1417p 1434p 1293p 1013p 903p 174 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Table 122 Year ended 31 March 2017 Year ended 31 March excl.
Joint ventures
Combined
Portfolio
Combined
Portfolio
Investment properties Net book value at the beginning of the year 12358 1630 34 13954 13529 Acquisitions 14 1  15 123 Capital expenditure 126 114  240 312 Capitalised interest 5 13  18 23 Disposals 205 39  244 940 Net movement in finance leases Transfer to trading properties  5  5 Net deficitsurplus on revaluation of investment properties 186 40 1 147 907 Net book value at the end of the year 12144 1763 34 13873 13954 Profit on disposal of investment properties 19 1  20 79 Trading properties Net book value at the beginning of the year 124 157  281 337 Capital expenditure 19 27  46 61 Capitalised interest  5  5 6 Disposals 33 68  101 140 Transfer from investment properties  5  5 Movement in impairment 12   12 16 Net book value at the end of the year 122 126  248 280 Profit on disposal of trading properties 29 7  36 41 Investment in joint ventures Loss on disposal of investment in joint venture 2   2 Other investments Profit on disposal of other investment 13   13 Acquisitions development and refurbishment expenditure m m Acquisitions of investment property 15 123 Capital expenditure  investment property 81 160 Development capital expenditure  investment properties 159 152 Capital expenditure  trading properties 19 51 Development capital expenditure  trading property 27 10 Acquisitions development and refurbishment expenditure 301 496 Disposals m m Net book value  investment property disposals 244 940 Net book value  trading property disposals 101 140 Profit on disposal  investment property 20 79 Profit on disposal  trading property 36 41 Loss on disposal  investment in joint venture 2 Profit on disposal  other investment 13 Disposal of asset held for sale  283 Other 1 10 Total disposal proceeds 413 1493 Acquisitions disposals and capital expenditure Additional information 175 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Table 123 Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Discretion Base salary To aid the recruitment retention and motivation of high performing executives To reflect the value of their experience skills and knowledge and importance to the business.
Reviewed annually with effect from 1 June and reflects Increases throughout the rest of the business Market benchmarking exercise undertaken periodically to ensure salaries are set at around the median of the market competitive level for people in comparable roles with similar levels of experience performance and contribution Changes in the scope of a Directors role may also require a further adjustment to salary.
For 201718 the annual base salaries of the Executive Directors are 784041 Chief Executive and 510367 Chief Financial Officer representing a 2% increase The maximum annual salary increase will not normally exceed the average increase across the rest of the workforce 201718 2%.
Higher increases will be exceptional and made in specific circumstances including Increase in responsibilities or scope of the role To apply salary progression for a newly appointed
Where the Directors salary has fallen below the market positioning.
The Committee has the discretion to determine the precise amount of base salary within the Policy including approving the salary for a newlyappointed Director.
It will also determine whether there are specific reasons to award salary increases greater than those for the wider workforce.
Benefits
To provide protection and market competitive benefits to aid recruitment and retention of high performing executives.
Directors receive a combination of Car allowance Private medical insurance Life assurance Ill health income protection Holiday and sick pay Professional advice in connection with their directorship Travel subsistence and accommodation as necessary Occasional gifts for example appropriate long service or leaving gifts.
The value of benefits may vary from year to year depending on the cost to the Company.
The Policy will always apply as stated unless there are specific individual circumstances why it should not.
Pension
To help recruit and retain high performing executives To reward continued contribution to the business by enabling Executive Directors to build retirement benefits.
Participation into a defined contribution pension scheme or cash equivalent.
Directors receive a pension contribution or cash allowance of 25% of salary.
The Policy will apply as stated.
Remuneration policy Executive Directors 176 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Discretion Annual bonus To incentivise the delivery of stretching nearterm business targets and personal performance objectives To reward nearterm outperformance relative to industry benchmarks Specific measures and targets for example successful planning applications and asset management initiatives will provide future opportunity for the business and will increase the value of our properties in the short term Other KPIs such as development lettings targets are likely to have a significant impact on capital growth and longterm revenue profit performance The ability to recognise performance through variable remuneration enables the Group to control its cost base flexibly and react to events and market circumstances Deferral of a portion of annual bonuses into shares encourages a longer term focus aligned to shareholders interests and discourages excessive risk taking.
All measures and targets are reviewed and set by the Board at the beginning of the year and payments are determined by the Committee after the year end based on performance against the targets set Specific measures and targets will be set each year but will always include a measure of Total Property Return versus that of the market Other measures and targets will reflect the most critical business performance indicators for the year ahead and will be both specific and measurable.
Revenue
Profit performance will always feature as a key measure The achievement of ontarget performance should result in a payment of 50% of the maximum opportunity i.
75% of salary A small proportion no more than 20% of base salary of a Directors bonus is based on the Committees assessment of the achievement of preset personal performance objectives The structure of the plan incentivises outperformance by ensuring that the threshold targets are stretching Bonuses up to 50% of salary are paid in cash Any amounts in excess of 50% of salary are deferred into shares for one year Any amounts in excess of 100% of salary are deferred into shares for two years Deferred shares are potentially forfeitable if the executive leaves prior to the share release date Bonus payments are not pensionable Withholding and recovery provisions malus and clawback apply where any overpayment was made as a result of a material misstatement of the Companys results or a performance condition or where there has been fraud or gross misconduct whether or not this caused the overpayment.
Minimum bonus payable is 0% of salary Maximum bonus potential is 150% of salary.
The Committee has the discretion to set targets and measures each year The outturns for the Group element of the bonus plan are calculated formulaically and therefore the Committee has no discretion to adjust these unless it feels it is necessary to adjust them down The Committee does have the discretion to award appropriate bonus payments under the individual element maximum 20% of base salary to reflect the performance and contribution of an individual Director Within the Policy the Committee will retain flexibility including When to make awards and payments How to determine the size of an award a payment or when and how much of an award should be payable Who receives an award or payment Whether a departing Director should receive a bonus and whether and what proportion of awards should be paid at the time of leaving or at a subsequent date Whether a departing Director should be treated as a good leaver in respect of deferred bonus shares How to deal with a change of control or any other corporate event which may require adjustments to awards To determine that no bonus or a reduced bonus is payable where the performance of the business has been poor notwithstanding the achievement of objectives.
Remuneration policy continued Additional information 177 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Discretion LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP Incentivises value creation over the longterm in excess of that created by general market increases Rewards execution of our strategy and the long term outperformance of our competitors Aligns the longterm interests of Directors and shareholders Promotes retention.
The Committee may make an annual award of shares under the LTIP Vesting is determined on the basis of the Groups achievements against stretching performance targets over a fixed three year financial period and continued employment.
There is no retesting The Committee reviews the measures their relative weightings and targets prior to each award The measures selected are relative and directly aligned to the interests of shareholders.
50% of an award is weighted to a measure of Total Property Return versus the industry benchmark over a three year period and 50% to Total Shareholder Return versus our listed comparator group over a three year period For each measure no awards vest for performance below that of the benchmark.
Only a proportion 20% will vest for matching the performance of the benchmark and significant outperformance is required for the maximum award to vest Awards will be satisfied by either newly issued shares or shares purchased in the market and any use of newly issued shares will be subject to the dilution limits contained in the scheme rules or approved by shareholders Executive Directors are required to hold vested shares for a further two years including post employment following the three year vesting period expiry Withholding and recovery provisions malus and clawback apply where any overpayment was made as a result of a material misstatement of the Companys results or a performance condition or where there has been fraud or gross misconduct whether or not this caused the overpayment.
Normal and current award limit  300% of salary.
The outturns of the LTIP are calculated formulaically and therefore the Committee has no discretion to adjust these unless it determines they should be adjusted down Within the Policy the Committee will retain flexibility including When to make awards and payments How to determine the size of an award a payment or when and how much of an award should vest Who receives an award or payment Whether a departing Director is treated as a good leaver for the purposes of the LTIP and whether and what proportion of awards vest at the time of leaving or at a subsequent vesting date How to deal with a change of control or any other corporate event which may require adjustments to awards.
Savings Related Share Option Scheme SAYE Scheme To encourage all employees to make a longterm investment in the Companys shares through a savings related arrangement.
All employees including Executive Directors are entitled to participate in the SAYE Scheme operated by the Company in line with UK HMRC guidelines currently prevailing.
The maximum participation levels may vary in line with HMRC limits.
For 201718 participants may save up to 500 per month for either three or five years using their accumulated savings at the end of the period to purchase shares at a 20% discount to the market price at the date of grant.
The Policy will apply as stated.
Within the Policy the Committee will retain the flexibility to determine whether a departing Executive Director should be treated as a good leaver .
Share ownership guidelines To provide close alignment between the longerterm interests of Directors and shareholders in terms of the Companys growth and performance.
Executive Directors are expected to build up and maintain shareholdings with a value set at a percentage of base salary Chief Executive  250% of salary Other Executive Directors  200% of salary These levels are normally required to be achieved within five years of appointment in order to qualify for future longterm incentive awards.
Deferred or unvested share awards not subject to performance conditions may count towards the ownership levels on a net of tax basis.
In exceptional circumstances the Committee may extend the period by which share ownership levels are required to be achieved by up to two years.
178 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Table 124 Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Base fee To aid the recruitment retention and motivation of high performing Nonexecutive Directors To reflect the time commitment given by Nonexecutive Directors to the business.
The Chairman is paid a single fee for all Board duties and the other Nonexecutive Directors receive a basic Board fee with supplementary fees payable for additional responsibilities Reviewed but not necessarily changed annually by the Board having regard to independent advice and published surveys The Chairmans fee is also reviewed by the Board rather than the Remuneration Committee.
The current fees for Nonexecutive Directors are shown in the Annual Report on Remuneration in section 3.2 Nonexecutive Director fees are typically reviewed annually but increased every two to three years Any increases reflect relevant benchmark data for Nonexecutive Directors in companies of a similar size and complexity and the time commitment required.
Additional fees To reflect the additional time commitment required from Nonexecutive Directors in chairing various Board subcommittees or becoming the Boards Senior Independent Director.
Reviewed but not necessarily changed annually by the Board having regard to independent advice and published surveys.
The opportunity depends on which if any additional roles are assumed by an individual Director over the course of their tenure Any increases reflect relevant benchmark data for Nonexecutive Directors in companies of a similar size and complexity and the time commitment required.
Other incentives and benefits Nonexecutive Directors do not receive any other remuneration or benefits beyond the fees noted above.
Expenses in relation to Company business will be reimbursed If deemed necessary and in the performance of their duties Nonexecutive Directors may take independent professional advice at the Companys expense.
Share ownership To provide close alignment between the longerterm interests of Directors and shareholders in terms of the Companys growth and performance.
The current share ownership guidelines require Nonexecutive Directors to own shares with a value of 100% of annual fees within three years of appointment.
Nonexecutive Directors Remuneration policy continued Additional information 179 Landsec Annual Report 2017 3.1 Service Agreements  Executive Directors The Executive Directors have Service Agreements with the Company which normally continue until the Directors agreed retirement date or such other date as the parties agree.
In line with Group policy the Executive Directors employment can be terminated at any time by either party on giving 12 months prior written notice.
The Company allows Executive Directors to hold external nonexecutive directorships subject to the prior approval of the Board and to retain fees from these roles.
3.2 Termination Provisions Executive Directors An Executive Directors Service Agreement may be terminated without notice and without further payment or compensation except for sums earned up to the date of termination on the occurrence of certain events such as gross misconduct.
The circumstances of the termination taking into account the individuals performance and an individuals opportunity to mitigate losses are taken into account by the Committee when determining amounts payable on termination including pay in lieu of notice.
The Groups normal approach is to stop or reduce compensatory payments to former Executive Directors when they receive remuneration from other employment during the compensation period.
The Company does not make any arrangements that guarantee pensions with limited or no abatement on severance or early retirement.
There are no special provisions for Executive Directors with regard to compensation in the event of loss of office.
Any sharebased entitlements granted under the Companys share plans will be determined on the basis of the relevant plan rules.
The default position is that any outstanding unvested awards automatically lapse on cessation of employment.
However under the rules of the LTIP  in certain prescribed circumstances such as redundancy disability retirement or other circumstances at the discretion of the Committee taking into account the individuals performance and the reasons for their departure good leaver status can be applied.
For example if an executives role has effectively been made redundant and there are no significant performance issues the Committee is likely to look favourably on the granting of some good leaver provisions.
However if an executive has resigned for a similar role in a competitor organisation then such provisions are extremely unlikely to apply.
Where good leaver provisions in respect of share awards are deemed to be appropriate a participants awards should vest on a time prorata basis and subject to the satisfaction of the relevant performance criteria with the balance of the awards lapsing.
The Committee retains discretion to decide not to prorate if it is inappropriate to do so in particular circumstances.
For the avoidance of doubt if the termination of employment is not for one of the specified reasons and the Committee does not exercise its discretion to allow an award to vest all outstanding awards automatically lapse.
3.3 Remuneration of newly appointed Executive Directors The remuneration package for a new externally appointed Executive Director would be set in accordance with the terms of the Companys approved remuneration policy in force at the time of appointment.
At present the Policy on base salary will apply but the Committee has the flexibility to set the salary of a new hire at a discount to the market level initially with a series of planned increases implemented over the following few years subject to performance in the role to bring the salary to the desired positioning.
Only in very exceptional circumstances will the salary of a newly appointed Director exceed the market median benchmark for the role.
The annual bonus would operate in accordance with the terms of the approved policy albeit with the opportunity prorated for the period of employment in the first year.
Depending on the timing and responsibilities of the appointment it may be necessary to set different performance measures and targets initially.
The LTIP would also operate in accordance with the Policy.
The maximum level of variable pay that may be offered to a new Executive Director is therefore at an aggregate maximum of 450% of salary.
This limit does not include the value of any buyout arrangements deemed appropriate see below.
In addition to the elements of the remuneration package covered by the Policy the Committee may buy out certain existing remuneration of an incoming Executive Director through the offer of either additional cash andor sharebased elements on a onetime basis or ongoing when it considers these to be in the best interests of the Company.
Any such payments would be based solely on remuneration lost when leaving the former employer and would take into account the existing delivery mechanism i. conditions.
In the case of an internally appointed Executive Director any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role would be paid out according to its terms adjusted as relevant to take into account the appointment.
In addition any other ongoing remuneration obligations existing prior to appointment would continue provided that they are put to shareholders for approval at the earliest opportunity.
For external and internal appointments the Committee may agree that the Company will meet certain relocation expenses on a one time basis as appropriate.
Where a Director is recruited from overseas flexibility is retained to provide benefits that take account of market practice in their country of residence.
The Company may offer a cash amount on recruitment payment of which may be staggered over a period of up to two years to reflect the value of benefits a new recruit may have received from a former employer.
Shareholders will be informed of the remuneration package and all additional payments to newly appointed Executive Directors at the time of their appointment.
3.4 Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors Letters of Appointment The Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors do not have Service Agreements with the
Instead each of them has a Letter of Appointment which sets out the terms of their appointment including the three months prior written notice on which their appointment can be terminated by either party at any time.
The dates of the current Letters of Appointment are shown in the Annual Report on Remuneration and these together with the Executive Directors Service Agreements are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
On appointment the fee arrangements for a new Nonexecutive Director would be set in accordance with the approved remuneration policy in force at that time.
Directors Service Agreements and Letters of Appointment 180 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Subsidiaries joint ventures and associates As at 31 March 2017 the Company had a 100% interest direct or indirect in the ordinary share capital of the following subsidiaries all of which are registered in the UK at 100 Victoria Street London SW1E 5JL.
5960 Grosvenor Street No.
1 Limited 5960 Grosvenor Street No.
2 Limited Alan House Nottingham No.
1 Limited Alan House Nottingham No.
2 Limited Albany Park Frimley No.
1 Limited Arundel Great Court Development Management
Blueco Limited Bluewater Ground Lease Limited Bluewater Outer Area Limited Brand Empire SPV 4 Limited Cedric New Fetter Lane No.
1 Limited Cedric New Fetter Lane No.
2 Limited City and Central Shops Limited City Centre Properties Limited Clock Tower Canterbury No.
1 Limited Clock Tower Canterbury No.
2 Limited Crossways 2000 Limited Crossways 3065 Limited Crossways 7055 Limited Dashwood House Limited DVD Box Limited Ebbsfleet Valley Estate Company Limited Ebbsfleet Valley Property Services Limited Eron Investments Limited GEP16 Limited Gunwharf Quays Limited Knollys House No.1 Limited Knollys House Limited L and P Estates Limited Land Securities BH Limited Land Securities Finance Limited Land Securities Hotels Limited Land Securities Insurance Services Limited Land Securities Media Services BH Limited Land Securities Media Services PQ Limited Land Securities Buchanan Street Developments
Land Securities Business Services Limited Land Securities Capital Markets PLC Land Securities Consulting Limited Land Securities Corporate Services Limited Land Securities Development Limited Land Securities Ebbsfleet No.2 Limited Land Securities Ebbsfleet No.3 Limited Land Securities Ebbsfleet Limited Land Securities Intermediate Limited Land Securities Investment Trust Limited Land Securities Lakeside Limited Land Securities Management Limited Land Securities Management Services Limited Land Securities MPPS Trustee Company Limited Land Securities Partnerships Limited Land Securities PLC Land Securities Portfolio Management Limited Land Securities Properties Limited Land Securities Property Holdings Limited Land Securities Reserve A Limited Land Securities Reserve B Limited Land Securities SPVS Limited Land Securities Trading Limited Land Securities Trinity Limited LC25 Limited LS Bracknell Limited LS Bridgewater Management Limited LS Finchley Road Limited LS Jaguar GP Investments Limited LS Milford Haven Limited LS Victoria Nominee No.1 Limited LS Victoria Nominee No.2 Limited LS Winchester Limited LS Workington Nominee 1 Limited LS Workington Nominee 2 Limited LS 1 New Street Square Developer Limited LS 1 New Street Square Limited LS 1 Sherwood Street Limited LS 120 Cheapside Limited LS 130 Wood ST Limited LS 20 Fenchurch Street GP Investments
LS 20 Fenchurch Street Limited LS 21 Moorfields Development Management
LS 21 Moorfields Limited LS Aldersgate Limited LS Arundel Nominee Limited LS Arundel Nominee No.
1 Limited LS Ashdown Limited LS Banbridge Limited LS Banbridge Management Limited LS Banbridge Phase Two Limited LS Bankside Development Limited LS Bankside Limited LS Bexhill Limited LS Birmingham Limited LS Bon Accord Limited LS Buchanan GP Investments Limited LS Buchanan Limited Name Name Additional information 181 Landsec Annual Report 2017 LS Canterbury Limited LS Cardiff GP Investments Limited LS Cardiff Holdings Limited LS Cardiff Limited LS Cardinal Limited LS Centre Properties Limited LS Chattenden Marketing Limited LS Chesterfield Limited LS City and West End Limited LS City Gate House Limited LS Clayton Square Limited LS Company Secretaries Limited LS Cornerhouse Limited LS Director Limited LS Eastbourne Terrace Limited LS Eastern Quarry Limited LS Easton Park Investments Limited LS Empress State Limited LS Fenchurch Development Management
LS Galleria Limited LS Greenwich Investments Limited LS Greenwich Limited LS Greyhound Limited LS Gunwharf Limited LS Harbour Exchange Option Limited LS Harrogate Leasehold Limited LS Harrogate Limited LS Harrow Properties Limited LS Harvest GP Investments Limited LS Harvest 2 Limited LS Harvest Limited LS Hill House Limited LS Holborn Gate Limited LS Howard Centre Welwyn Limited LS Hungate Limited LS Juliet Limited LS Kings Gate Residential Limited LS Kings Gate Residential No.2 Limited LS Kingsmead Limited LS Leisure Limited LS Lewisham Limited LS London Holdings One Limited LS London Holdings Three Limited LS Ludgate No.1 Limited LS Ludgate No.2 Limited LS Ludgate No.3 Limited LS Ludgate Development Limited LS Maidstone Limited LS Mark Lane Limited LS Millshaw Limited LS Mirage Limited LS Moorgate Limited LS New Street Square Investments Limited LS Nominees Holdings Limited LS Occupier Limited LS ONC Holdings Limited LS One New Change Developments Limited LS One New Change Limited LS Oxygen Limited LS Park House Development Management
LS Poole Retail Limited LS Portfolio Investments Limited LS Portland House Developer Limited LS Property Finance Company Limited LS Property Solutions Limited LS Red Lion Court Limited LS Retail Warehouses Limited LS Roebuck House LP Limited LS Rose Lane Limited LS Selborne House Limited LS Soho Square Limited LS Taplow Limited LS Taplow No.2 Limited LS Thanet Limited LS Times Square GP Limited LS Times Square Limited LS TMS Nominee 1 Limited LS TMS Nominee 2 Limited LS Tottenham Court Road Limited LS Victoria Circle Development Management
LS Victoria Circle GP Investments Limited LS Victoria Circle LP1 Limited LS Victoria Circle LP2 Limited LS Victoria Properties Limited LS Voyager Limited LS Wellington Limited LS Westminster Limited LS Westminster No.2 Limited LS White Rose Limited LS Whitefriars Limited LS Wilton Plaza Limited LS Wood Lane Limited LS Zig Zag Limited LSIT Management Limited Metro Nominees Notting Hill No.1 Limited Metro Nominees Notting Hill No.2 Limited Metro Nominees Victoria Place Limited Micadant  Limited O2 Retail and Leisure UK Partnership No.1 LLP Oriana LP Limited Oxford Castle Apartments Limited QAM  Limited QAM GP Limited QAM Holdings Limited QAM LP Limited QAM Funding Limited Partnership QAM Nominee No 1 Limited QAM Nominee No 2 Limited QAM Property Trustee No 1 Limited QAM Property Trustee No 2 Limited Ravenseft Industrial Estates Limited Ravenseft Properties Limited Ravenside Investments Limited Retail Property Holdings Trust Limited Roebuck House GP Limited Roebuck House Nominee Limited Rosefarm Leisure Limited Sevington Properties Limited Shirec Limited Southside General Partner Limited Stag Place GP Limited Stag Place LP Limited Stag Place Limited Partnership The City of London Real Property Company
The Imperial Hotel Hull Limited The Westminster Trust Limited Tops Estates Limited Tops Shop Centres Limited Tops Shop Estates Limited Trinity Quarter Developments Limited Wallace City Limited Watchmaker Finance Limited Whitecliff Developments Limited Willett Developments Limited Wood Lane Nominee No.
1 Limited Wood Lane Nominee No.
2 Limited XLeisure Brighton Cinema Limited XLeisure Brighton Cinema II Limited XLeisure Edinburgh Limited XLeisure Limited Name Name Name 182 Landsec Annual Report 2017 As at 31 March 2017 the Company had an interest as shown direct or indirect in the ordinary share capital of the following subsidiaries joint ventures and associates each of which is registered in the country indicated.
The registered address of all the entities is 100 Victoria Street London SW1E 5JL except where indicated by a footnote.
Name
Group share % Country of registration 20 Fenchurch Street GP Limited 50.00% UK 20 Fenchurch Street Developer Limited 50.00% UK 20 Fenchurch Street Limited Partnership 50.00% UK 20 Fenchurch Street Nominee No.1 Limited 50.00% UK 20 Fenchurch Street Nominee No.2 Limited 50.00% UK Castleford UK Limited 95.04% UK Ebbsfleet Investment GP Limited 50.00% UK Ebbsfleet Nominee No.1 Limited 50.00% UK Five Fields Limited 50.00% UK Greenhithe Holding Limited 100.00% Jersey Greenhithe Investments Limited 100.00% Jersey Harbour Exchange Management Company Limited 25.70% UK Harvest 2 GP Limited 50.00% UK Harvest 2 Limited Partnership 50.00% UK Harvest 2 Selly Oak Limited 50.00% UK Harvest Development Management Limited 50.00% UK Harvest GP Limited 50.00% UK Harvest Nominee No.
1 Limited 50.00% UK Harvest Nominee No.
2 Limited 50.00% UK Kent Retail Investments Limited 100.00% Jersey Land Securities Insurance Limited 100.00% Guernsey Leisure II North Finchley Two Limited 95.04% Jersey Leisure II North Finchley Limited 95.04% Jersey Leisure II O2 LP Shareholder Limited 95.04% UK Leisure II O2 Manager Shareholder Limited 95.04% UK Leisure II West India Quay LP Shareholder Limited 95.04% UK Leisure II West India Quay Two Limited 95.04% Jersey Leisure II West India Quay Limited 95.04% Jersey Leisure Parks I Limited 95.04% UK Leisure Parks II Limited 95.04% UK LS Eureka Two Limited 95.04% UK LS Eureka Limited 95.04% UK LS Fountain Park Two Limited 95.04% UK LS Fountain Park Limited 95.04% UK LS Parrswood Two Limited 95.04% UK LS Parrswood Limited 95.04% UK LS Riverside Two Limited 95.04% UK LS Riverside Limited 95.04% UK LS Fort Limited Limited by guarantee UK Metro Nominees Clapham Limited 50.00% UK Metro Nominees Wandsworth No.1 Limited 50.00% UK Metro Nominees Wandsworth No.2 Limited 50.00% UK Metro Shopping Fund GP Limited 50.00% Jersey Metro Shopping Fund LP 50.00% Jersey Metro Shopping Fund Management Limited 50.00% UK NOVA Residential GP Limited 50.00% UK NOVA Residential Intermediate Limited 50.00% UK NOVA Residential Limited Partnership 50.00% UK O2 General Partner Limited 95.04% UK Oriana Hanway St Limited 50.00% UK Oriana GP Limited 50.00% UK Oriana Nominee No.1 Limited 50.00% UK Oriana Nominee No.2 Limited 50.00% UK Oriana Residential Nominee No.1 Limited 50.00% UK Oriana Residential Nominee No.2 Limited 50.00% UK
Group share % Country of registration Oriana Residential Nominee No.3 Limited 50.00% UK Oriana Residential Nominee No.4 Limited 50.00% UK Queens Links Unit Trust 95.04% Jersey St Davids Cardiff Residential Limited 50.00% UK St Davids General Partner Limited 50.00% UK St Davids Dewi Sant Merchants Association Limited Limited by guarantee UK
Davids No.1 Limited 50.00% UK
Davids No.2 Limited 50.00% UK
Davids Unit Trust 100.00% Jersey The Ebbsfleet Limited Partnership 50.00% UK The Oriana Limited Partnership 50.00% UK The St.
Davids Limited Partnership 50.00% UK The XLeisure General Partner Limited 95.04% UK The XLeisure Limited Partnership 95.04% UK The XLeisure Unit Trust 95.04% Jersey Victoria Circle Business Manager Limited 50.00% UK Victoria Circle Developer Limited 50.00% UK Victoria Circle GP Limited 50.00% UK Victoria Circle Limited Partnership 50.00% UK Victoria Circle Nominee 1 Limited 50.00% UK Victoria Circle Nominee 2 Limited 50.00% UK West India Quay Limited 47.52% UK West India Quay Management Company Limited 29.93% UK West India Quay Unit Trust 47.52% Jersey Westgate Oxford Alliance GP Limited 50.00% UK Westgate Oxford Alliance Limited Partnership 50.00% UK Westgate Oxford Alliance Nominee No.1 Limited 50.00% UK Westgate Oxford Alliance Nominee No.2 Limited 50.00% UK XLeisure Bentley Bridge Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Boldon Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Brighton I Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Brighton II Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Cambridge I Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Cambridge II Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Leeds I Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Leeds II Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Maidstone II Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Maidstone Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Poole Limited 95.04% UK XLeisure Management Limited 95.04% UK Xscape Castleford Limited 95.04% Jersey Xscape Castleford Limited Liability Partnership 95.04% UK Xscape Castleford No.2 Limited 95.04% Jersey Xscape Castleford Partnership 95.04% UK Xscape Castleford Property Unit Trust 95.04% Jersey Xscape Milton Keynes Jersey No.2 Limited 95.04% Jersey Xscape Milton Keynes Limited 95.04% Jersey Xscape Milton Keynes Limited Liability Partnership 95.04% UK Xscape Milton Keynes Partnership 95.04% UK Xscape Milton Keynes Property Unit Trust 95.04% Jersey 44 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE4 9WG 13 Castle Street St Helier Jersey JE4 5UT PO Box 155 Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 4ET 1314 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE1 1EE 47 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE1 0BD Subsidiaries joint ventures and associates continued Additional information 183 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Shareholder information Financial calendar Tabletel17 Final dividend Exdividend date 22 June Record date 23 June Last day for DRIP electionsreceipt of DRIP application 6 July Payment date 27 July Annual General Meeting 13 July 201718 First quarterly interim dividend Record date 8 September Payment date 6 October 201718 Halfyearly results announcement 14 November 201718 Second quarterly interim dividend Record date 1 December Payment date 5 January 201718 Third quarterly interim dividend Record date 9 March Payment date 6 April 201718 Financial year end 31 March 201718 Annual results announcement 15 May The Board has recommended a final dividend of 11.7p per ordinary share payable wholly as a Property Income Distribution subject to shareholders approval at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
The Annual General Meeting will be held at 10.00 am on Thursday 13 July 2017 at 80 Victoria Street London SW1E 5JL.
A separate circular comprising a letter from the Chairman Notice of Meeting and explanatory notes in respect of the resolutions proposed accompanies this Annual Report.
Copies of this document can also be found on the Companys website at siteinvestors The Board has declared a first quarterly dividend of 9.85p pence per ordinary share payable wholly as a Property Income Distribution.
Provisional.
Share register analysis as at 31 March 2017 Table 126 Holding range Number of holders % Number of ordinary shares % 11000 9004 66.5 3496457 0.4 10015000 3175 23.4 6519740 0.8 500110000 389 2.9 2749364 0.3 1000150000 420 3.1 10227100 1.3 50001100000 136 1.0 9898684 1.2 100001500000 224 1.7 51641904 6.5 500001highest 184 1.4 716711379 89.5 Total 13532 100.0 801244628 100.0 Share register analysis as at 31 March 2017 Table 127 Held by Number of holders % Number of ordinary shares % Private shareholders 10475 77.4 13025459 1.6 Nominee and institutional investors 3057 22.6 788219169 98.4 Total 13532 100.0 801244628 100.0 Including 10495131 shares held in Treasury by the Company.
184 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Ordinary shares The Companys ordinary shares each of nominal value 10p each are traded on the main market for listed securities on the London Stock Exchange LONLAND.
The Companys American Depositary Receipt Programme was terminated on 1 September 2016.
Company website site The Companys Annual Report results announcements and presentations are available to view and download from its website.
Information can also be found there about the latest Land Securities share price and dividend information news about the Company its properties and operations and how to obtain further information.
Registrar Equiniti For assistance with queries about administration of shareholdings such as lost share certificates change of address or personal details amalgamation of accounts and dividend payments please contact the Companys Registrar Equiniti Group PLC Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
International dialing 44 0tel site An online share management service is available which enables shareholders to access details of their Land Securities Group PLC shareholdings electronically.
This is available at site investors or site eCommunication We encourage shareholders to consider receiving their communications from the Company electronically as this will enable you to receive it more quickly and securely.
It also allows Landsec to communicate in a more environmentally friendly and costeffective manner.
To register for this service you should go to site investors or site UK Real Estate Investment Trust REIT taxation and status on payment of dividends As a UK REIT Landsec does not pay corporation tax on rental profit and chargeable gains relating to property rental business.
However it is required to distribute at least 90% of its qualifying income as Property Income Distributions PIDs .
A REIT may in addition pay ordinary dividends and this will be treated in the same way as dividends from nonREIT companies.
UK shareholders will be taxed on PIDs received at their full marginal tax rates and on ordinary dividends received in line with the dividend tax regime introduced by the Government on 6 April 2016  for more information see sitetaxondividends.
For most shareholders PIDs will be paid after deducting withholding tax at the basic rate.
However certain categories of shareholder may be able to receive PIDs gross i. without deduction of withholding tax.
These categories are principally UK companies charities local authorities UK pension schemes and managers of ISAs PEPs and Child Trust Funds.
Further information on UK REITs and the forms required to be completed to apply for PIDs to be paid gross are available on the Companys website or from the Registrar.
Payment of dividends to UK resident shareholders Shareholders whose dividends are currently sent to their registered address may wish to consider having their dividends paid directly into their personal bank or building society account.
This has a number of advantages including the crediting of cleared funds on the actual dividend payment date.
If you would like your future dividends paid in this way you should contact the Registrar or complete a mandate instruction available from site investors and return it to the Registrar.
Under this arrangement dividend confirmations are still sent to your registered address.
Payment of dividends to nonUK resident shareholders Instead of waiting for a sterling cheque to arrive by post shareholders can request that their dividends be paid directly to a personal bank account overseas.
This is a service which the Registrar can arrange in over 30 different countries worldwide and in local currencies and it normally costs less than paying in a sterling cheque.
For more information you should contact the Registrar on 44 0tel or download an application form online at site Alternatively you can contact the Registrar at the address given above.
Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP The DRIP gives shareholders the opportunity to use cash dividends to increase their shareholding in Land Securities Group PLC.
It is a convenient and costeffective facility provided by Equiniti Financial Services Limited.
Under the DRIP  cash dividends are used to buy shares in the market as soon as possible after the dividend payment with any residual cash being carried forward to the next dividend payment.
Details of the DRIP  including terms and conditions and participation election forms are available at siteinvestors.
They are also available from Dividend Reinvestment Plans Equiniti Group PLC Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
International dialling 44 0tel Share dealing facilities Equiniti provides both existing and prospective UK shareholders with an easy to access and simpletouse share dealing facility for buying and selling shares in Land Securities Group PLC by telephone online or post.
The telephone and online dealing service allows shareholders to trade realtime at a known price that will be given to them at the time they give their instruction.
For telephone dealing calltel between 8.00am and 4.30pm Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and
Calls are charged at the standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Calls outside the UK will be charged at the applicable international rate.
For online dealing log on to site dealing.
For postal dealing calltel for full details and a dealing instruction form.
Existing shareholders will need to provide the account shareholder reference number shown on their share certificate.
Other
Shareholder information continued Additional information 185 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Shareholders with only a small number of shares the value of which makes it uneconomic to sell them may wish to consider donating them to the charity through ShareGift a registered charity benefit.
A ShareGift donation form can be obtained from the Registrar and further information about ShareGift is available at www. haregift.
ShareGift
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation Limited 17 Carlton House Terrace London SW1Y 5AH TelephonetelCorporate Individual Savings Account ISA The Company has in place a Corporate ISA which is managed by Equiniti Financial Services Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Capital Gains Tax For the purpose of Capital Gains Tax the price of a Land Securities share at 31 March 1982 adjusted for the capitalisation issue in November 1983 and the Scheme of Arrangement in September 2002 was 203p.
On the assumption that the 5 for 8 Rights Issue in March 2009 was taken up in full the adjusted price for Capital Gains Tax purposes would be 229p per share.
Unclaimed Assets Register The Company participates in the Unclaimed Assets Register which provides a search facility for financial assets which may have been forgotten.
For further information contact The Unclaimed Assets Register Telephone 44 0tel email email.
Unsolicited mail The Company is obliged by law to make its share register available on request to other organisations and this may result in shareholders receiving unsolicited mail.
To limit the receipt of unsolicited mail shareholders may register with the Mailing Preference Service an independent organisation whose services are free by visiting www. psonline.
Shareholder security Over the past few months some of our shareholders have received unsolicited telephone calls or correspondence concerning investment matters from organisations or persons claiming or implying that they have some connection with the Company.
These are typically from purported brokers who offer to buy shares at a price often far in excess of their market value.
These operations are commonly known as boiler rooms .
Shareholders are advised to be very wary of any offers of unsolicited advice discounted shares premium prices for shares they own or free reports into the Company.
If you receive any such unsolicited calls correspondence or investment advice ensure you get the correct name of the person and firm check that the firm is on the Financial Conduct Authority FCA Register to ensure they are authorised at www. egister. sa. simply hang up.
Additionally feel free to report andor discuss any shareholder security matters with the Company.
To do this please callteland ask to be put through to a member of the Company Secretarial department.
Lines are open 8.30am to 5.30pm UK time Monday to Friday excluding public holidays.
Calls are charged at the standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Calls from outside the UK will be charged at the applicable international rate.
186 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Key contacts and advisers Registered office and principal UK address Land Securities Group PLC 100 Victoria Street London SW1E 5JL Registered in England and Wales No.
Company Secretary Tim Ashby Group General Counsel and Company Secretary Investor relations Edward Thacker Head of Investor Relations TelephonetelEmail investor.
Registrar
Equiniti Group PLC Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Texteltel
International dialing 44 0tel site
Ernst and Young LLP 1 More London Place London SE1 2AF
External advisers Valuer CBRE Financial adviser Citigroup Solicitors Slaughter and May Joint brokers JP Morgan Cazenove and UBS Additional information 187 Landsec Annual Report 2017
Adjusted earnings per share Adjusted EPS Earnings per share based on revenue profit after related tax.
Adjusted net assets per share Net assets per share adjusted to remove the effect of the derecognition of the 2004 bond exchange and cumulative fair value movements on interestrate swaps and similar instruments.
Adjusted net debt Net debt excluding cumulative fair value movements on interestrate swaps the adjustment arising from the de recognition of the bond exchange and amounts payable under finance leases.
It generally includes the net debt of subsidiaries and joint ventures on a proportionate basis.
Book value The amount at which assets and liabilities are reported in the financial statements.
BREEAM
Building Research Establishments Environmental Assessment Method.
Combined Portfolio The Combined Portfolio comprises the investment properties of the Groups subsidiaries on a proportionately consolidated basis when not wholly owned together with our share of investment properties held in our joint ventures.
Completed developments Completed developments consist of those properties previously included in the development programme which have been transferred from the development programme since 1 April 2015.
Development pipeline The development programme together with proposed developments.
Development programme The development programme consists of committed developments Board approved projects with the building contract let authorised developments Board approved projects under construction and developments which have reached practical completion within the last two years but are not yet 95% let.
Diluted figures Reported results adjusted to include the effects of potentially dilutive shares issuable under employee share schemes.
Dividend Reinvestment Plan DRIP The DRIP provides shareholders with the opportunity to use cash dividends received to purchase additional ordinary shares in the Company immediately after the relevant dividend payment date.
Full details appear on the Companys website.
Earnings per share Profit after taxation attributable to owners of the parent divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
EPRA
European Public Real Estate Association.
EPRA net initial yield EPRA net initial yield is defined within EPRAs Best Practice Recommendations as the annualised rental income based on the cash rents passing at the balance sheet date less non recoverable property operating expenses divided by the gross market value of the property.
It is consistent with the net initial yield calculated by the Groups external valuer.
Equivalent yield Calculated by the Groups external valuer equivalent yield is the internal rate of return from an investment property based on the gross outlays for the purchase of a property including purchase costs reflecting reversions to current market rent and such items as voids and nonrecoverable expenditure but ignoring future changes in capital value.
The calculation assumes rent is received annually in arrears.
ERV  Gross estimated rental value The estimated market rental value of lettable space as determined biannually by the Groups external valuer.
For investment properties in the development programme which have not yet reached practical completion the ERV represents managements view of market rents.
Fair value movement An accounting adjustment to change the book value of an asset or liability to its market value see also marktomarket adjustment.
Finance lease A lease that transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership from the lessor to the lessee.
Net initial yield Net initial yield is a calculation by the Groups external valuer of the yield that would be received by a purchaser based on the Estimated Net Rental Income expressed as a percentage of the acquisition cost being the market value plus assumed usual purchasers costs at the reporting date.
The calculation is in line with EPRA guidance.
Estimated Net Rental Income is determined by the valuer and is based on the passing cash rent less ground rent at the balance sheet date estimated non recoverable outgoings and void costs including service charges insurance costs and void rates.
Net rental income Net rental income is the net operational income arising from properties on an accruals basis including rental income finance lease interest rents payable service charge income and expense other property related income direct property expenditure and bad debts.
Net rental income is presented on a proportionate basis.
Overrented
Space where the passing rent is above the ERV.
Passing cash rent The estimated annual rent receivable as at the reporting date which includes estimates of turnover rent and estimates of rent to be agreed in respect of outstanding rent review or lease renewal negotiations.
Passing cash rent may be more or less than the ERV see overrented reversionary and ERV.
Passing cash rent excludes annual rent receivable from units in administration save to the extent that rents are expected to be received.
Void units and units that are in a rentfree period at the reporting date are deemed to have no passing cash rent.
Although temporary lets of less than 12 months are treated as void income from temporary lets is included in passing cash rents.
Planning permission There are two common types of planning permission full planning permission and outline planning permission.
A full planning permission results in a decision on the detailed proposals on how the site can be developed.
The grant of a full planning permission will subject to satisfaction of any conditions mean no further engagement with the local planning authority will be required to build the consented development.
An outline planning permission approves general principles of how a site can be developed.
Outline
Consent must be sought and achieved for discharge of all reserved matters within a specified time limit normally three years from the date outline planning permission was granted before building can begin.
In both the case of full and outline planning permission the local planning authority will resolve to grant permission .
At this stage the planning permission is granted subject to agreement of legal documents in particular the s106 agreement.
On execution of the s106 agreement the planning permission will be issued.
Work can begin on satisfaction of any precommencement planning conditions.
Prelet
A lease signed with an occupier prior to completion of a development.
Predevelopment properties Predevelopment properties are those properties within the likeforlike portfolio which are being managed to align vacant possession within a three year horizon with a view to redevelopment.
Property Income Distribution PID A PID is a distribution by a REIT to its shareholders paid out of qualifying profits.
A REIT is required to distribute at least 90% of its qualifying profits as a PID to its shareholders.
Proposed developments Proposed developments are properties which have not yet received final Board approval or are still subject to main planning conditions being satisfied but which are more likely to proceed than not.
Qualifying activities Qualifying assets The ownership activity of property assets which is held to earn rental income and qualifies for taxexempt treatment income and capital gains under UK REIT legislation.
Real Estate Investment Trust REIT A REIT must be a publicly quoted company with at least three quarters of its profits and assets derived from a qualifying property rental business.
Income and capital gains from the property rental business are exempt from tax but the REIT is required to distribute at least 90% of those profits to shareholders.
Corporation tax is payable on nonqualifying activities in the normal way.
Gearing
Total borrowings including bank overdrafts less shortterm deposits corporate bonds and cash at book value plus cumulative fair value movements on financial derivatives as a percentage of total equity.
For adjusted gearing see note 20.
Gross market value Market value plus assumed usual purchasers costs at the reporting date.
Head lease A lease under which the Group holds an investment property.
Interest Cover Ratio ICR A calculation of a companys ability to meet its interest payments on outstanding debt.
It is calculated using revenue profit before interest divided by net interest excluding the marktomarket movement on interestrate swaps foreign exchange swaps bond exchange derecognition capitalised interest and interest on the pension scheme assets and liabilities.
The calculation excludes joint ventures.
IPD
Refers to the MSCI IPD Direct Property indexes which measure the property level investment returns in the UK.
Interestrate swap A financial instrument where two parties agree to exchange an interest rate obligation for a predetermined amount of time.
These are generally used by the Group to convert floatingrate debt or investments to fixed rates.
Investment portfolio The investment portfolio comprises the investment properties of the Groups subsidiaries on a proportionately consolidated basis where not wholly owned.
Joint venture An arrangement in which the Group holds an interest and which is jointly controlled by the Group and one or more partners under a contractual arrangement.
Decisions on the activities of the joint venture that significantly affect the joint ventures returns including decisions on financial and operating policies and the performance and financial position of the operation require the unanimous consent of the partners sharing control.
Lease incentives Any incentive offered to occupiers to enter into a lease.
Typically the incentive will be an initial rentfree period or a cash contribution to fitout or similar costs.
For accounting purposes the value of the incentive is spread over the noncancellable life of the lease.
LIBOR
The London Interbank Offered Rate the interest rate charged by one bank to another for lending money often used as a reference rate in bank facilities.
Likeforlike portfolio The likeforlike portfolio includes all properties which have been in the portfolio since 1 April 2015 but excluding those which are acquired sold or included in the development pipeline at any time since that date.
Loantovalue LTV Group LTV is the ratio of adjusted net debt including subsidiaries and joint ventures to the sum of the market value of investment properties and the book value of trading properties of the Group its subsidiaries and joint ventures all on a proportionate basis expressed as a percentage.
For the Security Group LTV is the ratio of net debt lent to the Security Group divided by the value of secured assets.
Market value Market value is determined by the Groups external valuer in accordance with the RICS Valuation Standards as an opinion of the estimated amount for which a property should exchange on the date of valuation between a willing buyer and a willing seller in an armslength transaction after proper marketing.
Marktomarket adjustment An accounting adjustment to change the book value of an asset or liability to its market value see also fair value movement.
Net assets per share Equity attributable to owners of the parent divided by the number of ordinary shares in issue at the year end.
Net assets per share is also commonly known as net asset value per share NAV per share.
188 Landsec Annual Report 2017 Rental value change Increase or decrease in the current rental value as determined by the Groups external valuer over the reporting period on a likeforlike basis.
Rental income Rental income is as reported in the income statement on an accruals basis and adjusted for the spreading of lease incentives over the term certain of the lease in accordance with SIC 15.
It is stated gross prior to the deduction of ground rents and without deduction for operational outgoings on car park and commercialisation activities.
Return on average capital employed Group profit before net finance expense plus joint venture profit before net finance expense divided by the average capital employed defined as shareholders funds plus adjusted net debt.
Return on average equity Group profit before tax plus joint venture tax divided by the average equity shareholders funds.
Revenue profit Profit before tax excluding profits on the sale of noncurrent assets and trading properties profits on longterm development contracts valuation movements fair value movements on interestrate swaps and similar instruments used for hedging purposes the adjustment to finance expense resulting from the amortisation of the bond exchange derecognition adjustment debt restructuring charges and any other items of an exceptional nature.
Reversionary or underrented Space where the passing rent is below the ERV.
Reversionary yield The anticipated yield to which the initial yield will rise or fall once the rent reaches the ERV.
Scrip dividend A scrip dividend is when shareholders are offered the opportunity to receive dividends in the form of shares instead of cash.
Security Group Security Group is the principal funding vehicle for the Group and properties held in the Security Group are mortgaged for the benefit of lenders.
It has the flexibility to raise a variety of different forms of finance.
Temporary lettings Lettings for a period of one year or less.
These are included within voids.
Toppedup net initial yield Toppedup net initial yield is a calculation by the Groups external valuer.
It is calculated by making an adjustment to net initial yield in respect of the annualised cash rent foregone through unexpired rentfree periods and other lease incentives.
The calculation is consistent with EPRA guidance.
Total business return Dividend paid per share in the year plus the change in adjusted diluted net assets per share divided by adjusted diluted net assets per share at the beginning of the year.
Total cost ratio Total cost ratio represents all costs included within revenue profit other than rents payable and financing costs expressed as a percentage of gross rental income before rents payable.
Total development cost TDC Total development cost refers to the book value of the site at the commencement of the project the estimated capital expenditure required to develop the scheme from the start of the financial year in which the property is added to our development programme together with capitalised interest being the Groups borrowing costs associated with direct expenditure on the property under development.
Interest is also capitalised on the purchase cost of land or property where it is acquired specifically for redevelopment.
The TDC for trading property development schemes excludes any estimated tax on disposal.
Total property return Valuation movement profitloss on property sales and net rental income in respect of investment properties expressed as a percentage of opening book value together with the time weighted value for capital expenditure incurred during the current period on the combined property portfolio.
Total Shareholder Return TSR The growth in value of a shareholding over a specified period assuming that dividends are reinvested to purchase additional units of the stock.
Trading properties Properties held for trading purposes and shown as current assets in the balance sheet.
Turnover rent Rental income which is related to an occupiers turnover.
Valuation surplusdeficit The valuation surplusdeficit represents the increase or decrease in the market value of the Combined Portfolio adjusted for net investment.
The market value of the Combined Portfolio is determined by the Groups external valuer.
Voids
Voids are expressed as a percentage of ERV and represent all unlet space including voids where refurbishment work is being carried out and voids in respect of predevelopment properties.
Temporary lettings for a period of one year or less are also treated as voids.
Weighted average cost of capital WACC Weighted average cost of debt and notional cost of equity used as a benchmark to assess investment returns.
Weighted average unexpired lease term The weighted average of the unexpired term of all leases other than shortterm lettings such as car parks and advertising hoardings temporary lettings of less than one year residential leases and long ground leases.
Yield shift A movement negative or positive in the equivalent yield of a property asset.
Zone A A means of analysing and comparing the rental value of retail space by dividing it into zones parallel with the main frontage.
The most valuable zone Zone A is at the front of the unit.
Each successive zone is valued at half the rate of the zone in front of it.
Glossary continued Cautionary statement This Annual Report and Landsecs website may contain certain forwardlooking statements with respect to Land Securities Group PLC Company and the Groups financial condition results of its operations and business and certain plans strategy objectives goals and expectations with respect to these items and the economies and markets in which the Group operates.
Forwardlooking statements are sometimes but not always identified by their use of a date in the future or such words as anticipates  aims  due  could  may  should will  would  expects  believes  intends  plans  targets goal or estimates or in each case their negative or other variations or comparable terminology.
Forwardlooking statements are not guarantees of future performance.
By their very nature forwardlooking statements are inherently unpredictable speculative and involve risk and uncertainty because they relate to events and depend on circumstances that will occur in the future.
Many of these assumptions risks and uncertainties relate to factors that are beyond the Groups ability to control or estimate precisely.
There are a number of such factors that could cause actual results and developments to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
These factors include but are not limited to changes in the political conditions economies and markets in which the Group operates including the outcome of the negotiations to leave the EU changes in the legal regulatory and competition frameworks in which the Group operates changes in the markets from which the Group raises finance the impact of legal or other proceedings against or which affect the Group changes in accounting practices and interpretation of accounting standards under IFRS and changes in interest and exchange rates.
Any forwardlooking statements made in this Annual Report or Landsecs website or made subsequently which are attributable to the Company or any other member of the Group or persons acting on their behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the factors referred to above.
Each forwardlooking statement speaks only as of the date it is made.
Except as required by its legal or statutory obligations the Company does not intend to update any forwardlooking statements.
Nothing in this Annual Report or Landsecs website should be construed as a profit forecast or an invitation to deal in the securities of the Company.
Land Securities Group PLC Copyright and trade mark notices.
All rights reserved.
Copyright 2017 Land Securities Group PLC Landsec Land Securities the Cornerstone logo the L  Logo and Everything is experience are trade marks of the Land Securities Group of companies.
Landsec is the trading name of Land Securities Group PLC.
All other trade marks and registered trade marks are the property of their respective owners.
Produced by Brightsource Limited a Cello Signal company.
Printed by CPI Colour.
Cover and text printed on Munken Design Kristall Smooth which is produced from FSC and PEFC certified wood pulps and manufactured at a paper mill which has ISO 14001 EU Ecolabel and EMAS certification for environmental standards.
Independently certified on behalf of the Forest Stewardship Council FSC
Words
Tim Rich and Landsec
