U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 YOU WILL KNOW US BY THE PLACES WE CREATE Cockpit Yard Springfield Park 10 and 12 Hammersmith Grove 399 Edgware Road Algarve House Future Works Charlton Riverside Circus Street Deptford Market Yard Donnybrook House Friarsgate Shopping Centre
Mill Green Telegraph Works Preston Barracks St Marks Square The Horizon Building 8 Albert Embankment The Old Vinyl Factory
Vertium
Blackhorse Road Westminster Industrial Estate Caxton Works Equipment Works Shepherds Bush Market Morden Wharf Spirit of Sittingbourne 60 24tel 51.1tel 260tel tel276tel 1tel 2016 2017 One year on In our first Annual Report as UI we told you about a business with a vision to create longlasting positive change for communities and sustainable value for our shareholders.
What underpins this is our genuine passion for unlocking the potential of undervalued urban sites transforming them into thriving communities and neighbourhoods.
At the end of our second year we are on our way to achieving our ambitious targets with a focus on value creation and a clear strategy to get us there.
Development and trading gains m 2017 financial highlights Total return % NAV per share pence Total dividends per share declared in the year 2016 13.9p
34.8% 2016 44.4% Total return is the growth in our basic NAV including dividends.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report 04 Chairmans letter C h i e f E x e c u t i v e Officers statement 10 Our markets 14 Our strategy at a glance Our key performance indicators 18 Risk review 21 Viability statement 22 Portfolio review 40 Financial review 48 Sustainability review Corporate governance C h a i r m a n  s
Governance
58 Board of Directors C o r p o r a t e governance A n n u a l S t a t e m e n t from the Remuneration Committee Chairman 81 Remuneration policy 92 Annual remuneration report 105 Directors report 113 Statement of Directors responsibilities Financial statements 114 Independent auditors report to the members of U and I Group PLC C o n soli d a t e d Statement of
Income
C o n soli d a t e d B a l a n c e
C o nsoli d a t e d Statement of Changes in Equity C o nsoli d a t e d C a s h Flow Statement Notes to the Consolidated financial statements I n d e p e n d e n t a u d i t o r s report to the members of U and I Group PLC C o m p a n y B a l a n c e
C o m p a n y S t a t e m e n t of Changes in Equity Notes to the Company financial statements F i na nc ia l c a l e nd a r and advisors EXISTS TO UNLOCK POTENTIAL THROUGH REGENERATION DELIVERING POSITIVE CHANGE FOR COMMUNITIES AND SUSTAINABLE VALUE FOR SHAREHOLDERS U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR PERFORMANCE OVER THE PAST YEAR HIGHLIGHTS THE EXTENT OF OUR AMBITIONS AND OUR POTENTIAL FOR THE FUTURE We are highly ambitious not for ambitions sake but because we are clear about the need for the regeneration projects we create.
We are proud of our ability to deliver them and we understand the value both financial and social that can be generated from them.
As our business expands and develops the combination of our operational focus and our financial model will deliver consistent longterm value driven by a dynamic blend of development trading and investment activity.
Matthew Weiner Chief Executive Officer WHY WE EXIST We exist to create longterm socioeconomic benefit for the communities in which we work delivering sustainable returns to our shareholders WHAT WE DO We are a specialist regeneration developer and investor that transforms undervalued parts of towns and cities into communities where people and enterprise can thrive DRIVEN BY OUR VALUES Imagination The creativity and verve to unlock the value within potential Intelligence Sharp minds quick wits and forensic rigour Audacity A brave spirit and the confidence to reconsider fundamentals Our role in the world Read more on p.1415 Read more on p.79 MAINTAIN CAPITAL
Maintain capital discipline and a strong balance sheet with a rigorous approach to risk DELIVER RETURNS Deliver excellent returns on a through cycle basis GROW PIPELINE Build a pipeline of regeneration projects that deliver superior returns DRIVE VALUE Optimise the value within our portfolio through an integrated business model Our strategic objectives DEVELOPMENT AND TRADING PORTFOLIO
Longerterm development profit Shorterterm trading profit Some elements of completed developments retained within investment portfolio 22% of gross assets capital value Our business model Read more on p.2239 INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO
Income returngrowth Capital growth Future development opportunities Key value drivers Asset management Planning gain capital value 39% of gross assets 39% of gross assets Group share where appropriate Assets held at cost not revalued Capital value includes all property interests held both directly and indirectly Trading PPP capital value Key value drivers Planning gain Development margin Arbitragemispricing UI is a specialist mixeduse regeneration developer and investor.
We realise gains and drive value as we unlock the potential of land and assets.
We have a talent for buying well and delivering value through planning and development.
We focus on opportunities where our size and expertise afford us competitive advantage.
We are experts in managing the complexities of the planning system to deliver high quality mixeduse regeneration projects.
With a track record of over 25 years of investment and development and a diverse team of property experts our 6 billion portfolio contains a mixture of longerterm large scale regeneration projects shorterterm trading opportunities and investment assets see pages 22 to 39.
This combination of projects allows us to generate consistent returns and income through the property cycles.
We have an equityefficient approach to development whereby we limit our financial exposure through the Public Private Partnership PPP model see pages 28 to 31.
This reduces our risk exposure in any one individual project whilst allowing us to build a portfolio with significant upside potential.
Our activity is focused on three core geographical areas  the London City Region Manchester and Dublin  where we see liquidity and sufficient depth through the cycle as well as growth in demand.
These locations have the talent tenants and tourism to succeed.
Placing people at the heart of everything we do we are committed to delivering profitable projects that create a legacy and deliver socioeconomic change for the communities in which we work see pages 48 to 54.
Read more on p.2239 6bn Gross Development Value of portfolio including joint ventures PPP projects won adding 1.5bn to our development pipeline 90% Success rate in planning Visitors to our meanwhile use projects How we create value How we measure our progress Development and trading gains
150m over the next 3 years FY2017 performance Total return
12% post tax total return per annum in the next 3 years FY2017 performance 0.2% Investment portfolio total return
10% return per annum in the next 24 years FY2017 performance 1.7%
Target
4050% on balance sheet FY2017 performance 34.8% Read more in our KPI section p.1617 A catchment area that includes satellite towns and locations within an hours commute of Central London Our KPIs Operational highlights WEVE BEEN BUSY DOING THIS ACROSS OUR PORTFOLIO EVERYTHING WE DO IS ABOUT CONNECTION UNCOVERING OPPORTUNITY AND REALISING POTENTIAL U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A YEAR OF ACHIEVEMENT U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 UI is establishing a reputation as a leading regeneration developer and the public sectors development partner of choice.
Four major wins this year are evidence of this together adding over 1.5 billion of Gross Development Value GDV to our pipeline and over 90 million of development and trading gains in 2020 and beyond.
Our
UNLOCKING
POTENTIAL TO REALISE POSITIVE CHANGE 1.5bn GDV added to pipeline Major PPP projects won U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 MAJOR NEW WIN MAYFIELD A HIGH QUALITY URBAN NEIGHBOURHOOD IN THE HEART OF MANCHESTER As part of a joint venture with The Mayfield Partnership we will be transforming the former Mayfield railway station into a high quality urban neighbourhood in the heart of the city.
The plans for the regeneration of Mayfield will rejuvenate a site which has been derelict for more than three decades breathing new life into a once thriving city district.
Type
Public Private Partnership Development partners The Mayfield Partnership Manchester City Council London Continental Railways and Transport for Greater Manchester
Manchester Piccadilly
Studio Egret West
24acres Size of development Read more in our portfolio review p.2239 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 MAJOR NEW WIN 8 ALBERT EMBANKMENT A NEW CHAPTER FOR THE LONDON FIRE BRIGADE This central London site which overlooks the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament is teeming with history and importance.
First constructed in 1937 this Grade II listed building was originally the headquarters of the London Fire Brigade before becoming the home to Lambeth fire station.
Our plans for 8 Albert Embankment will take the site into the next chapter of its life.
We are completely redesigning the space to create a modern fitfor purpose fire station and training yard within a wider mixeduse regeneration project delivering a new landmark for London.
Type
Public Private Partnership Development partners London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority
Lambeth London
Pilbrow and Partners
2.5acres Size of development Read more in our portfolio review p.2239 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AN ICONIC REGENERATION 8 Albert Embankment will house a permanent London Fire Brigade museum alongside the operating station.
Formerly located in Southwark the museum will provide a world class collection which depicts the history of firefighting from the Great Fire of London to the present day.
To kick things off we have provided a temporary home for a popup fire museum within 8 Albert Embankment.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Cockpit Yard A mixeduse PPP project in the heart of Holborn London MAJOR NEW WIN COCKPIT YARD A NEW DESTINATION FOR
Our partnership with Camden Council will deliver a new mixeduse destination for Holborn.
Located on Theobalds Road within the Bloomsbury Conservation Area the site is currently occupied by Holborn library and Cockpit Arts an award winning social enterprise and creative business incubator for designermakers.
We are now working on plans that will see the site completely redeveloped to provide brand new work spaces a fully remodelled library a local archive facility and new public spaces.
The redevelopment will also deliver 105 new homes including new affordable units.
Type
Public Private Partnership Development partners London Borough of Camden
Holborn London
Coffey Architects
Read more in our portfolio review p.2239 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Playing to our strengths as a regeneration specialist we are aligning our investment portfolio with the wider activities of the Group.
Our focus is to hunt for overlooked and undervalued sites in areas of the market where value can be driven through regeneration.
IMPROVING
OUR INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REALISING POTENTIAL REGENERATING A GREAT LONDON HIGH STREET Having completed the development of The Deptford Project we have retained Deptford Market Yard DMY within our investment portfolio.
This new retail destination opened in November 2016 and we have carefully curated a mix of tenants to create a retail experience that embraces the culture and community of Deptford.
A daily street market will sit at the heart of DMY lined with independent shops and restaurants to create a truly original London leisure destination.
Our achievements were recently recognised with a Placemaking Award at the Property Week Awards.
Type
Retained investment asset Development partners London Borough of Lewisham
Deptford Lewisham London Read more in our portfolio review p.2239 10.4% FY2017 valuation growth 8.2% Estimated rental value U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Forming specialist platforms with capital partners allows us to deliver projects off balance sheet in a capital efficient manner.
These platforms allow us to leverage both our equity and our intellectual capital to acquire enhance and deliver projects generating annual fees and development and trading profits to the business.
In effect they allow us to do more than we could on our own.
CREATING SPECIALIST
FY17 highlights U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
MORE
THAN WE
ON OUR OWN U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Creating longterm socioeconomic growth in the places where we work is core to our approach.
From the start of the development process we engage with local communities in meaningful and creative ways through meanwhile use activities on our sites.
In this way we learn more about the heritage and reality of these places and build deeper relationships with local communities.
Ultimately this allows us to develop better proposals more suited to the local context resulting in a smoother more successful journey through planning and regeneration.
ENHANCING
COMMUNITIES visitors to our meanwhile projects events hosted at our meanwhile projects FY17 highlights Read more in our sustainability section p.4854 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 THE WORKSHOP This year we launched The Workshop at 8 Albert Embankment creating a temporary home for the London Fire Museum and a public coworking space for creative businesses who run events for the local community.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
A PLATFORM TO ENGAGE THE COMMUNITY Housed at our development site in Southwark Platform is a multidisciplinary temporary project space with a mission to encourage and promote groundbreaking art music and performance.
Collaboration and engagement with the local community are central to Platforms mission which aims to be a fun and creative space that is accessible to all.
Working with UI above and around Southwark Underground station will see us create homes jobs and new community facilities on a site that has been left undeveloped for far too long.
Southwark is a great example of what we are doing across our portfolio and we look forward to working with UI at sites across the capital to meet Londons needs whilst generating revenues to reinvest in the transport network.
Graeme Craig Director of Commercial Development TfL U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our people are what allow us to do what we do.
We are growing a strong culture around a clear brand ambition values and behaviours that will set us apart and fuel our success.
Its
Its
Its what allows us to deliver great places and generate value for all of our stakeholders.
STRENGTHENING
OUR TEAM Read more in our sustainability p.4854 and Corporate governance p.56113 sections U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 THE RIGHT SKILLS This year we established our Executive Committee ExCo to ensure greater responsibility and accountability for delivering our business plan with each member having ownership of key work streams within the business.
We strengthened this team with the appointment of Mark Richardson as Head of Delivery and Brenda Bates as Head of Communications and Business Services during the year.
From left to right Mark Richardson James Bishop Brenda Bates Simon Hesketh Bradley Cassels U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 UNITED AND INDUSTRIOUS We are building a company that our team is proud to be part of living out our values every day as we deliver our strategy together.
Read more in our sustainability section on p.4854 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DONT JUST TAKE OUR WORD FOR IT WE HAVE WORKED CLOSELY WITH UI WHO HASNT BEEN AFRAID TO CHALLENGE OUR THINKING AND BRING NEW IDEAS TO THE TABLE.
THE COMBINATION OF OUR INTRICATE KNOWLEDGE OF THE CITY AND UIS DEPTH OF UNDERSTANDING OF URBAN REGENERATION IS CREATING A NEW DEVELOPMENT THAT WILL BRING GROWTH AND BUILD AN EXCITING LEGACY FOR OUR CITY.
Cllr Mike Wilcox Leader of Lichfield District Council UI HAS BEEN AN EXCELLENT DEVELOPMENT PARTNER BRINGING A THOROUGH AND EXPERT APPROACH TO RISK MANAGEMENT  CARE AND ATTENTION TO DESIGN AND A THOUGHTFUL APPROACH TO COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.
WE ARE PROUD OF THE LEGACY WE HAVE CREATED WITH 10 AND 12 HAMMERSMITH GROVE.
Gerry Ferguson Head of UK Property Pooled Funds Aberdeen Asset Management UI HAS BEEN A LONGSTANDING PARTNER OF GREENWICH COUNCIL AND WE HAVE ALWAYS ENJOYED THE SPARK AND COMMUNITYFOCUSSED APPROACH THAT THEY BRING.
THE
PROJECTS THAT THEY ARE DELIVERING ARE ENLIVENING AND ENRICHING OUR BOROUGH.
Denise Hyland Leader of Royal Borough of Greenwich Council UI IS EXACTLY THE KIND OF DEVELOPMENT PARTNER WE ARE LOOKING FOR.
ITS IDEAS ENERGY AND DRIVE HAVE
A WELCOME AND REFRESHING ADDITION TO THE FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR TOWN.
Cllr Gerry Clarkson Leader of Ashford Borough Council UI SPOTTED THE OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE A HIGH QUALITY OFFICE LED REGENERATION PROJECT AT THE GATEWAY TO SLOUGH.
BRUNEL
PLACE IS A FIRSTRATE BUILDING THAT IS SET TO BENEFIT FROM THE STRENGTH OF ITS LOCATION AND THE HIGH DEMAND FOR QUALITY COMMERCIAL SPACE.
WE ARE EXCITED TO BE PARTNERING ON A PROJECT THAT IS SET TO TRANSFORM SLOUGH TOWN CENTRE.
Peter Ferrari Chief Executive of Ashby Capital WITH A CLEAR FOCUS WE ARE BUILDING ON OUR STRONG TRACK RECORD DELIVERING LONGTERM VALUE FOR ALL OF OUR
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chairmans letter A SUSTAINABLE AND SUCCESSFUL
Peter Williams photographed at UIs offices in Victoria London U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 This is my first statement as Chairman of UI and I am pleased to report another solid set of annual results.
We delivered a headline profit before tax and exceptional items of 0.4 million and development and trading gains of 35.0 million.
These are profits realised from sales made during the year that demonstrate UIs highly effective origination activity coupled with an ability to add value through the planning and development process.
The results are noteworthy given the impact of the UKs decision to leave the EU following the referendum in June 2016.
In the months following that referendum a pall of uncertainty hung over the property market as investment decisions were delayed and activity stalled.
More normalised conditions have begun to return but the environment remains unpredictable.
At UI however we are optimistic about the future and our ability to proactively drive value and generate strong cash flows as evidenced by the Board declaring a third consecutive supplemental dividend in addition to our ordinary dividend.
There are strong grounds for our positive outlook which reflect why I am excited to be chairing this company.
UI is distinctive.
It stands out within the property sector both in what it does and the way it does it.
The Group takes a creative approach to real estate.
We dare to challenge the status quo and as a result we win business that others dont and deliver results that others cant.
With my background in cuttingedge retail these are attributes that I recognise and appreciate.
They are already helping UI to generate momentum as evidenced by the four major regeneration projects that the Company won last year.
These will not only deliver sustainable value they are also an endorsement of UIs approach strategy and growing reputation among public sector decisionmakers.
UIs focus on mixeduse regeneration makes sense on many levels.
It chimes with government policy to deliver more homes and jobs improve productivity and stimulate local communities.
It encourages better use of brownfield and public land which is in vast supply.
It supports pressurised local authorities and public bodies in their drive to deliver the regeneration that their communities need but with limited resource to do so.
It responds to consumer demand for mixeduse environments where they can live work play and study.
It delivers tangible socio economic benefits and it creates value for shareholders.
It is particularly inspiring to see the way that the UI team approaches these projects.
There is real care and conviction a desire to build true partnerships with local communities and decisionmakers but also a rigorous focus on risk management and value creation for shareholders.
The Groups portfolio with a Gross Development Value GDV of 6 billion is anchored by largescale Public Private Partnership PPP projects balanced with shorterterm trading activity to produce regular consistent returns.
These projects give us visibility on a pipeline that stretches to 2020 and beyond with over 150 million of gains set to be delivered in the next three years.
The investment portfolio is transitioning to a focus on regeneration to support development and trading activities improve performance and drive stronger returns.
And our specialist platforms are designed to leverage our equity and intellectual capital to drive growth and maximise financial efficiency.
This spread of activity  with assets in the London City Region Manchester and Dublin  provides welcome diversification and several routes to value creation.
In my nine months as Chairman Matthew and Richard have continued to knit this company together strengthen the team and create a unified whole.
The energy enthusiasm and drive across the business are palpable and symptomatic of a company that is progressing at pace.
UIs values  audacity imagination and intelligence  are rare in the property industry.
Yet this Company lives by these values with integrity.
It has the imagination to visualise a better brighter future for the places in which it works.
It has the audacity to make those transformations real.
And it has the intelligence to know what is worth striving for.
I am pleased and proud to see what the Group has achieved so far and I am confident that the team are developing a strong sustainable and successful business.
Peter Williams
26 April 2017 A catchment area that includes satellite towns and locations within an hours commute of Central London Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Executive Officers statement
CONFIDENT IN OUR AMBITIOUS
Matthew Weiner photographed at 8 Albert Embankment London U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 As I look back over the past year I am proud of what we have achieved and even more excited about what is yet to come.
We are making measurable progress in our ambition to build a sustainable business centred on mixeduse regeneration.
These projects respond to real needs within our society and they are recognised as a priority by central and local government.
There are growing opportunities in the regeneration market within which we play a leading role with a strengthening competitive advantage in our chosen regions.
In the year to February 2017 we delivered development and trading profits of 35.0 million 2016 51.5 million and a profit before tax and exceptional items of 0.4 million 2016 25.8 million.
The reduction in profit before tax was principally caused by a lower level of development and trading gains a negative valuation performance of our investment portfolio in H1 and lower rental income as we disposed of noncore assets from our investment portfolio.
After paying 17.4 million of dividends 13.9 pence per share our net asset value NAV decreased to 347.6 million278 pence per share 2016 363.3 million291 pence per share.
The Board has recommended the payment of a final dividend of 3.5 pence per share payable on 17 August 2017 to all shareholders on the register on 21 July 2017 bringing the total dividend for the financial year to 5.9 pence per share.
In addition we will pay a supplemental dividend of 2.8 pence per share on 16 June 2017 to all shareholders on the register on 12 May 2017.
This will be the third supplemental dividend paid to shareholders in the past three years and underlines our confidence in continuing to generate strong cash flows from our development and trading activities.
Navigating the market I am particularly pleased with our performance given the unusual and unpredictable economic and political backdrop.
The decision last June to leave the EU temporarily stalled the UK property market creating headwinds throughout the summer and beyond.
Although we have seen little evidence of a permanent impact on prices we have experienced delays on the realisation of a number of projects as businesses paused to assess the revised environment.
Looking ahead even as market conditions remain deeply uncertain we are confident that we can make significant progress.
The need for creative wellexecuted regeneration projects is clear.
The UK faces a growing structural housing deficit while consumers increasingly favour mixeduse real estate where they can live work play and forge real communities.
These are the schemes that UI is focused on and where we are developing an increasingly competitive edge.
Strengthening our portfolio During the year we were highly focused concentrating on growing our portfolio of larger projects improving our investment portfolio and building efficient capitallight specialist platforms.
Our ambition remains unchanged to generate robust longterm sustainable growth quantified by our target to achieve annual posttax total returns of 12 per cent in the next three years.
This ambition is centred on delivering a balance of PPP and trading projects with a focus on mixeduse regeneration schemes in our chosen regions the London City Region Manchester and Dublin.
Winning large complex projects is a crucial element of our strategy and they are the foundations around which our business is based.
Against that backdrop winning four largescale PPP projects during the year was particularly pleasing namely 8 Albert Embankment Cockpit Yard and the Westminster Industrial Estate in London and Mayfield in Manchester.
These projects were won in competitive situations underscoring our growing reputation in the mixeduse regeneration space.
They add more than 1.5 billion of Gross Development Value GDV to our portfolio and an additional 90 million of development and trading gains to our pipeline in 2020 and beyond.
These projects also indicate the extent to which UI is functioning as a single unified Group capable of winning business that we would not have been able to secure in the past.
Mayfield alone is valued at 850 million testament to our ability to take on even the most sizeable regeneration projects.
Notably too these partnerships are built on trust and quality of execution developed over the long term by forming genuine partnerships with public bodies and local communities.
This blend of skill and reputation creates high barriers to entry only overcome through genuine commitment and proven results.
The 35.0 million of development and trading gains that we delivered this year were achieved through consistent Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chief Executive Officers statement continued effort and hard work on a number of projects.
In each case we have delivered tangible gains by buying well and then adding value through the planning and development processes.
The full breakdown of projects that underpin this years gains is provided in the portfolio review.
I am particularly proud of these results which reflect genuine value uplift evidenced by cash profits.
I have every confidence that we will produce a record result in the current year targeting 6570 million of development and trading gains.
Over the next three years we are targeting more than 150 million of gains.
I am optimistic too about our investment portfolio which is being steadily realigned to reflect the Groups strategic focus on regeneration.
Having assessed each of the assets within this portfolio we are progressing the disposal of noncore assets optimising the value of those we are retaining and reinvesting in new assets that make best use of our regeneration expertise.
During the year we formed two specialist platforms strategic joint ventures with majority capital partners.
In August 2016 we signed a 200 million joint venture agreement with Proprium Capital Partners to secure incomegenerating assets in the London City Region.
In November we formed a 300 million partnership with Colony NorthStar focused on adding value to underperforming office buildings in London Manchester and Dublin.
These platforms give us the ability to acquire and deliver projects off balance sheet leveraging our equity and intellectual capital whilst generating fees to the business which offset overhead.
In effect they enable us to do more than we could on our own.
A marketleading team None of this would be possible without our people.
This year we formed our Executive Committee ExCo a step that should tangibly improve the way we do business and the results we achieve.
Created to support the Companys development the ExCo is responsible for implementing our strategy on a day to day basis.
As such this committee plays a central role in helping the business to deliver results today and to ensure it is positioned for growth tomorrow.
We have selectively strengthened this team with the appointment of Mark Richardson as Head of Delivery and Brenda Bates as Head of Communications and Business
Mark previously preconstruction director at Laing ORourke has worked on some of the most prestigious projects in London whilst Brenda who joined UI from the World Gold Council brings significant strategic expertise.
We have also strengthened our team in Manchester with the appointment of experienced development professionals to oversee our Mayfield regeneration site deepening our roots in this city.
Our aim is simple  to deliver vibrant mixeduse regeneration projects that c reate recurring sustainable economic and social value for local stakeholders and longlasting value for our sh areholders U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 While our senior people provide direction within our Company they are supported by an experienced team bringing talent enthusiasm and energy to the projects we undertake.
Our work is not easy  if it were we would not be in the unique position we are in  combining longterm regeneration shortterm trading and investment.
But our work is exciting audacious and rewarding.
It demands intelligence and imagination.
It delivers tangible change.
As a result we attract people at every level who share our vision our desire for progress and our commitment to delivering returns both to our investors and the communities in which we work.
Wellpositioned for the future Our teams energy and combination of skills will help us achieve our targets this year and beyond growing our pipeline driving value delivering returns and maintaining capital efficiency.
Having built a substantial regeneration platform we are in a position where we can remain selective about the future projects we take on.
We have a range of specific criteria that need to be satisfied before we consider new projects and we will only undertake those where we can deliver meaningful social change and significant shareholder value.
Looking ahead I am optimistic that we can succeed in our ambitions.
We operate in markets that will continue to grow where we have built a genuine competitive advantage that will only intensify over time.
We operate an equityefficient model designed to minimise balance sheet risk and maximise shareholder returns.
As our business expands and develops the combination of our operational leverage and our financial model should deliver consistent longterm value driven by a dynamic blend of development trading and investment activity.
We are highly ambitious not for ambitions sake but because we are clear about the need for these projects we are proud of our ability to deliver them and we understand the value both financial and social that can be generated from them.
Our targets are stretching but based on the work we have done so far the team that we have created the relationships we have built and the pipeline of opportunities ahead I am confident of success.
Matthew Weiner
Chief Executive Officer
26 April 2017 Our aim is simple  to deliver vibrant mixeduse regeneration projects that c reate recurring sustainable economic and social value for local stakeholders and longlasting value for our sh areholders Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our markets The property market might have been expected to slump against such an unpromising backdrop  and certainly Brexit had a significant impact with Q3 2016 being characterised by limited transactional activity.
However during Q4 2016 activity started to return and confidence grew following a series of unexpectedly strong economic indicators.
GDP growth was better than forecast while consumer spending and business optimism were both greater than expected.
In recent months however some worrying signs have begun to emerge.
UK GDP growth is slowing inflation is rising and wages are static all trends that we expect to intensify during 2017.
Business investment has been disappointing for several months and is likely to continue in that vein.
The quarterly Deloitte CFO survey  a key measure of business confidence shows that most finance directors would still prefer to retain cash than invest it in new projects.
This is unlikely to change as Brexit negotiations get underway.
And consumers who have buoyed the UK economy for years are under pressure.
Household budgets are being squeezed by the rising cost of everyday goods as wage growth remains elusive.
This creates a further challenge for retailers many of which are already struggling as ecommerce becomes ever more prevalent and business rates rise.
Opportunities remain Despite these challenging conditions our competitive advantages remain strong and we are confident that plenty of opportunities exist for us to make rewarding investments and generate value for our stakeholders.
Our optimism is tempered with caution.
We have raised our required rate of return on new projects and we have become even more forensic in our due diligence.
However a number of factors contribute to our sense of optimism  factors that hold This time last year amid a multitude of economic financial and social concerns one specific issue stood out  the referendum on EU membership and the impact of a vote to leave.
Today Brexit is a fact of life.
The full effects of that decision have yet to be felt but the UK has triggered Article 50 and departure from the EU is inevitable.
A challenging backdrop U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 good today and are likely to persist for several years in our core markets of the London City Region Manchester and Dublin.
Commercial  pockets of potential Within the commercial property space the cycle is at a point where rents are broadly stable and yields static but where construction costs are rising.
Against this development has been limited for almost a decade so the supply of office space is tight and vacancies are low.
We believe there are some broad themes that will provide opportunities.
First there is a growing demand for interesting high quality office space.
With low unemployment companies are striving to attract and retain top talent  dynamic inspiring office space that encourages collaboration is one important way of doing so.
Second the growth of the gig economy is changing the work environment driving demand for shared offices both for individuals and for companies seeking flexible space.
Third investors the world over are searching for incomeproducing assets.
Sterlings weakness has enhanced the appeal of UK assets and this trend is likely to continue as long as the value of Sterling does not plummet.
It is also worth noting that property yields remain materially above those of ten year gilts  as long as this continues UK commercial real estate will remain an attractive investment.
Looking ahead rising construction costs and an uncertain economic environment are likely to limit the supply of central London office development.
According to some estimates construction costs increased by almost 20 per cent in 2016 driven by rising commodity prices wage inflation and a stronger Dollar JP Morgan Cazenove European Property review February 2017.
Our bias towards suburban London should shield us from this given that demand is growing but supply is weak  in outer London 1.6 million sq. ft. is required and only 700000 sq. ft. five years Savills.
This presents clear opportunities for our office repositioning platform with Colony NorthStar which focuses on reviving and reworking tired office buildings rather than new build office space a process that is quicker to deliver and involves less cost risk.
Retail  an experiential movement The retail market has changed dramatically over the past decade as ecommerce becomes a way of life and consumers become increasingly promiscuous about where when and how they shop.
The challenges facing retailers are exacerbated by shifting spending patterns as consumers become more demanding leaning towards experiences rather than material possessions and are happy to rent or share goods and services rather than buy them outright.
Such trends are making their presence felt across all demographics but they are particularly prevalent among millennials.
Against this backdrop retailers are having to think carefully about where they are physically located what they offer discerning consumers and how their offer is presented.
Convenience experience and value are all critical and across the board retailers are challenged with working hard and thinking differently to attract and retain customers.
Our retail assets benefit from these trends offering convenient experiences in attractive environments.
Created as part of a bigger mixeduse environment these developments are designed to capture growth in footfall over the long term as the quality of place improves.
Interestingly too local authorities are moving into this sector purchasing assets such as shopping centres in a bid to generate longterm income and influence the culture and soul of their towns.
This is likely to have a material impact on the market and should benefit developers and owners of town centre leisure and retail developments such as UI by creating a new form of investment demand.
Residential  persistent demand at the right price point The outlook for midmarket residential space remains strong.
Both the UK and Ireland suffer from a structural supply deficit a situation that will not change in the near term without a rapid supply response.
The mismatch between demand and supply is particularly acute in the London City Region but it is also apparent in Manchester and Dublin.
The UK Governments Housing White Paper may encourage an increase in supply over the long term but it is unlikely to have a material impact in the next few years.
Across the UK 225000275000 new homes are required per annum to keep up with population growth.
In 2015 around 168000 new homes were built
The gap between supply and demand persists.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our markets continued At the top end of the market prices have come down and activity has slowed.
However welllocated affordable homes in the London suburbs continue to see strong demand and single digit price increases.
Demand is both from end users and housebuilders wanting shovelready projects which we are able to deliver through our planning expertise.
This midmarket sector is a key focus for UI.
London  a booming capital London remains a booming metropolis and the main driver of UK economic growth.
In 2015 Londons gross value added per head was 43629 more than double the national average Office for National Statistics and Londons economy is forecast to continue growing by a minimum of two per cent per year Greater London Authority.
Within the commercial market the capital has reduced its reliance on financial services in recent years and become a TMT hub.
Not only is homegrown tech talent blossoming in London but Apple Snapchat Google and Facebook have all taken space in the city highlighting its resilience in a postBrexit world.
On the residential front the city is growing by around 100000 people a year a trend that will continue regardless of Brexit.
That growth requires 40000  50000 new residential units per annum and these are simply not being built.
Demand is particularly strong within suburban locations and the sub 600000 price points where we focus our regeneration efforts.
Our focus on the London City Region a catchment area that includes satellite towns within an hours commute of Central London  is well placed as we believe that it will continue to be the dominant force within the UK economy.
Manchester  the UKs second city Increasingly acknowledged as the UKs second city Manchester is now the third most influential city in Europe according to the latest
Colliers International.
THESE TRENDS SUPPORT UIS FOCUS ON WELLLOCATED ATTRACTIVE AND HIGH QUALITY DEVELOPMENTS PRIMARILY FORWARD FUNDED BY LONGTERM CAPITAL PARTNERS.
That position is hard won reflecting strong leadership from the city council and a determined effort to create quality places to live and work.
The councils strategy has created a virtuous circle which is changing perceptions of Manchester and driving demand for both office and residential real estate.
The commercial office market has been strong for the past three years and demand is increasing reaching its highest level since 2010 in the final quarter of 2016 Manchester Office Agents Forum.
Looking ahead Manchester is expected to retain and consolidate its reputation as a leading European city bolstered by continued efforts to improve the citys commercial and residential infrastructure.
Our
Manchester Piccadilly area acting as a catalyst for the regeneration of the wider city.
Dublin  shining bright In 2016 Ireland was yet again the fastest growing economy in the EU delivering GDP growth of 5.2 per cent.
Dublin is the key driver of that growth.
Widely seen as an appealing city with strong links to the US it benefits from a well thought out corporate tax policy which has attracted large numbers of international businesses in recent years.
Dublin has already established itself as an international hub ranked third in the FDI Global Cities of the Future and tenth in the Global Talent Competitiveness Index.
Last year alone global tech companies including Microsoft announced expansion plans in the city.
Notably too once Brexit takes place Dublin will be the only major Englishspeaking city in the EU a factor that should play in its favour.
Commercial property investment is buoyant in the city with Dublin ranked as a top five European city for property investment for the fourth consecutive year Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland Residential and Commercial Property Outlook 2017.
Supply is increasing but rental rates are expected to continue rising this year before stabilising thereafter.
As the city grows and its economy develops the need for housing intensifies.
Ireland is suffering from a national housing crisis the Government is under pressure to address this and Dublin faces a substantial deficit of new homes.
In the first nine months of 2016 fewer than 3500 houses were completed less than half the number required to address the current shortage.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Mixeduse projects  a growing need Society is changing.
Globalisation technological advances and growing inequality are giving rise to tensions and pressures.
Static wages highly priced properties and a dearth of new supply have put home ownership increasingly out of reach.
These developments are both unwelcome and potentially dangerous as both central and local government increasingly recognise.
Against this backdrop consumer demand is also changing  people no longer want to live in one area work in another and spend their leisure time somewhere else again.
The mixeduse regeneration schemes that we deliver are designed to address these issues  providing the buzz of urban life within the more affordable areas of the London City Region Manchester and Dublin where people can live work and play.
For local authorities and public landowners mixeduse regeneration schemes offer the opportunity to rebuild communities and generate muchneeded revenue.
Forwardlooking local authorities are increasingly interested in partnering with trusted developers such as ourselves to create projects in which they can have a direct longterm stake.
The benefits for both public and private partners are significant.
For our partners revitalised places valuable community assets profit shares business rates.
For UI access to valuable highquality sites and the ability to generate substantial socioeconomic value and financial returns.
These agreements can be highly productive for both parties but they require trust.
We have gained a hardwon reputation for creating quality spaces that stand the test of time and importantly delivering high quality results.
Demand for mixeduse regeneration schemes is widely expected to remain strong boosted by social and structural change.
This is UIs chosen sector and it is a sector in which we have already proven our ability.
No real estate company is immune to the outside world but the space in which UI operates is likely to remain relevant and in demand for years to come.
Mayfield Manchester Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements Our strategy at a glance GROW PIPELINE Build a pipeline of regeneration projects that deliver superior returns Portfolio review p.2239 Our core skills as a business lie in smart land acquisition and adding value through the planning process.
Our focus is to build a pipeline of PPP and trading projects that generate excellent shareholder returns through the property cycle as we realise profits from asset disposals.
Our large scale developments are structured to limit our upfront equity investment and we derisk the development process through forward sales and forward funding.
This allows us to build a pipeline of projects that are throughcycle with an appropriate balance of risk and return.
This year we won four major PPP regeneration projects including 8 Albert Embankment and Mayfield in Manchester.
Read more on p.2831 6bn Gross Development Value of our whole portfolio including joint ventures 1.5bn of GDV added from 4 new PPP wins We will continue to grow our pipeline of trading and PPP assets with a strict focus on projects within our core markets that match our returns profile and suit our regeneration focus.
Within the investment portfolio our target for the year ahead is to reinvest to build a portfolio of regenerationfocused investment assets.
Scarcity of viable investment and development opportunities DRIVE VALUE Optimise the value within our portfolio through an integrated business model Portfolio review p.2239 We are experts in generating value by transforming overlooked sites into distinctive vibrant new places that deliver substantial socioeconomic value.
The combination of skills within the business enables us to maximise the value across our portfolio and offer different but connected routes to market.
Having completed The Deptford Project we retained Deptford Market Yard within our investment portfolio and will be proactively managing this asset to drive value.
Read more on p.36 90% success rate in planning Planning remains the key value driver across all of our activity.
Our focus for the year ahead is to secure planning consent on a number of projects including Blackhorse Road Preston Barracks and Kensington Church Street.
We will also continue to focus on optimising the value of our investment portfolio through proactive asset management and enhancement with a mediumterm target of driving 10% return per annum.
Market risk Planning risk Construction risk Counterparty risk
RETURNS
Deliver excellent returns on a throughcycle basis
Chief Executive Officers
The business has the capacity to generate consistent returns through the property cycle from a balance of longer term PPP projects shorterterm trading activity and improving the value of our investment portfolio.
Birmingham International Park was a nonincome producing legacy asset.
We realised 8.4 million of gains upon disposal having added value through planning change of use.
Read more on p.32 of development and trading gains The Board has established a mediumterm target to deliver over 50 million of development and trading gains per annum and a minimum of 150 million over the next three years.
For FY2018 our target for development and trading gains is 6570 million.
The Board is also targeting a posttax total returns target of 12% per annum in the next 3 years.
Scarcity of viable investment and development opportunities Planning risk Construction risk Counterparty risk Bank funding risk
CAPITAL
EFFICIENCY
Maintain capital discipline and a strong Balance Sheet with a rigorous approach to risk
Chief Executive Officers
Dividend policy p.46 Portfolio review p.2239 Risk review p.1820 Financial review p.4047 We do not hoard capital on our Balance Sheet but use our strong cash flows to reinvest pay down debt or return capital to shareholders.
We maintain an efficient Balance Sheet with appropriate gearing levels and a sizeable cash buffer to keep us stable throughout the property cycle.
The creation of specialist platforms allows us to deliver projects in a capitalefficient manner through joint ventures with majority capital partners.
These generate management fees which enable us to offset overhead costs and to monetise the land within our portfolio.
In November 2016 we formed a JV with Colony Northstar Inc to target office repositioning opportunities in London Manchester and Dublin.
We also formed a JV with Proprium Capital Partners to target incomeproducing longterm development sites within the London City Region.
Read more on p.39 34.8% gearing 4.6% average cost of debt dividend per share declared We will continue to maintain our gearing within our target range of 4050% and redistribute surplus capital in accordance with our dividend policy.
Counterparty risk Bank funding risk
CASE STUDY
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1.
GROW PIPELINE Build a pipeline of regeneration projects that deliver superior returns Portfolio review p.2239 Our core skills as a business lie in smart land acquisition and adding value through the planning process.
Our focus is to build a pipeline of PPP and trading projects that generate excellent shareholder returns through the property cycle as we realise profits from asset disposals.
Our large scale developments are structured to limit our upfront equity investment and we derisk the development process through forward sales and forward funding.
This allows us to build a pipeline of projects that are throughcycle with an appropriate balance of risk and return.
This year we won four major PPP regeneration projects including 8 Albert Embankment and Mayfield in Manchester.
Read more on p.2831 6bn Gross Development Value of our whole portfolio including joint ventures 1.5bn of GDV added from 4 new PPP wins We will continue to grow our pipeline of trading and PPP assets with a strict focus on projects within our core markets that match our returns profile and suit our regeneration focus.
Within the investment portfolio our target for the year ahead is to reinvest to build a portfolio of regenerationfocused investment assets.
Scarcity of viable investment and development opportunities DRIVE VALUE Optimise the value within our portfolio through an integrated business model Portfolio review p.2239 We are experts in generating value by transforming overlooked sites into distinctive vibrant new places that deliver substantial socioeconomic value.
The combination of skills within the business enables us to maximise the value across our portfolio and offer different but connected routes to market.
Having completed The Deptford Project we retained Deptford Market Yard within our investment portfolio and will be proactively managing this asset to drive value.
Read more on p.36 90% success rate in planning Planning remains the key value driver across all of our activity.
Our focus for the year ahead is to secure planning consent on a number of projects including Blackhorse Road Preston Barracks and Kensington Church Street.
We will also continue to focus on optimising the value of our investment portfolio through proactive asset management and enhancement with a mediumterm target of driving 10% return per annum.
Market risk Planning risk Construction risk Counterparty risk
RETURNS
Deliver excellent returns on a throughcycle basis
Chief Executive Officers
The business has the capacity to generate consistent returns through the property cycle from a balance of longer term PPP projects shorterterm trading activity and improving the value of our investment portfolio.
Birmingham International Park was a nonincome producing legacy asset.
We realised 8.4 million of gains upon disposal having added value through planning change of use.
Read more on p.32 of development and trading gains The Board has established a mediumterm target to deliver over 50 million of development and trading gains per annum and a minimum of 150 million over the next three years.
For FY2018 our target for development and trading gains is 6570 million.
The Board is also targeting a posttax total returns target of 12% per annum in the next 3 years.
Scarcity of viable investment and development opportunities Planning risk Construction risk Counterparty risk Bank funding risk
CAPITAL
EFFICIENCY
Maintain capital discipline and a strong Balance Sheet with a rigorous approach to risk
Chief Executive Officers
Dividend policy p.46 Portfolio review p.2239 Risk review p.1820 Financial review p.4047 We do not hoard capital on our Balance Sheet but use our strong cash flows to reinvest pay down debt or return capital to shareholders.
We maintain an efficient Balance Sheet with appropriate gearing levels and a sizeable cash buffer to keep us stable throughout the property cycle.
The creation of specialist platforms allows us to deliver projects in a capitalefficient manner through joint ventures with majority capital partners.
These generate management fees which enable us to offset overhead costs and to monetise the land within our portfolio.
In November 2016 we formed a JV with Colony Northstar Inc to target office repositioning opportunities in London Manchester and Dublin.
We also formed a JV with Proprium Capital Partners to target incomeproducing longterm development sites within the London City Region.
Read more on p.39 34.8% gearing 4.6% average cost of debt dividend per share declared We will continue to maintain our gearing within our target range of 4050% and redistribute surplus capital in accordance with our dividend policy.
Counterparty risk Bank funding risk
FY2017 HIGHLIGHTS
KEY RISKS
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 60 24tel 51.1tel Our key performance indicators The following KPIs are used by the Board to measure the success of the Groups performance against its strategic objectives Development and trading gains
Development and trading DT gains are profits realised as we sell land and assets having added value through planning asset management or development.
Comment
In 2017 we delivered 35 million of DT gains which was within our guidance range.
The delivery of gains in FY2017 was impacted by the result of the EU referendum which delayed the realisation of a number of projects into FY2018.
Remuneration linkage DT gains are the principal contributor to our total return the key metric against which our Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP is determined.
The level at which our LTIP vests relies on a consistent level of performance over a number of years hence delivering a steady level of DT gains is a key focus for the business.
30% of the Directors annual bonus is determined by DT gains being achieved within the range of guidance given at the start of each financial year.
Read more on p.2632 Gains realised in 2017
50 million minimum per annum and a minimum of 150 million in the next three years.
Investment portfolio total return
The investment portfolio total return includes the capital growth and income growth realised during the financial year across our investment assets.
Comment
During the year investment income reduced from 203.3 million to 179.2 million as we disposed of a number of assets in line with our strategy.
Values declined by 5.1% as a result of weakness in some of our secondary retail markets.
As a result our investment portfolio total return was 1.7%.
As outlined in our portfolio review we are proactively transitioning our investment portfolio in order to drive growth and support our overall returns target.
Remuneration linkage Our investment portfolio performance is a key driver of our NAV growth which underpins our LTIP.
Improving the performance of our investment portfolio is a key focus for the Board.
Read more on p.3337 Investment portfolio return in 2017 1.7%
10% total return in the next two to four years.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accountsteltel % 24tel 44.7tel % Total returns
Total return is the growth in our basic NAV including dividends and is the most direct way of measuring returns to shareholders during the year.
Comment
In 2017 we delivered a total return of 0.2% due to the negative performance of our investment portfolio.
Remuneration linkage Under the Groups Remuneration Policy the Directors LTIP is calculated according to a scale of total returns targets.
As such total return is considered a key performance measure for the Group.
Read more on p.84 Total return in 2017 0.2%
12% per annum in the next three years.
Gearing
Definition
The Group seeks to maintain a conservative level of gearing appropriate to the size of our Balance Sheet in order to maintain capital efficiency.
At certain points the Groups gearing may increase as a result of a higher level of construction debt against specific assets.
However construction finance is usually only ever secured on properties where the exit has been guaranteed through presales or forwardfunding.
This enables us to maintain a low risk financial structure and to protect shareholder value throughout the property and economic cycles.
Comment
During the year gearing fell from 44.4% to 34.8%.
This was primarily driven by the disposal of the presold residential units at Deptford in February 2016 and the subsequent repayment of the related debt facilities in March 2016.
2017 Gearing 34.8%
4050% on balance sheet and 5060% including our share of joint venture debt.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Impact Low High Likelihood Unlikely Very Likely a.
Market risk b.
Scarcity of viable investment and development opportunities c.
Counterparty risk d.
Bank funding risk e.
Construction risk f.
Planning risk Risk review Our business model is shaped by the risks that the Directors consider significant to our strategy size and capabilities RISK ASSESSMENT
IDENTIFY RISK COMMITTEE
AUDIT COMMITTEE MITIGATING ACTIONS BOARD BOARD OF DIRECTORS Risk management structure The Groups risk profile is maintained under continual review by its Audit and Risk Committee and by the Board.
In addition the Group has a Risk Management Committee which oversees the Groups risk register and risk control processes on behalf of the Audit and Risk Committee.
The Risk Management Committee comprises senior employees from across the Group covering all areas of the Groups operations.
Mapping our risks The Group categorises risks according to the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact on the Group.
The
Directors consider the following to be the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group.
These risks have been grouped as either External risks  whose occurrence is beyond the control of the Group or Business risks  which the Directors choose to manage as part of the Groups operations.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EXTERNAL RISKS RISK IMPACT MITIGATION RISK EXPOSURE CHANGE YEAR ON YEAR a.
Market risk The real estate market is directly linked to the health of the local national and increasingly international economies.
Lack of economic growth recessionary conditions or economic uncertainty can translate into negative sentiment towards the performance of real estate.
Lack of liquidity available to prospective purchasers of completed projects may delay ability to realise planned disposals or reduce prices leading to significantly reduced cash inflows.
Higher occupier risk leading to significantly reduced values.
Lack of occupier demand resulting in inability to realise gains.
Riskaverse property development strategy whereby projects are prefunded prelet or presold where appropriate.
Long maturities of debt finance facilities.
Moderate level of gearing.
Regular meetings with economic forecasters to gauge economic trends.
The UK economy remains supportive to our activities however continuing political uncertainty following the result of the EU referendum and the triggering of Article 50 by the UK Government together with escalating geopolitical risks continue to overshadow the market. b.
Scarcity of viable investment and development opportunities The Groups business is predominantly transactional and requires a flow of PPP trading and investment opportunities to generate consistent returns.
The risk is that the flow of suitably priced opportunities either reduces or stops.
Inability to source new deals leads to decline in development and trading profits in future years.
Higher pricing of acquisition opportunities leads to reduced ability to add value.
Flexible approach to market opportunities seeking out sectors where value can be generated and seeking funding partners with different return requirements.
Stringent deal underwriting procedures with minimum return hurdles.
Maintaining broad industry contacts for acquisitions rather than being dependent on a single source of opportunity.
Use of PPP model to secure regeneration opportunities in an innovative way.
Opportunities continue to be sourced for development trading and investment which satisfy Group underwriting criteria.
The Group is now focusing on increasing the number of shortterm trading opportunities following the successful PPP wins during the year.
Due to its deep relationships and acquisition expertise the Group is able to source a steady stream of opportunities despite lower cost overseas capital making the market more expensive. c.
Counterparty risk Transaction counterparties be they joint venture partners purchasers under sale contracts or banks in respect of cash deposits or derivative arrangements may suffer or fail financially.
Failure of sales transaction counterparties may lead to an inability to produce trading profits.
Failure of financial counterparties may impact on effectiveness of hedging or recoverability of deposits.
Proof of funding required prior to agreeing sales contracts.
The Board regularly assesses the credit worthiness of financial counterparties prior to placing deposits and hedging transactions.
Substantial deposits are required for presold residential developments.
The Group continues to have exposure to the private residential market through the development of presold residential units both on and off balance sheet.
The risk of purchasers failing to complete has not changed to any material extent during the year. d.
Bank funding risk The pressure on a large number of traditional real estate lending banks to reduce their exposure to real estate reduces the capacity and liquidity within the lending market and can impact upon the availability of debt to deliver business plans.
Inability to secure funding for new opportunities.
Inability to refinance existing facilities leading to disposals at the wrong time in business plans and failing to maximise profits.
Unpredictability of cash flows.
Inability for buyers to complete.
The Group maintains relationships with a wide range of both bank and nonbank lenders reducing over reliance on any one partner.
The Group is constantly seeking to widen its range of funding sources and liaises with new entrants into the real estate lending market.
The lending market continues to see new entrants.
Competitive pressures have led to a reduction in margins and an increase in maturities available.
Through the year there has been a gradual reduction in lenders appetite for development risk particularly on a speculative basis post the EU referendum result.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risk review continued BUSINESS RISKS RISK IMPACT MITIGATION RISK EXPOSURE CHANGE YEAR ON YEAR e.
Construction risk There is a risk of being unable to secure a viable construction contract post receipt of planning permission.
Real estate construction is subject to the risk of cost overruns delay and the financial failure of an appointed contractor.
Reduced profitability or potential loss on individual projects andor guarantees being called.
Projects becoming unviable leading to loss of WIP.
Construction work ceasing whilst a suitable replacement contractor is found leading to delays in project completion and a reduction in profit.
The Group retains inhouse experienced project managers throughout the life of individual projects to ensure that costs are appropriately budgeted timetables are adhered to and hence the impact of these risks is minimised.
The Group performs appropriate precontract due diligence on the capabilities and financial security of its material contractors and key subcontractors.
The Group continually monitors the financial position of key contractors to anticipate financial difficulties.
If issues arise with contractors the Group uses its professional teams and inhouse expertise to mitigate the impact.
The Group requires detailed design and specification throughout the tender process to enable it to maximise the risk transfer to contractors.
The Group requires that all construction contracts include provisions for Liquidated Ascertained Damages in the case of performance failures by contractors and that contractors provide performance bonds typically to a level of 100% of the contract sum.
Since the result of the EU referendum in June 2016 there has been a fall in the value of sterling against the Euro which has resulted in an increase in construction material prices.
At the same time construction workforce shortages and increasing labour costs are anticipated reflecting uncertainty about the longterm status of EU nationals working in the UK.
These are both impacting upon pricing and making the placement of construction contracts more difficult in terms of cost certainty with a resulting impact on margin.
Tender periods are also under pressure as more detailed designs are required before a viable construction contract can be agreed.
The time and cost of provision of supporting off site infrastructure is often outside our direct control. f.
Planning risk Procuring an appropriate and valuable planning consent is often a key element of the creation of value through property development.
Securing planning permission in a changing political and regulatory environment is a complex and uncertain process with applications subject to objection from a wide range of potential stakeholders and hence consent is prone to delay modification and rejection.
Even when consent has been granted the time and cost taken to agree local infrastructure isses is impacted by a lack of capacity which can lead to considerable delays in implementing consent.
Failure to secure planning consent can either cause delay or render a project unviableunprofitable and lead to the write off of considerable costs or reduced profit potential.
Delay in the period between consent and start on site can reduce profitability.
The Group retains a team with extensive experience of achieving planning consents and local knowledge supplemented by advisors and sector specialist partners to maximise the chance of success and reduce the risks and costs of failure.
An alternative exit strategy is always considered in case of planning failure.
The Groups PPP model seeks to build partnerships with local statutory and planning authorities as a way of mitigating risk.
The ability to obtain clear planning decisions is increasingly compromised by key political events such as the constant cycle of regional and national elections.
It is also hampered by under resourced planning departments.
As projects and planning regulations become ever more complex particularly where more dense mixeduse schemes are concerned there is an urgent need to professionalise planning departments and decision making committees.
This was ignored by the recent White Paper.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Introduction UIs business model is to deliver returns through regeneration realising profits by successfully repositioning undervalued land and assets into new places that deliver social and economic value to a wide range of stakeholders.
The key drivers in delivering the model are Ability to source a regular supply of new business opportunities which can deliver profits in future years.
Sourcing debt finance to leverage both new business opportunities and refinance existing facilities where appropriate.
Access to a wide range of capital partners to both coinvest in larger schemes and forward fund larger speculative developments.
Successfully delivering new planning permissions.
A high yielding investment portfolio generating a sustainable cash yield both to support business activities and sustain corporate overheads.
Maintaining a diversified portfolio of projects so as to reduce property specific risk across the overall portfolio.
Assessment period The Groups business planning process consists of a fiveyear look forward.
The rationale for this is that the main driver of success is the generation of development and trading gains from projects with the exception of two outliers Shortterm pure trading and Longterm land strategies The majority of projects have a duration of between two and five years from acquisition to exit.
Therefore from any starting point over a five year period the vast majority of projects will have moved through to exit.
To plan for a period longer than five years would lead to the construction of a purely theoretical model in years 5 rather than one underpinned by specific existing projects in the initial fiveyear period.
Therefore for the purposes of this review the business has been considered and stress tested over a fiveyear period.
Consideration of principal risks The nature of the Groups business and the industry in which it operates expose it to a variety of risks.
The principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group are detailed on pages 18 to 20.
The Board regularly reviews the principal risks and assesses the appropriate controls and mitigating actions required to manage the operations of the Group within an appropriate risk environment.
The Board has further considered their impact within the context of the Groups viability.
Assumptions
In assessing the longterm viability of the Group the Board has made the following assumptions Property investment valuations continue to be broadly stable with no prolonged significant downwards movements.
The Group continues to be able to deliver cash backed development and trading gains from its existing portfolio of projects sufficient to meet its operational requirements principally driven by securing new planning permissions.
The Group continues to be able to source new business opportunities capable of delivering both shortterm trading gains and longerterm development gains to replace existing projects as they are exited.
The Group continues with its policy of having a mixture of longterm debt associated with its longterm investment portfolio and shorterterm standalone debt associated with its development and trading projects.
The Group continues as it did throughout the previous recession to be able to source both replacement and new debt facilities as they are required from both existing and new lenders.
The Group continues with its policy of maintaining a broad range of counterparties including financial contractor and purchaser so as to mitigate the impact of potential counterparty failure.
The Group continues its policy of derisking developments by obtaining forwardfunding for larger schemes and only carrying out limited on balance sheet development.
Construction contracts are entered into on a guaranteed maximum price basis where possible.
The Group maintains its current conservative gearing strategy.
In addition the Groups fiveyear business model was stress tested to simulate either a deterioration in market conditions or a failure of these assumptions.
In particular consideration was given to Persistent valuation falls of 2.5% 5.0% and 10.0% per annum for each of the next five years and the resultant impact upon NAV gearing covenants and cash levels i. property values.
Inability to win any new business opportunities over the next five years and hence the only profits that can be generated are from existing schemes.
Debt facilities were stress tested to see at what level of property valuation fall loan covenants would be breached and how much cash would be required to cure any loan covenant defaults.
Conclusion
As a result of the work performed above including the consideration of the key assumptions and the subsequent stress testing the Board believes that the Groups strategy of maintaining a broad portfolio of development and trading projects a core investment portfolio and a diverse range of financial and operational counterparties provides the Group with a strong platform on which to continue its business.
The Directors therefore have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the fiveyear period to February 2022.
Viability statement Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio review DEVELOPING A LEADING EDGE Richard Upton Deputy Chief Executive photographed at Charlton U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Regeneration can be hard work particularly in the unloved overlooked and neglected suburban areas in which we often work.
It requires a blend of creativity experience understanding and integrity.
But it is rewarding work  changing the lives of those who live and work in these revitalised places inspiring public landowners who act as enablers for change and delivering value for shareholders who benefit as we realise gains through planning and development.
This is where UI is building a leading edge.
Projects that are all too often dismissed as dull and distant by Central London developers or considered too large and complicated for local or regional developers.
Projects which require imagination innovation and connection to unlock value.
For the Government these projects are a priority and local authorities are under pressure to deliver them  in partnership with private sector developers.
Given that these local authorities own 370 billion of developable land  40 per cent of the total the scale of the opportunity is immense particularly in our chosen areas the London City Region Manchester and Dublin.
These cities are peppered with industrial and retail wastelands overlooked spaces that can become thriving places where people genuinely want to live and work.
In essence the sites are there and the need is clear  the need for affordable homes the need to improve productivity the need to stimulate local economies and drive value.
Successful mixeduse regeneration projects can address all these issues while generating returns for our shareholders too.
Not everyone can do this work and many have chosen not to  so how do we unlock potential and deliver value where others cannot As seasoned property entrepreneurs we hunt better than many looking in places that have been ignored by others.
As creative imaginative thinkers we see value in places that may not always be obvious to others.
As responsible partners we recognise that the best way to unlock potential is by engaging with communities and public bodies in a way that builds trust and understanding.
PPP projects rely on trust and the more we prove our ability to deliver places of lasting value the more we become a partner of U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements Portfolio review continued choice for the public sector with whom we work and the more we create barriers to entry for our competitors.
And the more we foster that virtuous circle the more opportunities come our way and the more we can deliver great places and long lasting shareholder value.
Our portfolio with a GDV of 6 billion comprises a mix of major PPP projects our trading schemes and investment assets all centred on value creation through regeneration.
This pipeline is well balanced combining largescale longerterm PPP projects which provide sustainable growth with shorterterm trading projects which deliver consistent strong cash flows.
We have won four major projects in the past year.
These give us a pipeline of growth stretching out to 2020 and beyond.
Our portfolio also carries significant latent value given that value enhancement within regeneration projects is not reflected in our NAV until profit is realised.
The moving parts are many  buying well having the imagination to see how the grey can be transformed to the great and digging deep into the provenance of the places where we build to deliver schemes that are truly relevant to those who live and work there.
We are not afraid to challenge convention in pursuit of the best results.
We are not afraid to engage with local authorities and local people to build a true partnership.
And we are not afraid to admit that we care about the outcome.
We made real progress this year and we intend to do even better as we move forward  unlocking potential to create value for our shareholders and the communities in which we work.
Richard Upton Deputy Chief Executive 26 April 2017 Westminster Industrial Estate One of four PPP projects secured in FY2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 How we manage our portfolio The mixeduse nature of our portfolio is one of our biggest advantages.
It gives us several routes to market and different options for driving value from our projects.
As outlined in the following diagram we deliver growth as we realise gains from development and trading activity and drive income and capital growth through our investment activities.
Importantly these portfolios are not run in isolation.
By thinking about our portfolio as one we apply our skills in land buying planning asset management and development across all of our projects driving maximum value and creating more routes to market.
For example we hold incomeproducing assets with longer term regeneration potential within our investment portfolio that can ultimately feed our development pipeline warehouse assets.
We also retain elements of our completed developments within our investment portfolio where we see opportunities for medium to longterm asset management potential retained assets.
In this way our investment activities feed our development activities and vice versa capitalising on the mix of skills within the business.
DEVELOPMENT AND TRADING PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO
Longerterm development profit Shorterterm trading profit Some elements of completed developments retained within investment portfolio
Income returngrowth Capital growth Future development opportunities Key value drivers Asset management Planning gain capital value 39% capital value 39% of gross assets 22% of gross assets Trading PPP capital value capital value Key value drivers Planning gain Development margin
Group share where appropriate Assets held at cost not revalued Capital value includes all property interests held both directly and indirectly Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio review continued Our development and trading portfolio comprises long term large scale PPP projects and shorterterm trading opportunities.
The combination of these different projects allows us to balance the lumpier profits generated from PPP development with shorterterm profit realisations allowing us to deliver a consistent level of aggregate returns.
Development and trading portfolio
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP Shortterm profit flows 13 years Planning gain is usually key Arbitragemispricing opportunities IRR of 30% Equity multiple 1.5X Large scale mixeduse regeneration projects delivered in partnership 25 years Max 20m equity in any one project but high upside potential in all Planning gain is key value driver Development is key profit driver Projects derisked via forward funding or presales Equity multiple 2.0X  5.0X A balanced approach to development and trading Project delivery time
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Realised gains Guidance range as at 26 April 2017 FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18 FY19 FY70 155180m 3 year target The balance of this activity has enabled us to deliver another strong year of gains as outlined below building on our strong track record over the past years.
Going forwards in line with our overall returns target of 12 per cent we are plus pa 12% posttax total return Anticipated gains to FY2020 focused on driving 50 million gains from our development and trading activities per annum with a minimum of 150 million to be delivered over the next three years.
Total returns the growth in our basic net asset value including dividends A reconciliation of the development and trading gains for the year is included in the Finance review on p.42 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio review continued The following table shows the main projects driving our development and trading gains for the year.
The majority of these profits are driven by the value gain captured from planning improvements.
PPP development The PPP model reflects our core strengths as a business and is responding to a real need within the UK regeneration market.
We are experts in this field in which there are significant barriers to entry.
One of the keys to this form of development is that the public sector is not completely price sensitive.
It is driven by its definition of best value which differs from project to project.
This plays to our strengths and focus on delivering places that put people at their heart and which embrace good design at their foundation.
The mixeduse nature of these sites is also best suited to development partners such as ourselves with a 25year track record of delivering complex urban regeneration projects.
One of the benefits of the PPP model to UI lies in the equitylight nature of these partnerships.
Typically the public sector partner seeds the partnership with land and UI applies its planning and development expertise to deliver a completed regenerated place.
Importantly risk and equity is spread across the development phases as outlined in the facing diagram.
UI commits a maximum of 20 million of equity in any one project spread across the planning viability and development phases and manages the associated risks.
Ultimately the public and private sector partners share in the profit delivered by the development.
This allows us to control risk limit our equity exposure in any one project and deliver large scale projects in a capital efficient manner.
The details of this model are outlined in a case study on 8 Albert Embankment on p.3031.
This has been a highly successful year for the business winning four PPP projects 8 Albert Embankment Mayfield Cockpit Yard and Westminster Industrial Estate.
These projects taken together have added more than 1.5 billion of GDV to our pipeline and further cemented our reputation as a leading regeneration developer and the public sectors partner of choice.
Anticipated
FY17 gains
Dublin projects The Vertium building 45m 4m Entire building let to a global brand triggering profit share Other 8m 5m Sale of Percy Place and commercial and residential units across two projects Birmingham International Park 8m 8m Planning secured and sale of site completed Maidstone 24m 2m Sale completed on phase 1 of project planning secured on phase 2 Ashford Powergen site 4m 4m Site disposal completed Woking 26m 5m Sale of site completed Other 8 projects 8m 7m Trading smaller projects profit below 2m Total 3540m 35m As at 19 October 2016 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Mayfield Manchester PPP phased development model YEAR 1 YEAR 2 YEAR 3 YEAR 4 YEAR 5 YEAR 6 YEAR 7 YEAR 8
Planning
Trigger 15% Margin GDV
Derisking
Equity commitment spread across phases Project derisked via forward funding and presales
Practical completion Sales  profit realisation 8 Albert Embankment indicative cost 1 Bid cost 200300k 2 Planning phase cost c.
3 Viability phase cost c.
5m We are delighted to have appointed UI as our development partner for Mayfield.
It was a challenging decision given the exceptionally high calibre of candidates however we were particularly impressed by UIs innovative approach.
We are confident that they have the expertise and experience to successfully drive this worldclass development forward and are now excited to see our vision for Mayfield take shape.
Sir Richard Leese Leader of Manchester City Council Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR BUSINESS IN ACTION 8 ALBERT EMBANKMENT In April 2016 we were given the mandate for the regeneration of 8 Albert Embankment in partnership with the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority LFEPA.
The selection process was competitive detailed and challenging given the status of this project and the high expectations from LFEPA to deliver a transformational project.
During the bid process we were assessed alongside other leading regeneration developers and contractors.
We were highly commended and ultimately selected based on our approach to placemaking and community consultation two areas that really separated us from our competitors.
LFEPA has seeded the partnership with a 2.5 acre site next to the River Thames and overlooking the Houses of
This has allowed us to secure a prime regeneration opportunity with limited upfront equity.
The site has been home to Lambeth fire station and the Fire Brigades Headquarters since 1937 although nowadays the site is underused.
There is a working fire station on the riverfront element of the site.
To the back of the site industrial buildings sit empty in search of a modern use that will fill them once again with life and activity.
Working with LFEPA our objective is to breathe new life into the site taking the fire station into the next chapter of its life whilst delivering a wider mixeduse regeneration scheme that opens up this prominent location to the community once again.
We are now preparing a planning application for the regeneration of the site and aim to submit our planning proposals in summer 2017.
UI will manage the development process and deliver this landmark development which includes residential apartments both private and affordable a hotel office space and a brand new fire station designed by Pilbrow and Partners.
At this early stage of the projects life UI is engaging with the local community council and other stakeholders to shape the development.
To facilitate better collaboration in November 2016 we opened up the site with a meanwhile use community and events space  The Workshop.
Alongside a London Fire Brigade popup museum the space is home to charities social and startup enterprises and artists who host events for the local community all with creativity at their heart.
This project demonstrates our reputation as a leading development partner for public sector bodies and adds to our portfolio of significant PPP projects.
Land
2.5 acre site overlooking the River Thames home to London Fire Brigade and empty industrial building Planning expertise Risk capital Project equity Community Improvements New fire station and practice yard Profit share New museum Retention of freehold Longterm asset improvement Riskmitigated delivery
Development profit c.
LFEPA UI PLANNING CONSENT PROJECT DELIVERY NEW LANDMARK DEVELOPMENT FOR LONDON New fire station New fire museum Hotel residential office space Public amenities Portfolio review continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 This is an iconic site and a regeneration project that will create an important cultural landmark for London including the new London Fire Brigade Museum alongside a working fire station.
Through the bidding process UI stood out as a regeneration partner who proactively engages the community in the development process and is committed to quality inclusive design.
We were impressed by their approach and look forward to delivering something very special together.
Sue Budden Director of Finance and Contractual Services for London Fire Brigade Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio review continued
We also apply our core skills to a pipeline of trading activity whereby we source undervalued land and buildings with potential for value creation through improved planning consents.
Typically these projects allow us to acquire assets and realise gains over the short term.
We focus on opportunities where terms of trade are in our favour and where we can efficiently unlock value via planning andor asset management.
We have a strong track record in being able to source wellpriced land drive value through planning and monetise this value through disposals.
Birmingham International Park exemplifies this approach generating 8.4 million of gains to the Company this year as outlined below with the profitable realisation demonstrating the importance of planning as the value trigger enabling us to capture gain from the land and assets within our portfolio.
OUR BUSINESS IN ACTION
INTERNATIONAL
PARK
Birmingham International Park generated 8.4 million of gains to the Company this year.
This was a 16acre nonincome producing site the final undeveloped piece of land from a larger piece of strategic land held at close to nil cost on our Balance
The land was within the green belt and we successfully argued a needsbased case allowing the land to be designated for development.
In
December 2016 we secured outline planning consent which enabled a sale of the site to Prologis.
The site which is close to Birmingham International railway station and airport will now be developed by Prologis into a 310000 sq. ft. for muchneeded logistics space.
8m of gains delivered U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our investment portfolio size reduced from 203.3 million to 179.2 million largely as a result of disposing of 18.0 million of noncore assets.
On a like for like basis our portfolio valuation declined by 5.1 per cent.
Though values stabilised in the second half of the year our portfolio suffered a 4.6 per cent decline in H1 as a result of weakness in the regional retail markets in which we operate partly impacted by the slowdown after the EU referendum.
We expect values to remain stable across the market in the next 12 months.
Disposing of noncore assets was a focus for us during the year and a key part of our strategy to transition the portfolio.
On a like for like basis our rental income decreased to 12.7 million and we maintained low void rates of 4.7 per cent across the portfolio through our proactive asset management activities.
To support our strategy of transitioning our investment portfolio our focus for the year ahead is as follows Acquisitions Target a minimum of 50 million of new assets that align to our regeneration focus and retention of assets from our development portfolio Drive value Continue to create value through selective planning change of use and proactive asset management 5.5 million of managementdriven capital growth to be delivered in FY2018 Disposals Where we have reached the end of our asset business plan we will dispose of mature assets targeting a further 50 million of sales in the year ahead Investment portfolio NUMBER OF ASSETS Feb 2016 20 INITIAL YIELD 6.6% Feb 2016 6.8% ESTIMATED RENTAL VALUE Feb 2016 13.5m VALUATION CHANGE INC JVS Feb 2016 1.7m VOID RATE 4.7% Feb 2016 4.5% SIZE OF PORTFOLIO Feb 2016 203.3m CONTRACTED RENTAL INCOME Feb 2016 13.6m EQUIVALENT YIELD 7.50% Feb 2016 7.09% On a likeforlike basis and core portfolio only Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio review continued Investment portfolio strategy We are repositioning our investment portfolio over the next four years with the following objectives Drive growth from our investment portfolio with a target of 10 per cent return per annum to support our overall 12 per cent total returns target Use our collective intellectual capital and regeneration expertise to drive value from overlooked and undervalued investment assets Provide the business with a stable rental income stream Provide greater optionality within our portfolio Store incomeproducing assets with longerterm potential for regeneration warehouse assets  see p.35 Retain elements of our completed developments or acquire assets close to development projects that will benefit from the halo effect of our regeneration Rationalisation This year within our current portfolio we have made continued progress to dispose of mature assets.
During the year we sold 18.0 million of investment assets disposing of a number of properties and elements of schemes that no longer fit our strategic objectives for the overall business plan for the asset.
Since the year end we have agreed terms on a further 8.0 million of noncore asset disposals and a new acquisition of 10.0 million.
Optimisation We have also made good progress to optimise the value of specific assets for example at our retail scheme in Killingworth.
Matalan currently occupy a large unit within the scheme that no longer fits their space requirements.
Terms have now been agreed with Matalan to split this unit downsize their store and to relet the remaining space to a national retailer with an anticipated resultant yield shift from 7.75 per cent to 6.75 per cent on this element.
There are also two drive through restaurants within the site which were valued at a 7.5 per cent yield in line with the whole scheme.
However these welllet selfcontained assets can be separated from the scheme allowing us to sell into the strong private investor market.
By carving out these units from the overall scheme we will realise disposals at a yield of circa 5.8 per cent.
Reinvestment Going forward our investment strategy is aligned with our core strengths as a regeneration specialist.
We will continue to invest in our core markets focusing on assets where performance can be driven through a specific regeneration process.
We will look to reposition assets through active asset management refurbishment and development whilst also focusing on investment assets where there is redevelopment upside that can be unlocked in the future via the planning process warehouse assets.
We will also retain elements of our completed regeneration projects where we believe there is more value to be created allowing us to benefit from the positive impact we have created in that location retained assets.
These strategies are laid out in full on the opposite page.
Investment portfolio overview of target transition process in FY2018 Valuation as at 28 February 2017
PORTFOLIO
18 assets 24 YEARS TO TRANSITION 10% target return
Assets Swanley and Killingworth Targeting 5m of added value REINVESTMENT FOCUS
Warehouse and retained assets 50m of new acquisitions targeted
50m noncore asset disposals targeted U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Time Value add DISCOVERING VALUE ADDING VALUE REALISING VALUE
Enhance planning mix and density through planning process
Offmarket
ACQUISITION
PLANNING
CONSENT
ASSET MANAGE INCOME
DEVELOP
LAND
IMPROVEMENT
PROFIT
Warehouse assets Incomeproducing assets that have longerterm regeneration potential.
Warehouse assets lie at the very early stages of the regeneration process and are incomeproducing assets with future redevelopment potential and an ability to secure land improvement profit.
They may also allow us to add to our development pipeline in a riskcontrolled and capital efficient manner generating consistent income throughout.
Charlton Riverside Charlton is an area that fits our acquisition strategy perfectly located in a wellconnected growing area of London where demand for affordable residential homes is growing and where the local authority has ambitious regeneration plans for the wider area.
To date we have acquired 10acres of riverside land in joint venture with future development potential.
The sites are for the most part occupied by low density industrial units generating a blended yield of 3.5 per cent.
Over the next few years we will develop a masterplan for the sites to bring forward a mixeduse redevelopment that complements the Councils wider vision.
Creating value through trading and warehouse assets Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts m FY21 FY20 FY19 FY18 FY17 FY16 Portfolio review continued Retained assets Identifying opportunities where asset management and maturity can add further value we will retain certain elements of our completed developments within our investment portfolio.
Where we have worked to develop or regenerate an area and we believe there is more value to come we will bring these assets into our portfolio and nurture their value over time.
Typically these will be the ground floor retail leisure and commercial elements of mixeduse projects which through creative and proactive asset management can be cultivated to enhance the sense of place and drive further value.
Deptford Market Yard Having completed The Deptford Project a mixeduse regeneration project next to Deptford train station in spring 2016 we officially opened Deptford Market Yard DMY in November 2016.
DMY lies at the heart of The Deptford Project and is home to 14 local startup retail and leisure operators who occupy the historic railway arches that run along the ground floor level of the development.
Our priorities for DMY were to transform a forgotten corner of Deptford into a new destination for London drive footfall and investment to the area and add value to the asset all the while retaining and protecting the character of the local area.
From a specialist in African womenswear to sellers of gourmet cheese toasties an eclectic range of tenants has brought vibrancy to this bustling upandcoming area.
There is further value to be created as we prove the strength of this location let the remaining vacant units and help to establish DMY.
In the year ahead our priorities are to fully let the remaining commercial and restaurant space as well as launching a regular weekend food market and weekly themed markets.
This will help to drive critical mass and create a vibrant and full retail experience.
We are also in negotiation with Network Rail to open up one of the exits to Deptford station directly onto the railway ramp that leads to DMY.
This is expected to boost footfall numbers as well as giving the retailers greater visibility to the hundreds of thousands of commuters who pass through Deptford station each week.
Deptford Market Yard growing value U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Top five occupiers as at 28 February 2017 Annual rent % of contracted rent Waitrose 1.59 12.48 Matalan 0.72 5.61 J Sainsbury 0.49 3.85 RicardoAea Limited 0.39 3.06 Wilkinson 0.28 2.23 Income generating properties  Likeforlike rental income received Year ended 28 February 2017
Acquisitions
Disposals
Total rental income Investment 12035 390 311 12736 Development and trading 2494 552 315 3361 Joint ventures 2050 431 403 2884 16579 1373 1029 18981 Year ended 29 February 2016 Investment 12313 297 1632 14242 Development and trading 2679 452 1518 4649 Joint ventures 1984 93 1462 3539 16976 842 4612 22430 Core investment portfolio  28 February 2017 Gross rental income tenant profile PLCnationals 63.1% Local traders 26.9% Regional multiples 4.3% Government 1.8% FTSE 100 3.9% 0  5 years 48.3% 5  10 years 29.5% 10  15 years 11.0% 15  20 years 1.6% 20 years 9.6% South East 37.8% South West 25.1% North 19.2% London 6.3% Wales 4.7% Northern Ireland 4.4% Midlands 2.5% Gross rental income lease term profile Capital value location profile Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Portfolio review continued Specialist platforms As set out in our strategic objectives specialist platforms are a way for us to deliver a greater number of projects in a capitalefficient manner.
By creating off balance sheet funding with largescale capital partners we focus on building a portfolio of opportunities within a specific asset class where we have a competitive advantage.
We invest a minority equity stake in the joint venture JV and take responsibility for development planning letting and asset management in order to complete the business plan for each asset within the JV.
In return we receive a promoted position and annual management fees.
The management fees help to offset central overhead costs effectively allowing us to leverage our existing overhead more productively.
This year we established two specialist platforms with substantial capital partners A JV with Colony NorthStar focused on office repositioning in London Manchester and Dublin A JV with Proprium Capital Partners focused on income producing assets in the London City Region with long term development potential our share of JV held within our investment portfolio Specialist platforms model
MINORITY EQUITY
PLANNING AND
EXPERTISE
PROFIT PROMOTE SPECIALIST PLATFORM PROFIT VIA PROMOTE STRUCTURE
MANAGEMENT FEE
FUNDING PARTNER
ASSETS ACQUIRED ASSETS DISPOSED OR
VALUE ADDED
PLANNING
DEVELOPMENT
ASSET
MANAGEMENT
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR BUSINESS IN ACTION SPECIALIST PLATFORM OFFICE REPOSITIONING In JV with Colony NorthStar we are targeting opportunities to reposition and refurbish functionally obsolete office blocks in London Manchester and Dublin.
With build costs continuing to rise and office rents expected to fall notably in London mediumterm commercial real estate development is expected to slow.
Against this backdrop we see an opportunity to deliver short to mediumterm office refurbishments that renovate standing but out of date office stock.
This would deliver high quality office space to the market that suits the needs of the modern occupier.
We have seeded the partnership with two of our assets The Record Store at The Old Vinyl Factory and Donnybrook House in Dublin  and have acquired a second office building in Dublin Ballymoss House.
We are proactively looking for further opportunities with the capacity to grow this JV to 300 million in the next 23 years.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial review
Marcus Shepherd photographed at 8 Albert Embankment London FOCUSED ON DELIVERING OUR
OBJECTIVES
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Results for the year During the year the Group focused on delivering on its strategic initiatives of fewer larger projects improving the performance of the investment portfolio and launching specialist platforms.
At the same time it continued to deliver gains from its development and trading portfolio albeit within the context of greater economic and political uncertainty resulting from the EU referendum.
Below is a summary of the Groups results for the year ended 28 February 2017 2017 2016 Development and trading gains 35.0m 51.1m Basic net asset value NAV 347.6m 363.3m Basic NAV per share 278p 291p Total declared dividends per share 8.7p 13.9p Lossprofit before tax 1.7m 25.8m Total return 0.2% 7.2% Balance sheet gearing 34.8% 44.4% After exceptional item of 2.1m The loss before tax for the year to 28 February 2017 is 1.7 million 2016 25.8 million profit a reduction of 27.5 million from the previous year after an exceptional charge of 2.1 million in respect of the Groups serviced office business refer note 2b.
The total development and trading gains for the year were 35.0 million 2016 51.1 million at the lower end of our guidance but once again demonstrating the benefit of a diversified portfolio of projects in a challenging market.
As reported in the first half of the year we suffered a valuation decline of 8.6 million in our investment portfolio.
Capital values have stabilised over the second half of the year to deliver a fullyear valuation decline of 9.5 million 2016 0.2 million gain.
The challenge now for our investment portfolio is to reinvest proceeds from the strategic disposals during the year into assets more closely aligned with our regeneration model.
During the year delays in the ability to reinvest approximately 24.4 million of restricted cash reserves has meant that rental income has been approximately 1.5 million less than in 2016.
This should be addressed during the first half of our 2018 financial year.
The movement in net assets for the year are shown in the bridge below
Feb 2016
Dividend tel8 2
NAV
Feb
Investment
Loss on disposal of investment assets
Development and trading contribution
Operating
Net interest costs Taxation Final 2016 and interim 2017 dividend
Feb 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial review continued Development and trading gains During the year we have realised a total of 35.0 million of trading and development gains.
The key components of these gains are 8.4 million  Birmingham International Park disposal of a land holding post receipt of planning permission for 9.6 million.
5.3 million  Elizabeth House Woking surrender premium from the existing tenant and subsequent disposal of the office building with residential consent.
4.3 million  The Vertium Building Dublin preletting of the building in course of construction.
3.8 million  Ashford Powergen site disposal of land post receipt of residential planning consent.
2.3 million  Maidstone disposal of land post receipt of residential planning consent.
3.0 million  Percy Place Dublin disposal of mixeduse scheme post construction and letting.
These results were achieved against a backdrop of both political and economic uncertainty following the EU referendum vote in June 2016.
This led to a slowdown in investment markets as sources of capital waited to consider the impact of the referendum.
Businesses were also reluctant to commit new funds to investment in either real estate or their businesses.
Development and trading gains can be analysed as follows Included in segmental analysis Development and trading segment result 28.5 39.0 Share of results of joint ventures 3.0 0.3 Sale of investment 0.6 2.2 Other income 0.7 0.2 Included in net finance costs Interest from financial asset 1.1 1.7 Other asset realisations 1.1 8.3
We have announced that during 2018 we intend to produce savings of 2.0 million in our net recurring overheads from a combination of cost efficiencies and the generation of management fees from specialist platforms.
During the year the launch of specialist platforms with Colony NorthStar and Proprium Capital Partners has set us well on the way to delivering the fee target and we continue to look at ways to drive efficiencies across the business focusing particularly on simplifying our corporate structure reducing the number of corporate entities and leveraging our intellectual capital.
The overheads during 2017 comprised Core recurring overheads 20.3 Nonrecurring staff costs 0.5 LTIP charge net 0.9 Closedown of historical tax structuring 0.4 Net finance costs Net finance costs for the year of 10.8 million 2016 12.9 million include foreign exchange deficit of 3.4 million 2016 3.2 million deficit in respect of the retranslation of Eurodenominated loans and deposits.
For entities where the reporting currency is in Euros retranslation differences are charged to reserves.
The movement for 2017 was a gain of 3.0 million 2016 2.4 million gain.
The net impact of these movements on NAV during the year was 0.4 million loss 2016 0.8 million loss.
Debt
We use debt finance to leverage the use of our equity in property transactions.
We continue to borrow from a wide range of financial institutions including UK clearing banks insurance companybacked lenders debt funds and financial institutions.
The availability of debt finance has not impacted our ability to transact new property deals.
We are currently seeking to negotiate greater flexibility into our investment property facility with Aviva so as to facilitate the restructure of our investment portfolio in line with Group strategy.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 During the year the following facilities were renegotiated or drawn down On balance sheet Refinance of the 28.0 million Lloyds facility secured on investment assets in Ringwood and Thatcham.
This is a twoyear investment facility with substitution rights and a cost of 2.5%.
New development funding from Quadrant for the build out of Valentine House Ilford a facility of 30.7 million at a fixed rate of 7.5%.
This facility is for the buildout of the presold residential units.
In joint venture In our Office Repositioning Platform with Colony NorthStar we have signed a 42.2 million facility with Quadrant to fund the acquisition and refurbishment of the first three properties.
In our Income Producing Development Assets Platform with Proprium Capital Partners we have signed a 11.3 million loan facility with RBS.
Details of our debt facilities are shown in the table below Groups bank facilities Principal financial highlights Facility type Notes
Utilised as at 28 Feb 2017
Loan to value ratio
Minimum net worth Loans financing longerterm assets Revolving credit 28000 28000 Variable 16Dec18 65% 200% Term loan 12000 11839 Cap 05Jan19 50% 200% Term loan 4 10580 10580 Variable 10Jan20 73% 160% Term loan 2795 2312 Variable 22May20 Loan notes 2 47000 40133  Cap 24Apr21 Term loan 57565 49135 Fixed 12Mar25 80% 110% Term loan 22470 19284 Fixed 12Mar25 80% 110% Loans financing development and trading assets Revolving credit 3 20000 2562  Variable 20Apr17 Term loan 4 26000 26000 Cap 30Sep17 60% 125% 100000 Term loan 4 4900 4900 Fixed 17Nov17 Term loan 5 9500 12276 Variable 31Mar18 Term loan 4539 1310 Variable 14Jun18 Term loan 2751 153 Variable 19Jul18 Term loan 24307 3075  Variable 01Aug18 73% 110% Term loan 30750 4053 Fixed 25Nov18 70% Term loan 24500  Fixed 31Jan19 Term loan 4 44100 37419 Fixed 24Feb19 Term loan 4 22045 6593  Fixed 18Nov19 Term loan 4 20125 10153  Fixed 06Jan20 Term loan 4 11300 11300 Variable 28Oct20 55% 150% Term loan 4 5610 5553 Cap 31Mar21 60% 175% Term loan 4 12725 12725 SWAP 01Sep21 50% 120% 1 Interest cover ratios are specific to the loan and the relevant property.
Minimum net worth refers to the net asset value of the Group per its latest Balance Sheet 28 February or 31 August 2 These unsecured variable rate loan notes are denominated in Euros with a nominal value of 47 million.
An interest rate cap is in place to limit the Groups exposure to movements in the EURIBOR rate however the Groups option to acquire 25000000 expired in April 2017 3 This facility has been extended to 20 August 2017 since the year end 4 Loans relating to joint ventures represent the total loan facility and not the Groups share 5 This facility has the provision to allow interest to be rolled into the loan Represents the amount of the Groups liability in Sterling as at the balance sheet date Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Debt maturity profile The graph below shows the maturity profile of the Groups debt and the analysis between investment development and corporate facilities Feb22 Feb21 Feb20 Feb19 Feb18 Feb26 Feb25 Feb24 Feb23 Corporate Drawn  Investment Drawn  Development
Financial review
Our debt policy can be summarised as follows Longerterm fixed rate facilities are used to fund longer term incomeproducing assets.
Target loan to value LTV 6065%.
Shorterterm assetspecific debt aligned to the business plan for shorterterm trading assets.
Target LTV 5055%.
Longterm Eurodenominated corporate debt to support our investment into Eurodenominated assets in Dublin.
No LTV target as this is corporate level debt.
The Group has no specific debt on nonincome producing assets or investments into PPP schemes.
Joint venture arrangements are designed to leverage both our operational expertise and our Balance Sheet.
When acting with third party capital we deploy asset specific debt which is often at a higher LTV 6575% reflecting the risk appetite and cost of capital of our partners.
A summary of the Groups gearing is shown below
28 Feb 26 Apr 29 Feb Gearing excl.
Gearing incl.
The greatest fluctuation in gearing occurs where we utilise debt to fund the buildout of presold residential developments on our own Balance Sheet.
This peaked at 59.2% during FY2017.
Our overall gearing targets therefore act as a limit on the amount of development that we can undertake on our own Balance Sheet.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Group maintains a mix of variable and fixed rate facilities to provide a degree of certainty whilst also benefiting from historically low interest rates.
Longerterm facilities tend to be structured with fixed rates.
A summary of the Groups interest rate exposure is shown below 2017 2016 Group net debt and gearing Gross debt m 172.1 213.3 Cash and cash equivalents m 51.3 51.8 Net debt m 120.8 161.5 Net assets m 347.6 363.3 Gearing % 34.8 44.4 Weighted average debt maturity years 4.8 4.5 Weighted average interest rate % 4.6 4.9 Including joint ventures Share of net debt in joint ventures m 44.0 43.6 Gearing % 47.4 56.4 Weighted average debt maturity years 4.2 4.2 Weighted average interest rate % 4.9 5.0 Joint venture arrangements The Group has a policy of working in joint venture arrangements as a way of Leveraging our equity so we can participate in projects that would otherwise would be of too large for our Balance Sheet Accessing deals with specialist partners who have secured positions on projects but require further equity and the planning and structuring skills which are a key part of our business.
During the year the Group entered into two new largescale joint ventures specialist platforms A joint venture with Colony NorthStar targeting 300 million of office refurbishment and repositioning opportunities in London Manchester and Dublin.
The
Group has a 50.0% holding in the joint venture Luxembourg Investment Company 112 Sarl and gearing was 18.5% as at 28 February 2017.
Gearing is below the target range as both joint venture partners have deposited large cash balances in the entity to cover future development spend.
A joint venture with Proprium Capital Partners targeting up to 200 million of incomeproducing assets with development potential in the London City Region.
The Group has a 20.0% holding in the joint venture UAIP Drum BV and gearing was 85.6% as at 28 February 2017 in accordance with the capital structure agreed with our joint venture partner.
The Groups joint ventures and associates are analysed in more detail in note 13 on pages 151 to 157 to the Consolidated financial statements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial review continued
Our tax strategy is aligned with our overall business strategy and is principled transparent and sustainable for the long term.
The key components of this strategy are A commitment to ensure full compliance with all statutory obligations including full disclosure to all relevant tax authorities Any tax planning strategy entered into is only implemented after full consideration of the risks.
Those findings are recorded in any relevant structuring document The maintenance of good relationships with tax authorities and a clear interaction between tax planning and the Groups wider corporate reputation and responsibility and Management of tax affairs in a manner that seeks to maximise shareholder value whilst operating within the parameters of existing tax legislation.
The Group has operations in certain jurisdictions that have been dictated to us by our majority capital partners.
Under most circumstances the Group does not enjoy any fiscal advantage by being in those jurisdictions.
The Group undertakes an annual Transfer Pricing Review to ensure that all crossborder services provided are conducted at the appropriate arms length market rate.
The suitability of our tax strategy is kept under constant review to ensure compliance with both the fiscal needs of the Group and the constant evolution of tax legislation.
Dividends
Our dividend policy consists of two elements as follows An Ordinary dividend comprising interim and final at 2.4 pence and 3.5 pence per share respectively and A supplemental dividend related to the net free level of cash flow generated during the financial year.
A final dividend of 3.5 pence per share will be recommended to shareholders at the Annual General Meeting AGM on 11 July 2017 to be paid on 17 August 2017 to shareholders on the register on 21 July 2017 2016 3.5 pence per share.
On 25 April 2017 the Board approved the payment of a supplemental dividend of 3.5 pence per share to be paid on 16 June 2017 to shareholders on the register on 12 May 2017.
Foreign currency movements The Groups operations are conducted primarily in the UK.
However as one of its three core regions is Dublin the Group is exposed to movements in foreign exchange rates between Sterling and Euros.
The Groups principal exposure to foreign currency movements is in respect of its 47.0 million Euro denominated loan notes Eurodenominated bank loans and property assets.
At 28 February 2017 the Group had net Eurodenominated liabilities of 16.6 million 2016 9.7 million.
The details of the Groups sensitivity to exchange rate movements are set out in note 17d of the Group financial statements.
During the year the value of Sterling against the Euro fell significantly following the EU referendum in June 2016.
The impact on our NAV during the period was a reduction of 0.4 million which is the net result of a loss of 3.4 million recorded in finance costs in the profit and loss account and a gain through reserves of 3.0 million.
EPRA
This year we have committed to provide more detailed disclosure in respect of our EPRA NAV by adjusting to fair value both our trading properties and the property interests where we have obtained planning consent  planning being the main driver of value in the portfolio.
Unlike a real estate investment business a significant part of our regeneration business model seeks to optimise the use of our Balance Sheet by entering into either conditional purchase agreements land option agreements or development management agreements where we incur the design costs and fees associated with obtaining a planning consent without purchasing the land up front.
These types of structures mean that for a significant part 70% of our development portfolio we are not able to produce a reliable fair value in accordance with EPRA guidelines until such time as planning consent is obtained and land becomes unconditionally owned.
The table below provides a summary of the assets valued in our directly owned and joint venture development and trading portfolio.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 % of assets valued Change in valuation after tax Directly owned portfolio 42.9 14.8 Assets held in joint venture 20.0 2.4 Total development and trading portfolio 30.1 12.4 We understand that EPRA NAV is the accepted valuation metric for real estate investment companies.
However UIs business model and our preference for developing assets using thirdparty capital rather than our own mean that EPRA NAV does not deliver a complete picture of the potential value within both our portfolio of assets and various contractual arrangements.
We will continue to give guidance as to expected development and trading gains over the next three years as a more complete picture of the potential value within the Groups projects.
Fiveyear summarytel 2014 2013 Lossprofit before taxation m 1.7 25.8 34.8 19.5 0.8 Lossearnings per share Pence 2.4 17.5 26.8 14.9 2.0 Net assets per share Pence 27tel251 Marcus Shepherd Chief Financial Officer 26 April 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainability review We measure and monitor our sustainability impact at the building level and deliver regular transparent reporting on our performance.
We seek to support our tenants and suppliers to monitor and reduce their environmental impact including energy and water usage and waste management.
We maximise the positive placemaking impacts of our projects striving to improve wellbeing and pride within communities by providing new and valuable facilities jobs and investments as well as bringing people together from the very start of our involvement.
We are diligent in the identification and management of environmental risks and in meeting the aspirations of clients partners and local authorities with regard to environmental quality standards.
Our sustainability focus areas Our approach to sustainability The illuminated words Everything is Connected hang above the entrance to our headquarters in London.
They say as much about our approach to sustainability as they do about the way we do business.
They capture the way we view the world how we operate and the culture that we want to create.
They reflect our love of the daring and the imaginative and our desire to stimulate new thinking encouraging people to pause and reflect on their individual contribution to something bigger in our work our relationships and society  aspects that we see as a fundamental requirement for successful regeneration projects.
In short connection lies at the heart of everything we do.
We connect people places and communities to create developments that deliver sustainable socioeconomic growth for the communities in which we build and long term value for our shareholders.
We do this by transforming unloved town centres and brownfield sites into vibrant neighbourhoods delivering a positive legacy for local residents or investing in our people.
Our approach to sustainability is built around the most material impacts arising from mixeduse regeneration.
It covers The places we create The buildings we own and operate The people who work for us Maintaining a firstrate approach to community engagement and delivering the greatest possible social and environmental value across all of our places remains our priority.
Managing and reducing the most significant environmental impacts of our buildings is also a focus area across our development and investment portfolios targeting reductions in energy water and waste.
The success of the projects we deliver relies in turn on our ability to harness the creativity innovation and flair of our people.
OUR PLACES OUR BUILDINGS OUR PEOPLE
ENVIRONMENT
The connection between the social environmental and financial aspects of our performance means our approach to sustainability is integrated into our governance structures and management procedures.
As such social and environmental aspects are considered as part of the broader conversation around specific projects at Board level and are incorporated into the overarching brief used for all regeneration projects and asset management strategies.
We recognise that the health wellbeing productivity and skills of our people are vital to our future success.
We invest in staff training educational development and wellness initiatives.
We provide a stimulating workplace and foster an engaging collegiate culture.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Community Connecting people businesses and places to create dynamic sustainable communities is a fundamental component of our approach.
When regeneration is done well it adds longterm value to neighbourhoods and cities by breathing life into underutilised and neglected sites.
We believe that the best regeneration projects can only be delivered if the broadest range of influences and trends that impact peoples daily lives aspirations and wellbeing are taken into account from the earliest stages of a project.
We work with communities to keep them informed listening to what they say to make the scheme the best it can be for the people that will live work and play there while also being respectful of the history and provenance of the location that together contribute to a positive sense of place.
At the same time we seek to generate positive socio economic returns for local communities by integrating novel commercial solutions with a view to their longterm sustainability.
We add value during the development process by identifying opportunities to support and encourage local businesses through the innovative use of lowcost space via our meanwhile use activities.
FIELD at Preston Barracks in Brighton illustrates our focus on generating value from the outset by providing work space for local entrepreneurs.
During the design phase of the regeneration of the former military barracks we believed that it was imperative that the siteinwaiting be opened to the residents of Brighton and that it serve as a home for a community of ecologically aware and technologically evolving fledgling businesses.
The building houses flexible work space for up to twelve startups in a dynamic and collaborative environment.
It forms the first stage of a much larger 50000 sq. ft.
7000 product design and technology jobs over the next ten years alongside a sustainable community of 369 new homes.
FIELD Brighton Based at the Preston Barracks regeneration site in Brighton FIELD is a hub for start ups that design and make physical products Providing this kind of temporary commercial space allows us to transform disused areas into creative zones and trial features that can be reflected in the final scheme.
This in turn helps us to prove the feasibility of our approach and strengthen our track record of creating sustainable growth and commercially successful projects.
FIELD is by no means unique and it builds on the success of other developments such as the Old Vinyl Factory development in Hayes west London.
Here we revived the sites industrial heritage by creating the first Central Research Laboratory CRL.
The CRL is a 10000 sq. ft. a hub for creative commercial innovation.
Since opening in 2015 CRL has supported approximately 30 early stage startups split between more intensive accelerator support covering product development business development access to finance and acquiring first customers and less intensive incubator support that provides workshop facilities and lighttouch advisory services.
Since its inception resident ventures have won investment grants and prizes worth more than 350000.
Our places Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainability review continued This respect for the local heritage embedded in a site was central to our winning proposal for the redevelopment of Mayfield in Manchester.
Conserving and exploiting the sites industrial and natural heritage was a core part of our vision for this 850 million regeneration project.
Our
In our capacity as development partner we are working in a Public Private Partnership alongside London Continental Railways Manchester City Council and Transport for Greater Manchester as the Mayfield Partnership.
Environment
Our commitment to delivering sustainable communities extends to managing and improving the environmental impact of the places we create.
Measures to improve the environmental sustainability of our projects are integrated into our template brief for development and construction.
We take a practical approach guided by the National Planning Policy Framework which ensures a consistent focus on improving our impact in relation to energy carbon water and waste across our development portfolio.
The greatest opportunity for us to improve the environmental impact of our portfolio is during the design phase for example by finding opportunities to incorporate sustainable features including green rooftop spaces cycling facilities photovoltaic panels LED lighting water efficient fittings and integrating developments within existing public transport networks where feasible.
We have not set project specific environmental performance targets but we have begun to measure the energy carbon water and waste performance of our schemes construction works and we seek solutions that minimise environmental impacts and maximise resource efficiencies.
As our approach develops we are investigating opportunities to integrate sustainable product selection and responsible sourcing into our procurement activities.
This includes goals to procure 100 per cent FSC certified timber and for 70 per cent of building materials to achieve a Green Guide rating of at least A.
Beyond ensuring that we comply with statutory and industry standards as a minimum we target BREEAM and LEED certifications on a projectbyproject basis.
Additional environmental features are determined by our stakeholders market expectations and the specific circumstances of each project.
For example the wider action plan for our Preston Barracks redevelopment includes ten environmental and socioeconomic sustainability principles that align with the city of Brightons wider sustainability goals.
The principles dictate how sustainability will be embedded into the design construction and operational phases of the developments life and cover objectives to enhance the health and wellbeing of its residents boost economic development and reduce its environmental footprintincluding a goal to be zero carbon and zero waste.
Once complete we estimate that the ecological footprint of the sites residents will be 38 per cent lower than the benchmark for Brighton.
As part of a longstanding focus on our greenhouse gas GHG emissions we calculate the embodied carbon of all our developments up to practical completion.
Collecting this data and comparing the performance of each project We teamed up with UI on our first forward funding deal in Dublin and the partnership has been very successful.
Both UI and Union have been early movers in the Dublin market and its exciting to be delivering one of the best office buildings in the city evidenced by our success in preletting the whole building.
Philip La Pierre Head of Investment Management Europe Union Investment U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Vertium Our Vertium development in Dublin features approximately 172000 sq.
2000 people and is pursuing LEED Gold standard certification.
An intelligent energy management system that monitors and optimises building services coupled with automated LED lighting and energy efficient ventilation and cooling technology mean that the building has an estimated energy consumption of 257 kWhm2 per year. material selection and procurement.
Our aim is to improve on previous performance which can be challenging given the varied nature of the development pipeline.
But as our development portfolio matures so the dataset of comparable projects grows allowing for better quality benchmarking.
Read more on p.112 Vertium Dublin Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainability review continued The options for reducing the environmental impact of our investment portfolio are more limited because they are not buildings we have designed or built ourselves.
Nonetheless we focus on improvements to energy efficiency waste and water consumption as part of our broader objective to sustain asset values and reduce operating costs.
To mitigate risk in the context of environmental legislation we aim to have only EPC C rated assets within our portfolio and to ensure that before 2018 we have no remaining properties rated F or below in terms of energy performance.
We have ongoing programmes for energy reduction in place across six assets which are yielding positive results.
We are also striving to divert 100% of waste from landfill and we have appointed a single waste removal contractor covering approximately 80% of our assets to help deliver this target.
In addition to reporting energy water and waste performance data we have established a number of long term key performance indicators that we will implement over the coming years to support our goals.
These include investigating the feasibility of rolling out smart meters to facilitate the collection of more accurate energy consumption data.
Our tenants account for the majority of the energy use and waste generated at our investment portfolio.
A challenge across the property sector is the split incentive between landlord and tenants to invest in environmental improvements.
To increase the energy performance of our portfolio we need to introduce energyefficient equipment and management practices in tenant demised areas but tenants are often unwilling to share the investment cost even when they will reap returns within reasonable payback periods.
We are tackling this through a range of measures including the introduction of green leases such as BREEAM Green Lease Agreements and green fitout design guidance for tenants at 399 Edgware Road.
EPRA sustainability reporting We report the environmental performance of our owned portfolio in line with EPRAs Sustainability Best Practice
Tables detailing our performance in 2016 can be found on our website site sustainabilityoverview Our buildings U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our goal is to build a culture where people are proud to work for us and share our values of intelligence imagination and audacity.
This can only be achieved by fostering a real sense of belonging among our employees connected by strong internal communications and high levels of engagement.
We are proud of what we have achieved in this respect following our merger and this goal continued to influence our activities in 201617.
People thrive when they are engaged inspired and continually learning so we challenge people to think creatively and encourage our employees to further their professional and personal development.
UI Think is one example of how we promote an intellectually stimulating environment where new ideas are explored and everyday thinking questioned.
Held in the spirit of challenging the status quo within the real estate sector UI Think provides a forum to connect employees with experts from backgrounds in public policy government design architecture and finance.
Sessions take place over breakfast or early evening drinks in our auditorium and speakers are tasked with showcasing original research from their area of expertise to inspire new and original thinking in our people and the industry.
In 2016 we formalised our commitment to investing in the future of our talent by publishing our study policy.
We encourage employees to develop their relevant skills and knowledge.
We provide financial support for employees including fees and other costs relating to their programme of study along with paid study leave.
This approach is supported by our learning and development strategy and performance management framework.
These combine to provide a clear framework for our team that identifies their individual roles and responsibilities as well as providing clarity on what is expected of them in accordance with the business strategy.
Our people Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainability review continued During the year we supported four employees studying further education qualifications including RICS CIPD MA in Construction Management and ICSA Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators.
Seventy four employees equivalent to 64% of our workforce attended at least one of the 20 different training events we organised on themes ranging from technical training i.
InDesign
Excel to Having Productive Conversations.
Beginning in 2016 we offered three work experience placements to extend these learning opportunities to young people outside of the workplace and we will offer a further four placements in 2017.
We also plan to establish a formal internship programme for young people in 2018.
Our Sabbatical Policy enables employees with more than seven years continuous employment to take up to three months extended leave.
We recognise the value sabbaticals add as a flexible and costeffective development tool with the potential to improve recruitment retention and increase levels of team motivation and performance.
As such employees are encouraged to use the time to undertake activities that promote their individual development as this will ultimately benefit UI.
To get the best out of our team we also encourage them to stay fit healthy and well.
We offer a wide range of benefits designed to promote better health and wellbeing including daily fruit supplies and free yoga classes we subsidise gym membership participate in the cycle2work scheme and provide excellent health insurance and health checks which are subsidised for all.
We offer an employee assistance programme for people to use if they are suffering from stress andor have financial domestic or workrelated concerns.
This includes access to counselling.
Employee profile as 28 February 2017
Total number of UI employees 119 Total number of new hires in 201617 25 Total number of training events 20 Total number of people who attended training 74
Men  6 Women  1 Senior Management Men  16 Women  4 Full team excl.
Senior Management and Executive Directors Men  29 Women  67 Employee senior management and Director numbers by gender at year end Our 2017 Strategic report from IFC to page 54 has been reviewed and approved by the Board of Directors on 26 April 2017.
Marcus Shepherd Chief Financial Officer 26 April 2017 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRONG
GOVERNANCE
UNDERPINS
EVERYTHING
WE DO In this section Corporate governance
56 Chairmans Introduction to Corporate Governance
58 Board of Directors 60 Corporate governance 80 Annual Statement from the Remuneration Committee Chairman 81 Remuneration policy 92 Annual remuneration report 105 Directors report 113 Statement of Directors responsibilities Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chairmans Introduction to Corporate Governance Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to introduce my first report on the governance and stewardship of the Company for the year ended 28 February 2017.
As your new Chairman I have spent my time getting to know the UI business visiting our projects and meeting with our stakeholders.
During this time I have been continually impressed with the quality experience dedication and enthusiasm of our people from Director level to employees throughout the Company.
Sustainable governance As a Board we are committed to building and leading the responsible transparent transformational and sustainable business discussed in the previous pages of this Annual
We believe that by maintaining high standards of corporate governance aligned with the strategic aims of the business both at Board level and throughout the Group we will deliver value for our stakeholders over the short and longer term.
Good governance is an essential tool to enhance and sustain business performance while raising our reputation both in the sector in which we operate and among our wider stakeholders.
The principles of leadership accountability and effectiveness along with remuneration and the relationships we have with our shareholders as defined under the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code are integrated throughout our business.
The implementation of these principles is set out in this report.
Board succession Succession at Board level was a key focus during the year.
I took over from David Jenkins as Chairman of the Board following the AGM in July 2016.
Lynn Krige was appointed as a new independent Nonexecutive Director in March 2016 taking over from Sarah Bates as Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee following the 2016 AGM.
This smooth transition highlights the effectiveness of our succession policy at Board level.
As Chairman of the Nomination Committee it is my responsibility to ensure the Board continues to hold the necessary skills and experience to oversee the effective running of the business.
Further information on this can be found in the Nomination Committee report on pages
Alongside succession the Board continued its focus on strategy with newly established biannual Board strategy days.
Dedicated entirely to strategy these days give Directors an excellent opportunity to focus their time and energy along with that of the Executive Committee to obtain a deeper understanding of what success looks like for our business and the associated risks and challenges.
Risk management
As set out in my letter on page 5 the impact of the UKs decision to leave the EU has created significant uncertainty in the property market.
The changing nature of the economic environment and with that the markets in which we operate is one of our key risks.
This and other key risks are set out on pages 19 and 20 and are considered as part of UIs risk management and internal control framework which is focused on by our Risk Management Committee and our Audit and Risk Committee.
The framework has been reviewed during the year to ensure those risks remain appropriate and proportionate and that our risk management systems remain robust with identified risks being mitigated to the fullest extent possible.
Further information on this can be found in the Audit and Risk Committee Report on pages 73 to 77.
Board evaluation The Board evaluation process led by myself with the assistance of the Company Secretary confirmed that the Board and its Committees continue to operate effectively and there were no significant issues to address.
However
I understand that there are always ways in which we can improve as a Board and I will look at the implementation Peter Williams photographed at UI offices U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 of recommendations from the evaluation process set out on page 69 during the year.
I am satisfied that our Directors all of whom will be standing for reelection at the 2017 AGM continue to be effective and show the required commitment to their roles and I will be recommending their reappointment to shareholders.
Remuneration
At this years AGM we will be proposing a resolution to shareholders to approve our Remuneration Policy.
This approval is required every three years and whilst no significant changes are being proposed we consulted with shareholders accounting for 60% of our register as part of this process.
The Remuneration Committee has listened to shareholders and taken on board the feedback received and we have amended the proposed Policy where we believed this was appropriate.
Further information on this can be found in the Remuneration Report on pages 80 to An explanation of all resolutions being proposed to shareholders at the AGM can be found on pages 107 to 1 10.
I trust that you will find this governance report helpful and informative and I look forward to meeting those of you attending our AGM.
Peter Williams
26 April 2017
EFFECTIVENESS
ACCOUNTABILITY
RELATIONS WITH
REMUNERATION
UI
Applying the Principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code Read more on p.6167 Read more on p.6871 Read more on p.7277 Read more on p.7879 Read more on p.80104 A clear tone of good governance has been established throughout the Company by Clearly defining roles and responsibilities of Board members A comprehensive corporate governance framework and Independent Directors fostering open and honest dialogue at the Board led by the
Effective leadership of the Company by the Board through Continued focus on Group strategy risk finance governance and people Successful execution of succession planning at Board level and Annual review of the effectiveness of the Board its Committees and Directors.
Transparent lines of accountability leading back to the Board with Clear reporting lines of Committees and senior management back to the Board Delegation of duties to Committees set out in published terms of reference and Continuous review and improvement to risk management and internal controls.
Ongoing engagement with shareholders through Executive Directors and Chairman meeting with key shareholders throughout the year Site visit to 8 Albert Embankment for shareholders and analysts and Engaging with smaller shareholders through the AGM process.
A transparent remuneration framework aligned with shareholder value by Consultation process undertaken on Remuneration Policy during the year Incentive structure focused on longer term performance and Monitoring of market trends and changes in legislation by the
Committee.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board of Directors U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chairman Peter Williams  Chairman Appointed 4 January 2016 Period of service on the Board 1 year 4 months Experience Peter became Chairman of the Company following the AGM on 14 July 2016.
Peter the former CEO of Selfridges has over 30 years of boardlevel experience having held a number of executive and nonexecutive positions at a wide range of public and private consumerfacing businesses. ite plc the online fashion retailer.
He is also a Senior Independent Director at Rightmove plc and a trustee of the Design Council.
In addition he has served on the boards of many companies including ASOS plc Cineworld Group Plc Jaeger Silverstone Holdings Ltd EMI Group Blacks Leisure Group Plc JJB Sports and Capital Radio Plc.
Peter is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
Committees Chairman of the Nomination Committee member of the Audit and Risk Committee and Remuneration Committee.
Executive Directors Matthew Weiner  Chief Executive Appointed 18 March 2004 Period of service on the Board 13 years 1 month Experience Matthew was appointed as Chief Executive of the Company following the AGM in July 2015 previously serving on the Board of Development Securities Plc as a Director.
Prior to joining the Company Matthew worked as a Fund Manager at both Legal and General and AXA Investment Management.
Matthew is a member of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and a board member of the charity Jewish Care.
He joined Development Securities Plc in November 2000 as Director of Investments.
Richard Upton  Deputy Chief Executive Appointed 19 May 2014 Period of service on the Board 2 years 11 months Experience Richard was the founder and Chief Executive Officer of the specialist regeneration real estate developer Cathedral Group which was acquired by Development Securities Plc in May 2014.
He was previously a founding director of Mount Anvil a leading London house builder and is a member of the London Advisory Committee for English Heritage.
Richard was appointed as Deputy Chief Executive of the Company in July 2015.
Marcus Shepherd  Chief Financial Officer Appointed 18 February 2013 Period of service on the Board 4 years 2 months Experience Marcus is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
His previous roles included Finance Director Global Real Estate at Aviva Investors Chief Financial Officer Europe for Valad Property Group and Group Finance Director of Teesland Plc.
NonExecutive Directors Nick Thomlinson  Senior Independent Director Appointed 3 January 2012 Period of service on the Board 5 years 4 months Experience Nick is a member of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
He is a former senior partner and Chairman of the Knight Frank Group.
Committees Chairman of the Remuneration Committee member of the Audit and Risk Committee and Nomination Committee.
Barry Bennett  Nonexecutive Director Appointed 19 May 2014 Period of service on the Board 2 years 11 months Experience Barry is a chartered accountant with significant experience in the financial and property sectors and is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in
Barry was previously a founding director of Mount Anvil a London house builder and in 2002 founded specialist regeneration real estate developer Cathedral Group with Richard Upton.
Lynn Krige  Independent Nonexecutive Director Appointed 10 March 2016 Period of Service on the Board 1 year 2 months Experience Lynn is currently CFO at British Engineering Services Limited and brings over 25 years experience from across the construction infrastructure investment and B2B services sectors.
She has previously held executive roles at Speedy Hire Plc and John Laing Plc originally qualifying with Deloitte in South Africa.
Lynn is also currently a member of the Audit Committee at the Imperial War Museum.
Committees Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee member of the Remuneration Committee and Nomination Committee.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance BOARD STATEMENTS Under the Code the Board is required to make a number of statements.
These statements are set out in the table below REQUIREMENT BOARD STATEMENT MORE INFORMATION Compliance with the Code As a Company listed on the London Stock Exchange U and I Group PLC is subject to requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Board is required to comply with the provisions of the Code and where it does not explain the reasons for noncompliance.
The Board confirms that in its view the Company has applied the main principles and has complied with all of the provisions set out in the Code during the financial year under review.
Details on how the Company complies with the Code can be found throughout the Governance section of the Annual Report.
Going Concern The Board is required to confirm that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operation for the foreseeable future.
The Directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue to be operational as a going concern for the foreseeable future and therefore have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the Groups 2017 financial statements.
More details on the Going Concern statement can be found on page 77.
Viability Statement The Board is required to assess the viability of the Company taking into account the current position and the potential impact of the principal risks and uncertainties set out on pages 18 to 20.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the fiveyear period to February 2022.
More details on the Viability statement can be found on page 21.
Principal risks facing the Group The Board is required to confirm that a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company has been carried out and should describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
A robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company was undertaken during the year including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The significant risks facing the Company and how these are mitigated are set out on pages Information around key risks and risk management processes can be found on pages 18 to 20 and on page 75 of the Audit and Risk Committee report.
Risk management and internal control The Board is required to monitor the Companys risk management and internal control systems and at least annually carry out a review of their effectiveness.
The Board conducted a review of the effectiveness of the systems of risk management and internal control during the year and considers that there is a sound system of internal control which accords with the Financial Reporting Councils Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
Details on the systems of risk management and internal control can be found on pages 75 to 77.
Fair balanced and understandable The Board should confirm that it considers the annual report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Directors consider to the best of each persons knowledge and belief that the annual report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
See the Audit and Risk Committee report on page 76 and the Statement of Directors responsibilities on page 113.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 LEADERSHIP UK Corporate Governance Code compliance U and I Group PLC UI Ordinary shares are listed on the Official List of the UK Listing Authority and as such the Company is required to state whether it has complied with the provisions contained within the Code.
The Code describes corporate governance as the system by which companies are directed and controlled.
The Board is responsible for the governance of the Company how it meets this responsibility is set out in this Governance section of the Annual Report on pages 56 to 113.
Shareholders are responsible for holding the Directors of the Company to account should the governance systems and processes in place not meet the requirements set out in the Code.
Shareholders can do this through direct contact with the Company or through voting on resolutions at the Companys AGM.
The Board confirms that in its view the Company has applied the main principles and has complied with all of the provisions set out in the Code during the financial year under review.
The full Code can be found at www. rc.
The Board The Board is responsible for ensuring effective leadership of the Company through the approval and implementation of the business strategy and oversight and review of the Groups activities.
It is collectively responsible to the Companys shareholders for the longterm success of the Company whilst ensuring that risk levels are appropriate.
In carrying out its responsibilities the Board takes into account the size and complexity of the Group and internal control measures employed to determine which formal matters are to be reserved to it and which are to be delegated to its various Committees or the Executive
The Board has put in place a formal schedule of reserved matters which require its approval that include but are not limited to those set out below Matters reserved for the Board At least once a year the Board reviews the nature and scale of matters reserved for its decision these include Company strategy and financial performance Approval of significant funding arrangements capital expenditure and the issue of any securities Executive performance retention remuneration and succession planning for the Board and senior management Authorisation of significant transactions investment acquisitions and disposals and corporate acquisitions Dividend policy Oversight of corporate reputation and communication and Internal control and risk management systems and review of the Boards own effectiveness.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance continued AUDIT AND RISK
RISK MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE
DISCLOSURE
COMMITTEE
BUSINESS DIVISIONS
COMMITTEE
REMUNERATION
COMMITTEE
NOMINATION
COMMITTEE
THE BOARD
Day to day operational management of the business and implementation of the business strategy Responsibility for the Groups financial reporting internal control and risk management and effectiveness and independence of external auditors Oversees the Groups risk register and risk control processes on behalf of the Audit and Risk Committee Oversees the disclosure of market sensitive information Ensures the Board has the required skills knowledge experience and diversity to oversee the delivery of the Group strategy Determines the reward strategy for Executive Directors and Chairman with oversight of senior management to ensure their interests are aligned with shareholders Responsibility for the performance and longterm success of the Company including leadership strategy values standards controls and risk management UI Governance Structure Governance framework To assist the Board in discharging its duties matters are delegated to the Committees of the Board set out in the diagram below further details of the roles and responsibilities of these Committees are set out throughout this report.
Board composition and appointments On 1 March 2016 the Board consisted of three Executive Directors a Nonexecutive Chairman and four Non executive Directors three of whom were independent.
Michael Marx formerly Chief Executive Officer up to July 2015 after which he held the position of NonExecutive Director retired from the Board with effect from close of business on 29 February 2016.
Michael continues to work with the Company on specific projects on a consultancy basis.
On 9 December 2015 the Company announced that Peter Williams would be appointed as an independent Nonexecutive Director and Chairman designate with effect from 4 January 2016.
Peter took over the position of Chairman following the AGM on 14 July 2016 when David Jenkins stepped down from the Board.
Peter also became Chairman of the Nomination Committee at this time.
On 10 March 2016 the Company announced that Lynn Krige would be appointed as a Nonexecutive Director with immediate effect.
It was further announced that Lynn would be Chairman designate of the Audit and Risk
Lynn took over from Sarah Bates as Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee following the AGM on 14 July 2016 when Sarah stepped down from the
At this time Lynn was also appointed as a member of the Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
Nick Thomlinson assumed the position of Senior Independent Director of the Company following Sarah Bates stepping down from the Board at the 2016 AGM.
Biographical information for the Directors in office at the date of this Report is out on page 59.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board composition as at 25 April 2017 Chairman nonexecutive 1 Executive Directors 3 Nonexecutive Directors Board Committees Supported by its principal Committees the Board sets the strategic direction of the Group.
Board Committees operate within defined terms of reference as determined by the
Terms of reference are available upon request from the Company Secretary and are also published on the Companys website at site The Company Secretary acts as secretary to each of the Committees.
The interaction between the Board its Committees and the management of the Company is detailed in the diagram on page 62.
The Audit and Risk Committee monitors the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls and risk management framework the Groups risk appetite and the integrity of the Groups financial reporting whistleblowing and regulatory compliance.
The Audit and Risk Committee report is on pages 73 to 77.
The Nomination Committee reviews and considers the size structure and composition of the Board and its Committees giving due regard to ongoing succession planning and makes recommendations to the Board.
The Nomination Committee report is on pages 70 and 71.
The Remuneration Committee reviews all aspects of Executive Directors remuneration reviewing trends across the industry and setting executive remuneration policies which are designed to incentivise and retain talent to support the delivery of the Companys longterm strategy.
The Remuneration Committee report
The purpose of the Executive Committee is to facilitate and assist the Chief Executive Officer in managing the day to day activities of the business and implementing the strategy approved by the Board.
Further details of the Executive Committee can be found on page 66.
The
Disclosure Committee meets as and when required and has responsibility for the identification and disclosure of inside information and for ensuring that regulatory announcements comply with applicable legal or regulatory requirements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance continued DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITIES ROLE RESPONSIBILITIES
The Chairman is responsible for the leadership of the Board and ensuring its effectiveness.
Peter Williams who became Chairman following the 2016 AGM has the following key responsibilities To organise the business of the Board and ensure the smooth flow of information in conjunction with the Company Secretary and to promote open and honest dialogue to enable effective decision making.
To work alongside the Chief Executive Officer in establishing the key strategic objectives of the Company.
To promote the Company and enhance its standing with stakeholders.
Chief Executive The Chief Executive is responsible for the running of the Companys business and meeting strategic objectives.
Matthew Weiner who became Chief Executive of the Company following the 2015 AGM has the following key responsibilities To work alongside the Chairman Executive Directors and senior management in establishing the key strategic objectives of the Company.
To oversee the overall performance of the business.
To implement the Groups business plan.
Nonexecutive Directors The Nonexecutive Directors play a key role in shaping strategy and holding the executive management to account.
The Nonexecutive Directors as set out on page 59 have the following key responsibilities To bring external perspectives and insight to the deliberations of the Board and its Committees.
To play an important role in the formulation and progression of the Boards agreed strategy and review and monitor the performance of the executive management in the implementation of this strategy.
To provide challenge to Executive Directors to produce a considered and independent outcome to Board deliberations.
Senior Independent Director The Senior Independent Director is an additional avenue of recourse to stakeholders where normal channels are not available or appropriate.
Nick Thomlinson who became Senior Independent Director following the 2016 AGM has the following key responsibilities To be available to stakeholders should they have concerns which have not been resolved through the normal channels or if these channels are not deemed appropriate.
To act as Chairman should the requirement arise.
To be responsible for leading the Nonexecutive Directors in the annual performance evaluation of the Chairman.
To act as a sounding board for the Chairman and serving as an intermediary for other Directors where necessary.
Company Secretary An officer of the Company responsible for advising the Board on governance matters.
Chris Barton who became Company Secretary in November 2014 has the following key responsibilities Under direction from the Chairman ensuring the appropriate information flows to the Board and its Committees to facilitate discussions and allow fully informed decisions to be made.
To ensure the Nonexecutive Directors have access to the senior management where required.
To ensure an appropriate induction process and ongoing training are in place for Executive and Nonexecutive Directors.
To facilitate the Board evaluation process.
To advise the Board and its Committees on all governance matters.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Division of roles In accordance with the Code the roles and remit of the Chairman Chief Executive and Senior Independent Director are set out in writing and agreed by the Board.
There were no significant changes to the Chief Executives or Chairmans other commitments during the year.
Board meeting attendance Board and Committee meetings are typically held at the Companys registered office address 7A Howick Place London SW1P 1DZ.
Board strategy days are held at an offsite location.
The following table sets out the attendance of the Directors at the scheduled meetings of the Board during the financial year Director Position Appointed Number of meetings attendedmeetings possible % attendance Peter Williams Chairman 04.01.2016 99 Matthew Weiner Chief Executive 18.04.2004 99 100 Richard Upton Deputy Chief Executive 19.05.2014 89 89 Marcus Shepherd Chief Financial Officer 18.02.2013 99 100 Nick Thomlinson Senior Independent Director 03.01.2012 99 100 Lynn Krige Independent Nonexecutive Director 10.03.2016 89 89 Barry Bennett Nonexecutive Director 19.05.2014 89 89 David Jenkins Chairman 01.02.2007 44 100 Sarah Bates Senior Independent Director 15.01.2010 44 100 For the purposes of detailing formal meetings scheduled to be held during the year ended 28 February 2017 the Board meeting originally scheduled for February 2017 but rescheduled to 1 March 2017 has been included in the above table Richard Upton missed one meeting due to illness Lynn Krige was appointed to the Board on 10 March 2016.
Lynn missed one meeting due to a previously arranged engagement Barry Bennett missed one meeting due to a previously arranged engagement David Jenkins and Sarah Bates stepped down from the Board following the 2016 AGM on 14 July 2016 Board meetings during the year The Board met formally nine times during the year including one meeting originally scheduled for February 2017 rescheduled to 1 March 2017.
Additional meetings were called at short notice for specific project approval and did not necessarily require full attendance although all Directors were given the opportunity to attend or comment on each proposal.
Where a Director is unable to participate in a meeting either in person or remotely the Chairman will solicit their views on key items of business ahead of time in order that these can be presented at the meeting and can influence the debate.
The Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors met on one occasion during the year without Executive Directors in attendance.
The Nonexecutive Directors also met during the year without the Executive Directors or Chairman present.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance continued KEY BOARD ACTIVITIES DURING THE YEAR MARCH 2016 Operational review Consideration of Board evaluation results New Director and senior management appointment update SEPTEMBER 2016 Board and
Committee strategy day DECEMBER 2016 Brand culture and engagement review IT project review update Board Committee updates APRIL 2016 Approval of annual report financial statements and final dividend Review of viability and going concern statements JULY 2016 Consideration of AGM matters Review of people and process Establishment of
Committee
OCTOBER 2016 Interim results and interim dividend approval
JANUARY 2017 Review of progress against forecast Reports of
Chairmen
Approval of delegated authorities MARCH 2017 Yearend review Board evaluation results All employee learning and development project update JUNE 2016 Review of potential area of new business growth EU regulations update on market abuse Review of investor feedbackperceptions audit Key project review A Chief Executives report which includes relevant matters to highlight since the previous meeting and economic and market analysis in addition to indepth project finance health and safety governance and investor relations reports are reviewed at each meeting 1 March meeting rescheduled from 28 February 2017 Executive Committee The Executive Committee is made up of the Executive Directors as well as senior divisional directors who take responsibility for the implementation of the Companys business strategy and assist the Chief Executive in running the
The Executive Committee meets weekly with formal monthly meetings it has the responsibility to manage the day to day business of UI to ensure delivery against the Companys organisational vision and strategy in a way that is consistent with the Companys values.
The Committee operates within agreed financial limits set by the Board.
There is a clear delegation of authority from the Board to the Executive Committee which is set out in writing and approved by the Board.
Members of the Executive Committee are invited to present on business activities and portfolio updates at each formal Board meeting.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A rigorous evaluation process is undertaken to ensure the Board continues to have the required mix of skills and experience to successfully lead the Company.
It is also necessary to ensure the smooth continuity of Board membership.
Highlights during the year Appointment of New Chairman and New Nonexecutive Director.
A full Board and Board Committee evaluation including the assessment of each Directors performance was conducted during the year.
An agenda item at each Board meeting discusses people and culture.
The Board rolled out an allemployee brand culture and values project during the year.
A robust governance framework and risk management system are essential in allowing the Board to maximise the opportunities available to it whilst ensuring the risks to the Company are understood and mitigated to the fullest extent possible.
Highlights during the year Full review of risks risk management and internal control systems during the year.
Reports on Health and Safety received at each meeting.
Focus on information security with a Company wide briefing on cybersecurity and phishing exercise led by external consultants.
The Board takes time to consider shareholder and stakeholder issues.
The Board is committed to an ongoing and active dialogue seeking both shareholder and stakeholder views on relevant matters.
Highlights during the year At each meeting a investor relations report is received updating the Board on share performance shareholder movement and media coverage.
Institutional investor feedback given by analysts on Investor presentations and Company performance and through a perceptions audit.
Review of 2016 AGM shareholder circular and proxy voting figures.
The Board formulates and oversees the strategic direction of the Company ensuring the correct strategy given the nature of the markets and economic conditions in which it is operating.
Highlights during the year Approval of acquisitions disposals and new business in line with agreed strategy for example 8 Albert Embankment and Mayfield.
Review of the current climate market and economic conditions at each meeting.
Executive Committee members present updates on projects at each Board meeting and receive challenge from the Board.
Offsite days dedicated to Group strategy were held in September 2016 and March 2017.
The Board led by the Chief Financial Officer monitors and discusses the financial requirements and performance of the Group at each meeting and has sole authority to approve transactions over a prescribed threshold.
Highlights during the year Detailed consideration of financial matters at each meeting including annual and interim results cash flow and trading forecasts.
Approval of final interim and supplemental dividends.
Discussion on Group treasury tax and cash matters.
Consideration of Going Concern and Viability Statements.
STRATEGY NEW BUSINESS AND EXISTING PORTFOLIO LEADERSHIP CULTURE AND PEOPLE GOVERNANCE RISK AND INTERNAL CONTROLS FINANCIAL PLANNING AND PERFORMANCE STAKEHOLDERS AND SHAREHOLDERS BOARD  ALLOCATION OF TIME 50% 15% 12% 15% 8% The following areas represent the primary focus of the Board in discharging its obligations during the year Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance continued
Director independence Peter Williams was appointed as Chairman of the Board following the AGM on 14 July 2016.
Peter had previously been appointed as a Nonexecutive Director and Chairman designate with effect from 4 January 2016.
On appointment the Board considered that Peter met the independence criteria set out in the Code.
The Chairmans biography can be found on page 59.
Lynn Krige was appointed an independent Nonexecutive Director during the year further details can be found in the Nomination Committee report on pages 70 to 71.
The independence of each Nonexecutive Director has been assessed during the year in line with the independence criteria contained within provision B.1.1 of the Code.
The Board considered all the Nonexecutive Directors to be independent during the year with the exception of Barry Bennett who was the cofounder of Cathedral Group.
David Jenkins who retired as Chairman in July 2016 was considered independent on appointment as Chairman and as discussed above Peter Williams was considered independent on appointment to the Board.
The current ratio of Executive and independent Nonexecutive Directors is permissible for a smaller company under Code provision B.1.2.
Board independence as at 25 April 2017 Chairman 1 Independent Directors 2 NonIndependent Directors  Independent on appointment Induction training and professional development The Chairman assisted by the Company Secretary is responsible for the formal induction of all new Directors.
On joining the Board a Director receives a comprehensive induction pack prepared by the Company Secretary which includes material relating to the Directors obligations as a Director of the Company the Company structure and governance and Board and Committee powers and authorities.
Induction meetings are arranged with Executive Directors Nonexecutive Directors and other relevant individuals including members of the Executive Committee where required for briefings around business strategy performance and the Companys projects.
Visits to key project sites are arranged.
Peter Williams and Lynn Krige received full inductions following their appointment as Nonexecutive Directors.
As part of Peters induction as Chairman following his appointment in July 2016 individual meetings were arranged with the majority of UIs major shareholders.
All Directors are given the opportunity to receive ongoing training and development whilst in office.
Directors may request this as part of the annual performance evaluation or by discussion with the Chairman or Company Secretary.
The Chairman agrees with each Director their training and development needs as and when required.
Development activities include regular presentations and updates on the Companys projects and portfolio by Executive Directors and members of the Executive Committee updates on the market and economic trends share price and trading performance and governance matters.
Professional advice and support All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible for advising the Board through the Chairman on corporate governance matters.
Directors are also able to seek independent professional advice as necessary at the Companys expense in respect of their duties.
Time commitment On appointment Directors are advised of and requested to make the necessary time commitment required to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
This time commitment is also outlined in the letters of appointment issued to the Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors.
As part of the annual performance evaluation each Director is appraised on their time commitment dedicated to the
The Board is satisfied that individual Directors have dedicated the required amount of time to the Company to effectively fulfil their role.
The Board as a whole is content that the Chairmans external appointments do not impact on his ability to allocate sufficient time to discharge his responsibilities to UI.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Performance evaluation As in previous years the Board has undertaken a formal performance evaluation of the Board and its Committees to ensure they continue to be effective.
Also reviewed as part of this process is the effectiveness of individual Directors and their commitment to their respective roles.
The Board believes that annual evaluations are helpful and provide a valuable opportunity for continuous improvement.
Consideration was given as to whether the evaluation should be externally facilitated the Board maintained that the current arrangements were appropriate but will keep this area under review.
The Board evaluation was carried out through a detailed questionnaire the responses to which were collated by the Company Secretary.
The evaluation focused on the Board as a whole its composition and effectiveness as well as on the Committees and individual Directors.
The responses were considered by the Chairman or the Senior Independent Director in relation to the Chairmans performance.
Following the results of the evaluation being disclosed to the Board Peter Williams chaired a meeting of the Nonexecutive Directors without Executive Directors present where the performance of the Executive Directors was reviewed.
Nick Thomlinson chaired a meeting of the Nonexecutive Directors without the Chairman or Executive Directors present at which the performance of the Chairman was reviewed.
The outcome was then discussed by the Chairman and Senior Independent Director.
No significant issues arose as a result of this review.
It was confirmed that the Chairman having been in place since the departure of David Jenkins following the 2016 AGM was leading the Board effectively.
A presentation by the Company Secretary of the results from the 2017 Board evaluation together with the progress made on the areas highlighted through the 2016 Board evaluation process was discussed by the Board.
Where considered relevant suggestions for areas of improvement have or will be implemented as detailed opposite.
2016 Board evaluation results The 2016 Board evaluation noted that whilst the Board was operating efficiently there had been a large amount of change which had taken place both within the Board itself and with regard to the overall governance structure within the Company over the course of the year.
These changes for example the introduction of the new Executive Committee were in the process of being embedded and the Boards focus for 2016 should be to ensure these changes were implemented effectively.
It was agreed that consideration should also be given as to whether a new independent Nonexecutive Director would be beneficial following the changes to the Board at the 2016 AGM.
Progress made The new governance structure continues to embed itself within the business.
The changes to the Board during the year were successfully implemented and managed as seen with the departure of David Jenkins and Sarah Bates and the introduction of Peter Williams and Lynn Krige as Chairman and Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee respectively.
The Executive Committee continues to evolve as the body that assists the Executive Directors in driving the implementation of strategy on a day to day basis.
Members of the Committee attend each Board meeting to update the Board on the progress made against agreed strategic goals and project performance.
The search for a new NonExecutive Director is active and ongoing.
2017 Board evaluation results No major issues were identified during the 2017 Board evaluation however the Board noted that the governance structure was still evolving with a new Chairman and Nonexecutive Director and new hires at Executive Committee level.
This would be kept under close scrutiny throughout the year.
The potential benefit of adding an additional independent Nonexecutive Director to the Board was again highlighted and it was confirmed that this process was being actively managed by the Nomination Committee.
The Board agreed that the introduction of two Board strategy days per year involving the Board and the Executive Committee was a positive step forward to ensure an alignment in the values vision and strategy of the Board and the Company as a whole.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance continued NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT Nomination Committee composition The following table sets out the attendance of members at the scheduled Nomination Committee meetings during the financial year under review
Joined the
Number of meetings attendedmeetings possible % attendance Peter Williams
Thomlinson 03.01.12 22 100 Lynn Krige David Jenkins Sarah Bates Peter Williams was appointed as Chairman of the Committee with effect from 14 July 2016 Lynn Krige was appointed as a member of the Committee with effect from 14 July 2016 David Jenkins resigned as Chairman of the Committee on leaving the Board on 14 July 2016 Sarah Bates resigned as a member of the Committee on leaving the Board on 14 July 2016 For full biographies see page 59.
David Jenkins and Sarah Bates both stood down from the Committee on their retirement from the Board at the AGM on 14 July 2016.
Peter Williams who became a member of the Committee on appointment to the Board in January 2016 took over as Chairman and Lynn Krige was appointed as a member of the Committee at this time.
Following a review of the Committees composition during 201516 it was agreed that in accordance with provision B2.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Chief Executive Matthew Weiner should stand down as a member of the Committee with effect from 29 February 2016 although Matthew would continue to attend meetings when requested to do so by the Chairman.
During the year ended 28 February 2017 the Committee was made up entirely of independent Nonexecutive Directors and the Chairman who was considered independent on appointment.
Role of the Nomination Committee The Committee is responsible for making recommendations to the Board within its agreed terms of reference on appointments to the Board.
The
Board appointment process is fulfilled through an effective search interview and evaluation process led by an external consultant based upon objective criteria set out by the Committee.
The Committees role as set out in its terms of reference includes Reviewing the structure size and composition of the Board as a whole Succession planning for Executive Directors Non executive Directors and the roles of the Chairman and Chief Executive Consideration of the balance of skills knowledge experience time commitment and diversity of the Board Recommending suitable candidates for the role of Senior Independent Director Devising descriptions of the role and capabilities required for a particular appointment and Providing recommendations on the composition of both the Audit and Risk and Remuneration Committees in consultation with the Chairs of those Committees.
WE CONTINUE TO KEEP OUR BOARD COMPOSITION UNDER REVIEW TO ENSURE WE HAVE THE CORRECT MIX OF SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE TO OVERSEE DELIVERY OF THE COMPANY STRATEGY Peter Williams Chairman of the Nomination Committee U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Activities of the Nomination Committee The Committee meets as and when necessary.
Following on from a busy 2016 during which the Committee appointed a new Chairman designate and a new Audit and Risk Committee Chairman designate the Committee met twice during the year ended 28 February 2017 to discuss Board structure size composition and the potential appointment of a new Nonexecutive Director as discussed in the Board evaluation results on page 69.
The specifications of the role have been discussed and the services of the consultant search firm Norman Broadbent are being used to consider a wide range of potential external candidates for the position.
Norman Broadbent has no other connection with the Company.
A list of candidates has been presented to the Committee.
Recommendations on any new appointment would be made by the Committee to the Board which would approve the appointment.
Nomination Committee  allocation of time Board composition and structure 20% Consideration of potential candidates for the Nonexecutive Director 50% Review of Directors and recommendation for reappointment 20% Review of terms of reference 10% New Director inductions As discussed on page 68 the Chairman assisted by the Company Secretary is responsible for the formal induction of all new Directors.
Lynn Krige who joined the Board during the year received a full induction which included a comprehensive induction pack prepared by the Company Secretary induction meetings with Executive Directors Nonexecutive Directors and other relevant individuals and also visits to project sites.
As part of Peter Williams induction as Chairman following his appointment in July 2016 individual meetings were arranged with the majority of UIs major shareholders.
Directors standing for election or reelection The Committee met once following the end of the financial year under review to discuss the reelection of all Directors and recommended to the Board that each Director being eligible should be put forward for annual reelection by shareholders.
Following the annual performance reviews of individual Directors the Chairman considers that each Director continues to operate as an effective member of the Board and has the skills knowledge experience and time to enable them to discharge their duties properly.
Upon election or reelection Nonexecutive Directors are invited to serve for threeyear fixed terms subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
All Nonexecutive Directors have confirmed that they have sufficient time to dedicate to their role.
The terms of their appointment are available from the Company Secretary and details of the Non executive Directors letters of appointment are detailed in the Remuneration Report on page 90.
On the advice of the Committee the Board recommends the reelection of each Director to shareholders at the 2017 AGM in line with provision B.7.1 of the Code.
The Company believes that sufficient biographical details and other relevant information for the Directors seeking annual re election is provided on page 59 in order for shareholders to make an informed decision on each Directors reelection.
Tenure on the Board as at 25 April 2017 Under 3 years 4 36 years 2 Over 6 years Composition of the Board The Committee has reviewed the size structure and composition of the Board and concluded that whilst it is an appropriate and effective Board the addition of an independent Nonexecutive Director in due course would be beneficial.
Diversity
As part of its role the Committee will review the diversity on the Board.
The Committee recognises the benefits of diversity in its broadest sense and the value this brings to the Board and the Company as a whole in terms of skills knowledge and experience.
Details of the gender diversity of the Board and across the Company are set out in the Sustainability Report on page 54.
Peter Williams Chairman of the Nomination Committee 26 April 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance continued
Risk management and internal control The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups risk management and internal control systems and monitors these on an ongoing basis.
The risk management and internal control systems put in place are designed to identify evaluate and mitigate risks while at the same enabling business objectives to be achieved.
Further information on the Companys internal control framework is set out in the Audit and Risk Committee Report on pages 76 and 77.
Risk Management Committee
The regular process of identifying evaluating and managing significant corporate risks has been delegated by the Board to the Audit and Risk Committee which in turn has delegated responsibility for overseeing the day to day risk management of the Company to the Risk Management
The Committee is an Executive Committee and comprises the Executive Directors members of the Executive Committee the Legal Counsel and the Company Secretary.
The Committees principal role as set out in its terms of reference includes Advising the Audit and Risk Committee on the Companys risk appetite tolerance and strategy taking into account the current and prospective macroeconomic and financial environment Reviewing the Companys risk register including identification of new risks continuous assessment and identification of early warning factors and mitigating actions and controls Reviewing the effectiveness of the Companys internal financial controls internal controls and risk management systems and Reviewing the Companys procedures for detecting fraud and prevention of bribery.
Annual activities of the Risk Management Committee The Committee meets quarterly during the year to ensure that the Groups risk management procedures are comprehensive and appropriate for the current economic climate regulatory requirements and business operations.
During the year the Committee performed a full review of all the risks facing the Company as set out on the risk register.
The significant risks facing the Company have been identified and are set out on pages 19 and 20.
At each meeting the Committee reviews those risks with the highest impact and highest likelihood of occurrence and the actions in place to ensure mitigation of the risks to the fullest extent.
Those risks with less impact or likelihood of occurring are reviewed on a sixmonthly basis.
The Committees remit includes all of the Groups subsidiaries and those joint ventures and associates which are administered by the Company.
Risks arising from externally managed joint ventures are managed at the boards of the joint venture companies.
The Committee reports into the Audit and Risk Committee.
In addition to the activities of the Risk Management Committee a risk evaluation on each significant prospective development investment or joint venture opportunity is evaluated by the
The Executive Directors regularly evaluate the Groups riskweighted development exposure which is then considered by the Board.
All necessary actions have been or are being taken to remedy any weaknesses acknowledged from the quarterly reviews.
No significant failings or weaknesses were identified over the year.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT AND RISK COMMITTEE REPORT
Joined the
Number of meetings attendedmeetings possible % attendance Lynn Krige
Thomlinson 03.01.12 44 100 Peter Williams 04.01.16 44 100 Sarah Bates David Jenkins Lynn Krige joined the Committee on 10 March 2016 and was appointed as Chairman with effect from 14 July 2016 Sarah Bates resigned as Chairman of the Committee on leaving the Board on 14 July 2016 David Jenkins resigned as a member of the Committee on leaving the Board on 14 July 2016 Role of the Audit and Risk Committee The Committee plays a crucial role in assisting the Board to discharge its responsibilities for the management of business risk by monitoring reviewing and challenging the effectiveness and the integrity of the Groups financial reporting and audit process and the development and maintenance of sound systems of risk management and internal control.
The Committee currently consists of two independent Nonexecutive Directors and the Companys Chairman Peter Williams who was considered independent on appointment.
The Board has determined that Lynn Krige and Peter Williams are qualified accountants with considerable experience and have significant recent and relevant financial experience for the purposes of the Code.
The Companys Chief Executive Deputy Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer and Financial Controller attend the Highlights of Committee activities during the year Review and approval of half year and full year financial statements.
Assessment of internal audit requirements and recommendations to the Board.
Review of external audit process.
Review of key risks the effectiveness of internal controls and risk management.
Review of finance policies and procedures.
Review of cyber security threats and mitigation processes and roll out of Groupwide training.
Audit and Risk Committee composition Lynn Krige was appointed Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee the Committee following Sarah Bates stepping down from the Board at the 2016 AGM.
David Jenkins also left the Committee at this time.
The table opposite sets out the Committees composition during the year and the attendance of members at the scheduled Committee meetings during the financial year under review.
AS A COMMITTEE WE CONTINUE TO FOCUS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF RISK WHILST ENSURING THE INTEGRITY OF THE COMPANYS FINANCIAL REPORTING AND INTERNAL CONTROL PROCEDURES Lynn Krige Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Committee meetings by invitation as does Barry Bennett a Nonexecutive Director who is also a chartered accountant.
To help the Committee review and challenge the integrity of the Companys financial reporting representatives from the external auditors attend appropriate parts of the meetings.
The Committees principal responsibilities fall under the following categories Financial reporting Review of significant financial reporting judgements and accounting policies and compliance with accounting standards.
Ensuring the integrity of the financial statements and their compliance to statutory requirements.
Ensuring the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable consideration of the Going Concern and Viability Statements and recommending their approval to the Board.
Risk management
On behalf of the Board and in conjunction with the Risk Management Committee establishing the risk appetite of the Company along with a review of the risk register and risk mitigation procedures.
Internal controls Monitoring the effectiveness of the Companys internal controls and compliance process.
Review of delegated authorities and signoff procedures.
Review of key internal control policies.
Fraud and whistleblowing Review of procedures in place to prevent fraudulent behaviour and enable whistleblowing.
If required receive reports on fraudulent incidents and ensure the required investigation is undertaken.
Internal audit Monitoring the requirement for an internal audit function and making subsequent recommendations to the Board.
Agreeing internal audit plans where necessary.
External audit Monitoring and reviewing the independence and performance of the external auditors and evaluating their effectiveness.
Making recommendations for the appointment and re appointment of the external auditors and approval of audit fees.
Annual activities of the Audit and Risk Committee The Committee met four times during the year.
One meeting was held to agree the external audit terms of engagement the auditors scope and proposed approach and the fees of the annual audit.
As is standard each year two of the meetings take place prior to the issue of the preliminary full year and interim results to review audit recommendations and consider any significant issues arising from the audit and review process.
The Committee also reviews the performance of the external auditors.
The Committee reviewed the following items during the year and where required made recommendations to the Board April Year end financial results and Annual Report Viability and Going Concern Statements external auditors report external property valuations significant project risks internal audit requirements risk appetite and review of key risks nonaudit fees and the reappointment of the external auditors.
October External auditors interim report interim results and financial statements internal and external portfolio valuations taxrelated matters risk management internal audit requirements and external audit tender.
December Delegated authority review external audit planning risk management appetite and review of key risks Viability Statement requirements internal audit review and terms of reference review.
January Internal controls and control processes risk assessment review whistleblowing policy review update on internal audit and audit fees.
Cyber security Cyber security continued to be a high priority issue for the Committee during the year.
An external consultant was engaged to provide Companywide training on cyber threats to both the Company and individual employees.
This educational training included phishing emails being sent to employees to highlight the dangers posed.
The
Company also reviewed and introduced new hardware and software systems during the year to minimise the risks associated around cyber threats these systems perform continuous penetration testing checking for weaknesses and potential attacks.
Corporate governance continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risk management The Committee has responsibility for overseeing the risk management process for the Company.
This entails reviewing the risk appetite the principal risks and risk mitigation on behalf of the Board.
The Committee delegates the day to day management of risk throughout the business to the Risk Management Committee see page 72 which reports into the Committee.
The Committee reviews the key risks of the Company the risk register and the mitigation processes in place.
A full review of the effectiveness of the risk management and risk mitigation processes was carried out by the Risk Management Committee during the year at the request of the Committee.
This included a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The results of this review and changes to the risk register were approved by the Committee.
The significant risks facing the Company are set out on pages 19 and 20.
The Committee dedicated its meeting in January to a review of internal control processes and procedures within the Group.
This included analysing the internal control structure delegated authorities throughout the Group and the major business processes covering areas such as operations borrowings cash management accounting and reporting statutory compliance and employment.
Other areas of review overseen by the Committee included IT cyber security corporate structure gifts and entertainment and organisational design.
The Committee considered the Companys internal audit requirements at each meeting during the year.
After a thorough review of the Companys requirements a peer group review and consultation with the external auditors the Committee concluded that a permanent internal audit function or an outsourced function was not required by the Company.
Further details of this can be found on page 77.
The Committee also met without Executive Directors present during the year and Lynn Krige as Chairman of the Committee met separately with the external auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Audit and Risk Committee  Allocation of time Financial matters 40% Risk management 30% Internal controls 20% Governance 10% Significant judgements Before recommending the interim and annual financial statements to the Board for approval the Committee considered amongst other things the following matters and significant judgements Direct property investments the development and trading portfolios and the valuation of the investment properties The Committee challenged executive management in respect of both independent external valuations and Directors valuations across the entire property portfolio.
In addition the Committee challenged the external auditors in respect of the work they had conducted in connection with the internal and external valuations.
The
Committee was satisfied that there were no significant areas of contention and that the valuation procedures and methodologies used and the valuations themselves were appropriate.
In respect of impairment charges recognised the Committee was satisfied that where applicable the written down values reflected the assets net realisable value.
Indirect property investments accounting for investments in property secured loans and recoverability of financial assets The Committee again discussed with executive management the valuation and recoverability of these assets along with the external auditors as to the work they had conducted.
As a result the Committee concluded that the assets were appropriately recognised in the Groups financial statements.
Construction risk The Committee considered developments under construction both on balance sheet and in joint ventures the recoverability of work in progress and the associated construction risks.
The Committee challenged management in respect of the assumptions made relating to the completion of all material developments including the ability of contractors to deliver the completed buildings the likely financial outcome of each development and the recoverability of all work in progress on balance sheet.
As a result the Committee concluded that the assets were appropriately recognised in the Groups financial statements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Serviced office business The Committee considered a management review of the Groups investment in the serviced office business in line with investment strategy.
Significant judgements with regard to recoverability and impairment were made in relation to the business.
Concluding this review an impairment was made see note 2b on page 140.
Other reporting matters The Committee considered the internal controls environment management oversight of indirect property investments and accounting and regulatory developments.
Fair balanced and understandable One of the significant requirements of the Code is that the Board confirms that the Annual Report presents a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Board requested that the Committee provide advice in this regard and with this in mind the Committee considered managements analysis and were content to recommend to the Board that the Annual Report taken as a whole was fair balanced and understandable and provided the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Boards statement to this effect is set out in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities on page 113.
Nonaudit services The NonAudit Services Policy was adhered to throughout the year providing additional control measures around the instruction of the auditors to undertake nonaudit work.
The policy requires that all nonaudit fee work be reported to the Committee and that all nonaudit fee work falling into certain categories and above certain thresholds be reported prior to the work being undertaken as detailed below Up to 25000 Approval required by the Chief Financial Officer or Chief Executive in his absence.
In excess of 25000 and up to 100000 Approval required by the Chief Financial Officer and Chairman of the Committee.
In excess of 100000 Approval required from the full
In addition the policy prohibits the auditors from being considered for providing the following services internal audit bookkeeping services and the design and implementation of financial information systems with additional requirements from March 2016.
An analysis of the nonaudit fees can be found in note 3 to the Consolidated financial statements.
The Committee scrutinises these payments but recognises that due to the nature of the business and complexity of deals there are certain assurance and advisory services that may be best performed by the external auditors as a result of their unique knowledge of the Company without compromising their independence or objectivity.
The total value paid during the year for tax advice and all other services amounted to 56000.
Auditors reappointment It is within the Committees remit to recommend the appointment of the external auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Additional scrutiny was placed on the independence and objectivity of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
In accordance with professional and regulatory standards the lead audit partner is rotated at least every five years in order to p r o t e c t a u d i t i nd e p e n d e n c e a nd o bje c t i v i t y .
J u l ia n Jenkins was the lead audit partner for the financial year under review and has been lead audit partner for the Company for four years.
The Committee was satisfied as to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPs independence performance and effectiveness and following a review of their tenure quality and fees recommended their re appointment as auditors.
This was subsequently ratified by the Board and accordingly the reappointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have been the independent auditors of the Company since 2008 which is the last time the audit went out to tender.
The audit will be put out to tender at least every ten years in accordance with the Code and this will be a focus of the Committee during the year ending 28 February 2018.
Internal control The Directors acknowledge their responsibility for reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control to safeguard shareholders investments and protect the Companys assets.
The Directors acknowledge that they are responsible for determining the nature and extent of the principal risks the Company is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
The operational financial and compliance risk controls are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Corporate governance continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Board through the Committee and Risk Management Committee has conducted a thorough and robust risk assessment of the business identifying principal risks their potential impact likelihood of occurrence controls and mitigating actions together with early warning systems and further actions which need to be implemented.
Detailed below is a description of the Groups internal control and risk management used in the process of preparing the Consolidated financial statements.
The key features of UIs system of internal control include A comprehensive system of financial reporting and business planning with appropriate sensitivity analysis A detailed authorisation process which ensures that no material commitments are entered into without competent and extensive approval A defined schedule of matters reserved for the Board and clear defined roles of the Chairman and Chief Executive An organisational structure with clearly defined levels of authority Formal documentation of procedures The close involvement of the Executive Directors in all aspects of the day to day operations including regular meetings with senior management to review all operational aspects of the business and risk management systems A review of the Group strategy and progress on developments at each scheduled Board meeting A comprehensive insurance programme and A formal whistleblowing policy.
Internal auditors H W Fisher and Company acted as the Companys internal auditors for the year ending 29 February 2016.
From April 2016 the Committee stood H W Fisher down as internal auditors.
A full review of the Companys requirements for an internal audit function was undertaken by the Chief Financial Officer in conjunction with the Committee Chairman and discussions took place on this issue at each Committee meeting during the year.
The Committee took into account the size and complexity of the business it also sought the advice of the external auditors and conducted a review of internal audit functions within its peer group.
The Committee agreed that it did not consider a permanent internal audit function either inhouse or outsourced was required at this time.
The Committee confirmed that a process was in place to regularly review this evaluation and also a mechanism was in place to adequately cover areas that may need additional review and focus as circumstances and the nature of risks change.
Any such review would be carried out by using experienced staff or external advisors.
The Committee will annually review the requirement for an internal audit function.
The Board has conducted a review of the effectiveness of the systems of internal control for the year ended 28 February 2017 and to the date of this report and considers that there is a sound system of internal control which accords with the FRC Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business
The Board is satisfied that there is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the Groups principal risks including financial operational and compliance controls and that it is regularly reviewed.
Going concern The Directors have reviewed the current and projected financial position of the Group making reasonable assumptions about future trading performance.
The key areas of sensitivity are Receipt amount and timings of development profits Timing and value of property sales Availability of loan finance and related cash flows Committed future expenditure Future property valuations and their impacts on covenants and potential loan repayments Committed future expenditure and Future rental income.
The forecast cash flows have been sensitised to reflect those cash flows which are less certain and to take account of a potential deterioration of property valuations.
In addition the forecasts have been subject to sensitivity analysis in which the impact of significant reductions to the property portfolio fair value and associated rental income on the Groups loan covenants was assessed.
From their review the Directors believe that the Group has adequate resources to continue to be operational as a going concern for the foreseeable future and therefore have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the Groups 2017 financial statements.
The Companys Viability Statement can be found on page 21.
Lynn Krige Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee 26 April 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 KEY SHAREHOLDER EVENTS FOR 201617 Corporate governance continued RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS The Board prioritised engagement throughout the year with existing and potential shareholders led by the Executive Directors and supported by the Nonexecutive Directors.
Peter Williams assumed the role of Chairman at the 2016 AGM and has met with key shareholders Nick Thomlinson assumed the role of Senior Independent Director replacing Sarah Bates.
Regular calls and meetings were facilitated with institutional shareholders who in aggregate held over 90% of the issued share capital of the Group.
These discussions covered the Companys strategy management remuneration and governance.
A number of shareholders visited key development sites and the executive management team hosted a site visit at 8 Albert Embankment in November 2016 which was well attended by analysts and shareholders.
The Board also received feedback from shareholders via a perceptions audit undertaken during the year.
Presentations were made by the Executive Directors to analysts shareholders and the media following the release of the preliminary and interim results.
Copies of these presentations together with the Annual Report and trading updates are published on the Companys website at site Regular announcements of the Groups significant transactions are made to enhance shareholders understanding of the Companys execution of its business strategy.
The Company ensures that the Board has an uptodate perspective on the views and opinions of shareholders and the investment market.
A report summarising share price performance compared to the market feedback received from the buy and sell sides changes to the shareholder register and key sector news is produced for each Board meeting.
During the year a shareholder consultation process was undertaken by the Remuneration Committee with shareholders owning an aggregate total of 60% of the share register.
The results of this consultation were taken into account when revising the Remuneration Policy see pages 80 to 91 to be put to shareholder vote at the 2017 AGM.
The Companys website contains uptodate information for shareholders and other interested parties including annual reports share price information news releases the financial calendar presentations to the investment community and information on shareholder services.
APRIL 2016 Presentation of the preliminary results OCTOBER 2016 Interim results JULY 2016 Annual General Meeting JANUARY 2017 Shareholder consultation regarding renewal of the Remuneration Policy NOVEMBER 2016 Site visits for shareholders including a presentation to analysts and shareholders event at 8 Albert
Programme of meetings between the Chairman and Executive Directors CEO Deputy CEO and CFO with the Groups largest institutional shareholders analysts and potential shareholders U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual General Meeting The Companys AGM provides an opportunity for the Board to respond to shareholders questions.
The information necessary for informed participation is made available with as much notice as possible.
Directors are introduced to shareholders at the AGM including the identification of Nonexecutive Directors and Committee Chairs.
More information regarding the 2017 AGM including the resolutions being put to the meeting can be found on pages 107 to 110.
The
Companys website site is updated at the same time as the Regulated Information Service to provide additional information dissemination for shareholders.
Shareholders are also invited to subscribe to the Companys email news alert service on the Companys website.
The results of the voting at the 2016 AGM were as follows
For % of votes cast
1 Receive Annual Report and Accounts 99.99 0.01 2 Remuneration Report 82.74 17.26 39 Appointment of Directors 93.65  99.98 0.02  6.35 10 Declare final dividend 99.99 0.01 11 Appointment of Auditor 99.96 0.04 12 Auditors remuneration 99.98 0.02 13 Authority to purchase own shares 99.99 0.01 14 Authority to allot shares 98.01 1.99 15 Disapplication of preemption rights 99.97 0.03 16 Meetings on 14 days notice 98.92 1.08 17 Political donations 99.18 0.82 Includes those votes for which discretion was given to the Chairman Does not include votes withheld Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual Statement from the Remuneration Committee Chairman REMUNERATION COMMITTEE
Increased shareholding guidelines.
Extension of LTIP holding period to five years.
New disclosure of annual bonus financial targets and increased disclosure of strategicindividual performance.
No salary increases for 201718.
I am pleased to present our Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 28 February 2017.
This report has been prepared in accordance with the remuneration reporting regulations and includes the following The Remuneration Policy the Policy sets out details of our new Directors Remuneration Policy which will be subject to a binding vote at our 2017 AGM.
The Annual Remuneration Report provides details on how our Directors were paid in respect of the year ended 28 February 2017 and how we intend to apply our Remuneration Policy for Directors in the financial year ended 28 February 2018.
Remuneration Policy renewal Prior to our existing Policy being tabled for approval in 2014 the Remuneration Committee the Committee undertook a comprehensive review of our executive remuneration framework.
This resulted in a significant shift in our incentive structure and our LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP replaced a number of legacy cashbased plans.
As part of this transition the Committee determined that the existing Policy would be effective from 1 March 2015.
As a result notwithstanding that the Policy was approved at the 2014 AGM it has only been in effect for the last two financial years.
Following a review of our current approach in 201617 it was agreed that it was too early in the lifetime of the Policy to propose significant changes.
During the review we engaged with our major shareholders and took into account their views when agreeing the final proposed Policy which is being tabled for approval at the 2017 AGM.
We are proposing some amendments to the Policy to ensure it is aligned with evolving investor expectations.
These are explained in more detail below.
Holding periods We have extended the holding period that applies to our LTIP awards so that the combined performance and holding period for the entire award is five years.
This applies to awards granted from 1 March 2017.
Annual bonus performance measures As disclosed last year for the financial year ended 28 February 2017 we changed our approach to the annual bonus.
This has now been formalised in our Policy and we have introduced a minimum weighting for financial measures of 50% of the total bonus.
In line with our approach last year for 201718 60% of the annual bonus will be based on financial measures with the remaining 40% based on strategicpersonal measures.
Shareholding guidelines Under our existing policy Executive Directors are required to build up a shareholding of 50% of salary within two years of appointment and 100% of salary within four years of WE HAVE CONSULTED OUR SHAREHOLDERS DURING THE YEAR TO ENSURE THAT THE CHANGES WE ARE PROPOSING TO OUR POLICY AND THE EXPECTATIONS OF OUR SHAREHOLDERS ARE ALIGNED WITH EXECUTIVES IN THE CREATION OF VALUE OVER THE LONGER TERM Nick Thomlinson Chairman of the Remuneration Committee U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy REMUNERATION POLICY The key objectives of the Companys Remuneration Policy are as follows To ensure that Executive Directors and senior managers are rewarded in a way that attracts retains motivates and rewards management of the highest quality.
To operate incentive plans designed to encourage Executive Directors and senior managers to align their longterm career aspirations with the longterm interests of the Company and shareholders expectations.
To promote the attainment of both individual and corporate achievements measured against performance criteria required to deliver the longterm growth and sustainability of the business.
To encourage sustained performance over the medium and long term without taking undue risk.
The total pay framework is based on a mixture of fixed and variable elements considered on a meritocratic basis at individual and Group level taking into account the remuneration awarded to employees in the Group.
The balance between fixed and variable pay is considered appropriate given that the various incentive plansschemes ensure a significant proportion of a key individuals remuneration package is performance related thereby correlating with the strategic aims of the business and the performance of the Company.
The Policy will apply from the 2017 AGM subject to shareholder approval.
Changes to the Policy The key changes between this Policy and the policy which was approved by shareholders at our 2014 AGM are as follows Extending the holding period that applies to our LTIP awards such that the combined performance and holding period will be five years in total for the entire award for awards from 1 March 2017.
From 201617 we changed our approach to the annual bonus moving to a structure with financial and strategic personal targets set at the beginning of each year.
To reflect this change in operation we have introduced a minimum weighting for financial measures of 50% for the annual bonus.
We have introduced an additional shareholding guideline requiring Executive Directors to retain 50% of net vested shares from the LTIP until they build up shareholdings of 200% of salary for the CEO and 150% of salary for the Deputy CEO and CFO. appointment.
We are strengthening our guidelines such that over time Executive Directors will be required to build shareholdings of 200% of salary for the Chief Executive and 150% of salary for the Deputy Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer.
Remuneration outturns 201617 was the first year of operation of our new annual bonus structure with financial and strategicpersonal targets set at the beginning of the year.
The threshold targets set in relation to NAV growth and development and trading gains were not achieved and consequently no annual bonus payments were made in respect of these elements.
Good performance was achieved against the personal and strategic objectives.
As a result the Executive Directors received annual bonus payments ranging from 19.5% to 20.1% of salary.
Further disclosure is set out on pages 96 and 97.
An assessment of the performance conditions for the award made under the Performance Share Plan PSP on 22 May 2014 resulted in nil vesting.
During the year the CEO received payouts under the legacy Development Profit Plan.
These relate to awards granted in previous years and reflects the successful realisation of profits above a notional cost of equity threshold from five projects.
Implementation of Policy in 201718 We are not making any changes to the operation of our Policy for 201718 save for those outlined above.
No increases are being made to the Executive Directors salaries for the financial year beginning 1 March 2017.
This represents the second consecutive year for which we have not increased salaries.
As a Committee we are committed to ongoing dialogue with our shareholders and I hope to receive your support for our Policy Report and Annual Remuneration Report at our forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Nick Thomlinson Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 26 April 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy continued POLICY TABLE FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS PURPOSE OF COMPONENT AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM
MEASURES
Salary
Core element of remuneration set at a level to attract and retain individuals of the calibre required to shape and execute the Companys strategy.
Contractual fixed cash amount.
Typically salary levels are reviewed on an annual basis.
The Committee takes into account a number of factors when setting base salary including Size and scope of the role Skills and experience of the individual Performance of the Company and individual Appropriate market data and Pay and conditions elsewhere in the Company.
Salary increases may be applied taking into account the factors outlined in this table.
During review consideration will also be given to increases applied to the wider employee population.
In certain circumstances such as an increase in the size and scope of the role or increased experience where an individual has been hired on a lower salary initially higher increases may be given.
There is no maximum salary opportunity.
None.
Benefits
To provide Executive Directors with market competitive benefits consistent with the role.
Executive Directors currently receive the following benefits Cash in lieu of motor vehicle Private medical insurance Income protection insurance and Life assurance.
Other benefits that are consistent with the role may be provided if the Committee considers it appropriate.
Payments may be made to Executive Directors in lieu of any unutilised holiday allowance.
The Committee may permit additional holiday in lieu of remuneration.
Relocation and expatriate benefits may also be provided if an existing or new Executive Director is required to relocate.
The Executive Directors may participate in any all employee share plans adopted by the Company on the same basis as other employees.
The cost of benefits may vary from year to year depending on an individuals circumstances and the varying cost of benefits premiums.
There is no maximum benefits value.
None.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 POLICY TABLE FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS continued PURPOSE OF COMPONENT AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM
MEASURES
Annual bonus Incentivises and rewards Executive Directors for the successful delivery of financial and strategic objectives on an annual basis.
Payments are based on performance in the relevant financial year.
Payments up to 50% of the maximum opportunity Target performance are made in cash.
Any bonus above 50% of the maximum opportunity will be paid in shares which the Director is expected to hold for at least two years.
Clawback andor malus provisions may be applied at the discretion of the Committee if an exceptional event occurs such as a material misstatement of results serious misconduct or an errormaterial misstatement resulting in overpayment.
Malus provisions may also be applied in the event of serious reputational damage to the Company or a material failure of risk management.
150% of salary per annum.
Executive Directors excluding the Chief Executive will have a lower maximum opportunity than the percentage stated above.
For the financial year ending 28 February 2018 Executive Directors including the CEO will have a maximum of 75% of salary.
The annual bonus is based on a range of financial strategic and individual measures set by the Committee at the beginning of each year.
The weightings will also be determined annually to ensure alignment with the Companys strategic priorities.
At least 50% of the bonus will be based on financial measures.
The Committee reviews the basis of performance measurement under the annual bonus from time to time and may review and amend the measures as it considers appropriate.
50% of the maximum bonus opportunity will be payable for Target performance.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 POLICY TABLE FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS continued PURPOSE OF COMPONENT AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM
MEASURES
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP Incentivises and rewards Executive Directors for delivery of the Companys strategic plan of building shareholder value.
Awards of nilcost options or conditional shares.
The awards vest subject to the achievement of performance targets set by the Committee.
50% of the award is based on performance measured over three years with the remaining 50% based on performance measured over four years.
Following vesting the awards will normally be subject to an additional holding period of up to two years such that the combined performance and holding period will not be less than five years in total.
Dividend equivalents may be paid on vested awards.
Clawback andor malus provisions may be applied at the discretion of the Committee if an exceptional event occurs such as material misstatement of results serious misconduct or an errormaterial misstatement resulting in overpayment.
Malus provisions may also be applied in the event of serious reputational damage to the Company or a material failure of risk management.
300% of salary per annum.
The primary performance measure will be net asset value per share growth including dividends.
No less than 50% of an award will be based on this measure.
The Committee retains the flexibility to introduce additional measures.
For threshold levels of performance no more than 25% of the award vests with 100% of the award vesting for maximum performance.
Retirement benefits To provide Executive Directors with retirement benefits consistent with the role.
Defined contribution pension arrangements are provided.
Pension benefits are provided through a Group Personal Pension Plan nonpensionable cash supplement or contribution to a Personal Pension arrangement.
17.5% of salary per annum.
None.
Remuneration policy continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 POLICY TABLE FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS continued PURPOSE OF COMPONENT AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM
MEASURES
Shareholding guidelines To align Executive Directors with the shareholder experience.
The Company operates shareholding guidelines for Executive Directors.
They are required to build a shareholding of 50% of salary within two years of appointment and 100% of salary within four years of appointment.
Thereafter they will be required to retain 50% of net vested shares from the LTIP until they build shareholdings of 200% of salary for the CEO and 150% of salary for the Deputy CEO and CFO.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
LEGACY ARRANGEMENTS AND TRANSITION Prior to the Policy being approved in 2014 the Committee undertook a review of incentive arrangements and the LTIP replaced a number of plans.
While no new awards will be made under these plans detail has been included on the Development Profit Plan as there are awards outstanding.
Any subsisting awards for legacy plans will continue in accordance with the relevant plan rules.
PURPOSE OF COMPONENT AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM
MEASURES
Development Profit Plan DPP Incentivises and rewards Executive Directors for the performance of their portfolio of projects.
No awards have been made to Executive Directors for projects which commence following 1 March 2015.
Awards may pay out once a project makes a realised profit.
No payments will be made in respect of profits realised after 1 March 2018.
50% of the payment is made in cash or shares at the time profit is realised.
The remaining 50% is deferred until the end of the financial year and paid in cash or shares at this point.
The maximum aggregate pool available for distribution to Executive Directors and the wider team is 10% of the realised profit above a hurdle for each development project.
Payments are only made under this plan once profit has been realised on a development above a threshold return a notional cost of equity.
Losses attributable to other projects in which a Director has been made an award are also taken into account when calculating payments to ensure that participants are incentivised to mitigate losses while maximising project profits.
This calculation is at the Committees discretion and will not apply in respect of certain legacy awards and projects.
Where unrealised losses are deducted in the calculation but a profit is subsequently recognised a balancing payment may be made.
There are no subsisting awards under either the Strategic Profit Plan or the Investment Growth Plan.
No further awards will be made to Executive Directors under these two plans.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy continued Notes to the Policy table Application of Policy The Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments that are not in line with the Policy set out above where the terms of the payment were i agreed before 1 March 2015 the date our first shareholder approved policy came into effect ii before the Policy set out in this report comes into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholder approved policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a Director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and an award of shares or cash is agreed at the time the award is granted.
Discretion
The Committee will operate the LTIP and DPP in accordance with the relevant plan rules.
In particular the Committee retains discretion on the operation and administration of these plans as follows Dividend equivalents may be paid on awards including on a reinvested basis.
While LTIP awards will normally be delivered in shares the Committee may settle an award in cash.
In the event of a variation of the Companys share capital a demerger special dividend or distribution or any other corporate event which in the Committees opinion might affect the current or future value of awards the Committee may adjust the number of shares the exercise price and the performance condition.
Awards may be amended in accordance with the rules approved by shareholders.
Payment in shares Where cumulative payments under the Development Profit Plan exceed 1.0 million in one financial year two thirds of the payments above 1.0 million will be made in shares which the Director is expected to hold for at least two years.
This will apply if the Directors shareholdings are less than two times salary.
The Chief Executive is the only Director with outstanding Development Profit Plan awards.
The Committee may increase the level of share deferral for incentives at any time.
Takeover or other corporate event For outstanding LTIP awards on a takeover or other corporate event generally the performance period will end on the date of the event.
The Committee will determine vesting having regard to the extent to which performance conditions have been achieved at this point taking into account any other factors they consider relevant.
Awards will generally vest on a time prorata basis taking into account the shortened performance period unless the Committee determines otherwise.
Awards subject to a holding period will be released as part of the transaction.
Alternatively outstanding LTIP awards may be subject to rollover with the agreement of the acquiring company.
Other corporate events may include but are not limited to a demerger delisting distribution other than an Ordinary dividend reverse takeover and merger by way of dual listing.
Under the DPP on a takeover the Committee can bring forward payments.
The amount of the payments will not exceed the bonus pool and subject to that are determined by the Committee on the basis of estimated profits.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Minor changes The Committee may make minor amendments to the Policy for example for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for the amendment.
Performance measures and target setting Annual bonus As discussed in last years report from 201617 we changed our approach to the annual bonus moving to a structure with financial and strategicpersonal targets set at the beginning of each year with measures and targets aligned with the Companys annual objectives.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP The Companys overarching objective is to build shareholder value over the long term.
The LTIP measures the Companys NAV per share growth over three and four years.
This will ensure that Directors are closely aligned with the shareholder experience as our NAV per share growth performance is a key indicator of the performance of the business and is closely related to share price performance.
Targets are positioned at a level which the Committee considers to be stretching but which do not incentivise a change in our risk approach.
Illustrations of Policy Illustrations of the Policy applying from 11 July 2017 are provided below.
These reflect the intended operation of the renewed policy for the 201718 financial year.
M S Weiner Total xed pay 0 400k 800k 1200k 1600k 2000k Annual bonus LTIP 25% 15% 60% 56% 100% 17% 27%
Mid performance
R Upton Total xed pay 0 400k 800k 1200k 1600k 2000k
Mid performance
Annual bonus LTIP 25% 15% 60% 56% 100% 17% 27% M O Shepherd Total xed pay 0 200k 400k 600k 800k 1200k 1000k Annual bonus LTIP 41% 25% 34% 68% 100% 21% 11%
Mid performance
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The assumptions used for these charts are as follows LEVELS OF PERFORMANCE ASSUMPTIONS Fixed pay All scenarios Total fixed pay comprises base salary benefits and pension.
Base salary  for the 201718 financial year.
Benefits  amount received by each Executive Director for the financial year ended 28 February 2017 as per single figure table.
Pension  17.5% base salary pension contributions.
Variable pay
No payout under the annual bonus.
No vesting under the LTIP Mid performance 50% of the maximum payout under the annual bonus.
20% vesting under the LTIP
100% of the maximum payout under the annual bonus.
100% vesting under the LTIP LTIP awards have been shown at face value with no dividend share price growth or discount rate assumptions.
Payments relating to legacy DPP awards made in respect of previous financial years are also excluded.
Award levels reflect a 300% of salary award for M S Weiner and R Upton and a 100% of salary award for M O Shepherd.
Differences in Remuneration Policy for Executive Directors compared with other employees As for our Executive Directors a sizeable proportion of employee pay is dependent on Company team and individual performance.
All employees participate in the annual bonus with the weighting of individual and corporate measures dependent on an individuals role and their ability to directly influence the Companys results.
Individuals below the Board who are involved in the organisation and management of our development and trading projects may be invited to participate in the DPP as appropriate.
While this plan was discontinued for Executive Directors with effect from 1 March 2015 it continues to operate below the Board to ensure that individuals at this level are rewarded for profit realisation from development projects.
POLICY TABLE FOR NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS COMPONENT THE COMPANYS APPROACH Chairman fees Comprises an allinclusive fee for all Board and Committee responsibilities.
Determined by the Remuneration Committee and approved by the Board.
Nonexecutive
Director fees Comprises a basic fee in respect of their Board duties.
Further fees may be paid in respect of additional Board or Committee duties.
Recommended by the Chairman and Chief Executive and approved by the Board.
Remuneration policy continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Expenses incurred in the performance of Nonexecutive Directors duties may be reimbursed or paid for directly by the Company including any tax due on those expenses.
No Director plays a role in determining their own remuneration.
Fees for all Nonexecutive Directors are set at a level sufficient to attract and retain individuals with the required skills experience and knowledge to allow the Board to carry out its duties.
The fees set out above are the sole element of Nonexecutive Director remuneration.
They are not eligible for participation in the Companys incentive or pension plans.
The fees are set within the aggregate limits set out in the Companys Articles of Association and approved by shareholders.
Approach to remuneration on recruitment The Committee will apply the following principles on the recruitment of a new Executive Director Although the Company operates in a highly competitive market for talent the Committee is mindful of the need to avoid paying more than is necessary on recruitment.
The package of a new Executive Director would so far as practical be aligned with the Policy table.
Salaries would reflect the skills and experience of the individual and may be set at a level to allow future salary progression to reflect performance in the role.
For interim positions a cash supplement may be paid rather than salary for example a Nonexecutive Director taking on an executive function on a shortterm basis.
It would be expected that the structure and quantum of the variable pay elements would reflect those set out in the Policy table.
However at recruitment the Committee may flex the balance between annual and longterm incentives and the measures used to assess performance.
Variable pay on recruitment excluding buyouts would be subject to the maximums in line with the ongoing incentive policy maximums set out in the Policy table being 150% of salary for annual bonus and 300% of salary for the LTIP.
In the event that an individual is internally promoted to the Board including if an Executive Director is appointed following an acquisition or merger the Company would normally honour all legacy arrangements in line with their original terms.
Buyouts
To facilitate recruitment the Committee may make compensatory payments andor awards for any remuneration arrangements subject to forfeit on leaving a previous employer.
Any buyout would take into consideration the terms of the arrangement being forfeited and would take into account all relevant factors such as the form expected value performance conditions anticipated vesting and timing of the forfeited remuneration.
There is no limit on the value of such awards but the Committees intention is that the value awarded would be no more than the commercial value forfeited.
Recruitment of Nonexecutive Directors On the appointment of a new Chairman or Nonexecutive Director remuneration arrangements will be consistent with the Policy set out in this report.
Service contracts  Executive Directors The dates of the current contracts in place for the Executive Directors are as follows Executive Director Date of contract M S Weiner 23 July 2015 R Upton 19 May 2014 M O Shepherd 23 July 2015 The Executive Directors service contracts do not specify an expiry date and may be terminated upon twelve months notice by either the Director or the Company.
In the event of early termination a payment in lieu of notice may be made which may include salary pension and benefits.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Companys policy on termination payments is to consider the circumstances on a casebycase basis taking into account the relevant contractual provisions the circumstances of termination and any applicable duty to mitigate.
An Executive Director may be hired on a contract that has a longer notice period up to 18 months during an initial predetermined period.
The Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors have letters of appointment rather than service contracts.
Details of the dates of appointment are set out below Nonexecutive Director Date of appointment N H Thomlinson 3 January 2012 B Bennett 19 May 2014 P W Williams Chairman 4 January 2016 L G Krige 10 March 2016 The Nonexecutive Directors appointments are terminable at the will of the parties but are envisaged to establish an initial term of three years after which they will be reviewed annually.
The notice periods are currently twelve months in the case of the Chairman and six months for other Nonexecutive Directors.
The Executive Directors service contracts and the Nonexecutive Directors letters of appointment are available at the Companys registered office from the Company Secretary.
Policy on payment for loss of office Where an Executive Director leaves employment the Committees approach to determining any payment for loss of office will normally be based on the following principles The Committees objective is to find an outcome which is in the best interests of both the Company and its shareholders while taking into account the specific circumstances of cessation of employment.
The Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with an Executive Directors cessation of office or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of a compromise or settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of an Executive Directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any reasonable level of fees for outplacement assistance andor the Executive Directors legal or professional advice fees in connection with his cessation of office or employment.
The Committee may make an annual bonus payment for the year of cessation depending on the reason for leaving.
Typically the Committee will take into consideration the period served during the year and the individual and the Companys performance up to cessation.
Any such payment is at the discretion of the Committee.
The treatment of outstanding share awards will be governed by the relevant plan rules as set out in the table below.
For the purposes of this table good leaver reasons include but are not limited to cessation due to illhealth redundancy retirement death and any other reason at the discretion of the Committee.
If awards are made on recruitment such as buyouts the treatment on leaving would be determined at that time.
Remuneration policy continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ONGOING PLANS PLAN TREATMENT ON CESSATION OF EMPLOYMENT LongTerm Incentive Plan Unvested awards will normally lapse in full unless a participant is a good leaver.
If the Committee determines that a participant is a good leaver it will determine the proportion of the award that vests to the extent that any performance condition is satisfied on the vesting date and it will take into account the time elapsed between the start of the performance period and cessation of employment unless it determines otherwise.
The vesting date for such awards will normally be the original vesting date although the Committee has the flexibility to determine that awards can vest early upon cessation of employment or at a later date.
In the event of death awards vest on cessation.
Where options are granted vested options will typically remain exercisable for twelve months from the date of vesting.
In the event of death awards remain exercisable for 24 months.
Where an individual leaves during the holding period of an award the award will usually be released at the normal time except in the case of death or if the Committee disapplies the holding period.
In the event of an individuals dismissal for misconduct during the holding period all awards will lapse.
HMRC approved all employee share plans In line with the HMRC approved plan rules.
LEGACY PLAN PLAN TREATMENT ON CESSATION OF EMPLOYMENT Development Profit Plan Awards will normally lapse in full unless a participant is a good leaver.
If a participant is treated as a good leaver and ceases employment before the bonus is paid the Committee may decide that some or all of the participants bonus is paid to him at the same time as they are paid to other participants.
Consideration of pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Company The Committee considers pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Company when developing policies for Executive Directors.
The Committee does not view formal comparison metrics when considering policy.
However the Committee is kept updated and has input into the remuneration decisions for the wider employee population.
For example the Committee will typically review the annual bonuses for all employees.
Consideration of shareholder views We consulted with our major shareholders in advance of the renewal of our Policy at the 2017 AGM and the proposed Policy has been shaped by the recent dialogue with our shareholders.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual remuneration report
ANNUAL REMUNERATION REPORT
The remainder of this report provides details of remuneration for the financial year ended 28 February 2017 and how our Policy will be implemented for the financial year commencing 1 March 2017.
Implementation of Remuneration Policy in the financial year commencing 1 March 2017 The table below provides an overview of the components of the remuneration framework for all Executive Directors Fixed pay  Annual bonus  LTIP As discussed in previous years transitional arrangements are in place for legacy plans.
No further awards will be made to Executive Directors under the Development Profit
No payments will be made in respect of profits realised after 1 March 2018.
Salary
The salaries which will apply for the financial year beginning 1 March 2017 are set out below 1 March 2017 1 March 2016 000 % increase M S Weiner 375 375 0.0% R Upton 350 350 0.0% M O Shepherd 325 325 0.0% This represents the second consecutive year for which we have not increased salaries.
Retirement benefits The existing money purchase pension scheme is now closed to future contributions and new joiners and pension is provided via a Group Personal Pension Plan.
The contribution structure for Executive Directors is 17.5% of salary for the financial year commencing 1 March 2017.
Annual bonus Last year the Committee moved to an annual bonus structure with financial and strategicpersonal targets set at the beginning of each year.
The targets set for 201617 are disclosed in the incentive outturns section on pages For 201718 we will continue with this structure.
The performance measures and weightings for the 201718 annual bonus are set out below.
Measure Weighting
NAV growth 30%
Nonfinancial and strategic
In the interests of transparency we intend to disclose the financial targets for the 201718 financial year including threshold and maximum and our performance against them in next years report.
Annual bonus opportunities for the financial year beginning 1 March 2017 are shown below.
Bonus amounts above target are held as shares for a period of two years.
On target bonus for year as a percentage of salary % Maximum bonus for year as a percentage of salary % M S Weiner 37.5 75 R Upton 37.5 75 M O Shepherd 37.5 75 LongTerm Incentive Plan Awards of 300% of salary will be made to M S Weiner and R Upton.
M O Shepherd will receive an award of 100% of salary.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Awards will be subject to UIs NAV growth 50% measured over a threeyear period and 50% measured over a fouryear period as outlined below Targets at years three and four
Fouryear cumulative targets Threshold vesting 20% of maximum 5% p.
15.8% 21.6% Maximum vesting 100% of maximum 12% p.
40.5% 57.4% Prorated vesting will occur for performance between these points.
For awards following 1 March 2017 the holding period will be extended such that the entire award will have a combined performance and holding period of five years.
Awards will be subject to a risk underpin.
For awards to vest the Committee must be satisfied that performance has not been achieved as a result of inappropriate financial risk e. stated strategy.
Clawback and malus In line with the revised 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code incentive awards made following 1 March 2016 are subject to both malus and clawback.
Clawback andor malus provisions may be applied at the discretion of the Committee if an exceptional event occurs such as a material misstatement of results serious misconduct or an errormaterial misstatement resulting in overpayment.
Malus provisions may also be applied in the event of serious reputational damage to the Company or a material failure of risk management.
Clawback provisions will apply to the annual bonus for up to two years following the payment of cashshares.
For LTIP awards malus and clawback provisions may be applied for up to five years post grant.
Transitional arrangements The remuneration framework that has applied since 1 March 2015 involved a significant departure from our historical approach which has been focused on cashbased profit plans.
As previously reported to balance fairness to participants and shareholders as well as reflect legacy contractual entitlements transitional arrangements will apply as outlined below.
Development Profit Plan While no new awards will be made under this plan or have been made since 1 March 2015 payments in respect of profits realised up to 1 March 2018 may be made.
Awards become payable once profits have been realised on a development project.
The maximum bonus pool available for distribution to Executive Directors and the wider team is 10.0% of the realised profit for each development.
This is calculated once a notional cost of equity of 12.5% is deducted so that the pool generated only relates to profits over and above a threshold return.
In 2013 the concept of netting off was introduced for all projects from August 2009 so that any realised and unrealised losses in respect of an Executive Directors portfolio will be taken into account when a profit is realised on a project.
Projects prior to 2009 and certain other legacy projects are excluded.
Performance Share Plan Historic awards made under the PSP will continue to run and will vest on their normal vesting date subject to the satisfaction of the required performance conditions.
No further awards will be made under the PSP.
The performance period for the final award made under the PSP ended on 28 February 2017.
Savingsrelated option scheme Executive Directors will continue to participate in our Save As You Earn Option Plan on the same basis as other employees.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Nonexecutive Directors fees Fees for the financial year commencing 1 March 2017 are set out in the table below 1 March 2017 1 March 2016 Chairman 120 105 Basic fee 42 40 Chairman of Audit or Remuneration Committee 7.5 7.5 Membership of Audit or Remuneration Committee 5 5 Senior Independent Director 5 5 Single total figure of remuneration audited The table below sets out the total remuneration receivable by each of the Directors who held office for the year to 28 February 2017 with a comparison to the previous financial year Executive Directors Fees and salary
Pension
Annual bonus
PSP
Total
M S Weiner  1197 0 1633 R Upton    587 M O Shepherd Nonexecutive Directors P W Williams 2017 94      94 N H Thomlinson 2017 57      57 2016 53      53 B Bennett 2017 41      41 2016 40      40 L G Krige 2017 50      50 D S Jenkins 2017 40      40 2016 105      105 S C Bates 2017 21      21 2016 58      58 Benefits received during the year include motor vehicles cash in lieu of motor vehicle fuel and medical insurance Pension contributions received during the year include contributions to the Companys approved scheme or cash supplements DPP figure relates to awards on projects realised during the year.
Awards on projects are subject to netting off P W Williams became a Nonexecutive Director of the Company on 4 January 2016 he became Chairman of the Company following the 2016 AGM at which point his fees increased from 50000 basic Nonexecutive Director fee and fee for membership of the Audit and Risk Committee and the Remuneration Committee to 120000 as set out in last years Annual Report N H Thomlinson took over the position of Senior Independent Director following the 2016 AGM on 14 July 2016 L G Krige became a Nonexecutive Director of the Company on 10 March 2016 and also became a member of the Audit and Risk Committee on this date she became Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee and a member of the Remuneration Committee following the 2016 AGM D S Jenkins resigned as Chairman and S C Bates resigned as a Nonexecutive Director following the 2016 AGM on 14 July 2016 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Incentive outturns Annual bonus As disclosed last year from 1 March 2016 we moved to an annual bonus structure with financial and strategicpersonal targets set at the beginning of each year.
The tables below provide details of financial targets and our performance against them Financial targets  60% of total bonus award The financial measures and targets were as follows NAV growth 30%
20% payout
100% payout NAV per share growth achieved For year ended 28 Feb 2017 % of actual payout for NAV growth maximum 30% NAV per share growth including dividends 5% 12% 0.2% 0 Payouts are calculated on a straightline basis between threshold and maximum performance.
For target performance 50% of maximum this is growth of 7.6% per annum Development and trading gains 30% Targets Actual performance and payout 0% payout 50% payout 75% payout 100% payout Development and trading gains for the year ended 28 Feb 2017 % of actual payout for Development and trading gains maximum 30% Development and trading gains 37.8m 40.7m 42m 46.2m 35m 0 Payouts are calculated on a straightline basis between performance points Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nonfinancial targets  40% of total bonus award Personal objectives were set at the beginning of the year which focused on both the delivery of strategic priorities for 201617 and the longer term.
M S Weiner Development of joint venture property strategies and development of key relationships Two new specialist platforms established with existing capital partners giving UI increased capital deployment capacity of c.
Successful implementation of shareholder engagement and communication plan with continued stake building by new shareholders.
Asset optimisation strategy Contribution towards strategy in respect of asset management optimisation.
Operational strategy testing Implementation and regular testing of strategy within operational parameters including introduction of Board strategy days.
Revised guidance at Interims post Brexit shock and a complete business plan review.
Strategic leadership for vision and values Enhanced employee engagement and success in internal communications including positive reaction to Discovery Workshop.
Continued low levels of staff turnover.
Full staff engagement programme and new performance management system implemented allowing for greater scrutiny of individual performance against objectives.
New organisational structure Implementation of new organisational structure including revised team roles reporting lines and senior hires at Executive Committee to improve the resilience and operational efficiency of the business.
Annual bonus % of salary 20.1 R Upton Lead stakeholder engagement programme Principal spokesperson on all public affairs matters including several high profile speaking engagements.
Public profile instrumental in building the Companys reputation in the PPP space with Mayfield project win being of particular significance and a consequence of the increased profile.
Identification and securing of new PPP projects During the year the Company won four new major projects with GDV in excess of 1.5bn and profit potential in excess of 90m.
Short and longterm development programme Partial achievement against longterm development planning objectives.
Two major planning consents secured.
Establishment of a PRS specialist platform vehicle Abortive negotiations with a Registered Provider.
Leadership of a revised marketing campaign to select a longterm capital partner.
Annual bonus % of salary 19.8 Annual remuneration report continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 100% of any annual bonus awarded which is above Target 50% of the maximum opportunity will be paid in shares which the recipient must hold for at least two years.
No bonus payments payable for the year ended 28 February 2017 exceeded the 50% of maximum opportunity therefore all bonus payments will be paid in cash.
When determining annual bonuses and awards under the DPP there is no doublecounting.
The contribution of any team or individual performance which leads to awards under the DPP is disregarded for the purpose of the annual bonus.
M O Shepherd
Successful refinancing and progress with shortterm financing objectives and negotiation of revised longterm facility.
Achievement against debt maturity interest rate and funding diversification objectives.
Cost saving and business simplification programme Identification and implementation of overhead reduction strategy.
Simplification of Companys off shore holding structure leading to both financial and efficiency savings.
Successful implementation of corporate rationalisation project with 34 companies liquidated during the year.
Investor relations Improved IR process and communications materials.
Building relationships with new investors.
Strengthening the control environment and audit process Achievement against objectives in relation to improved control environment and audit process efficiencies.
Business plan monitoring Progress against business plan monitoring objectives taking overall responsibility for managing output against objectives.
Annual bonus % of salary 19.5 In light of both corporate and individual performance the Committee determined the following bonus awards be made for the year ended 28 February 2017 Executive Director Total award % of maximum Total award % of salary Total bonus award M S Weiner 26.8 20.1 75 R Upton 26.4 19.8 69 M O Shepherd 26 19.5 63 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Development Profit Plan The table below provides further information on M S Weiners DPP incentive outturns and targets realised during the year.
In all cases the threshold is based on achievement of a notional cost of equity of 12.5%.
Project
Threshold target Actual profit DPP award Barnstaple Phase 1  Residual Profit 247 625 DPP  9 Abbey Wood Profit 1245 8374 DPP  321 Wick Lane Profit 781 10240 DPP  525
Profit 1182 7243 DPP  201 Percy Place Profit 1024 3386 DPP  142 Performance Share Plan Awards were made under the PSP in 2014 subject to the Companys relative total shareholder return TSR performance and growth in NAV per share over the period 1 March 2014 to 28 February 2017.
UIs TSR performance was below the median of the comparator group the Companys NAV per share growth was below the required threshold therefore the 2014 PSP award lapsed in full.
This was the final award made under this plan.
Annual remuneration report continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Payments madeawards granted during the year Development Profit Plan audited As previously detailed no further awards have been or will be made to Executive Directors under the Development Profit Plan after 1 March 2015.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP audited On 9 June 2016 awards were made under the LTIP as follows Executive Director Type Number of shares Face value % of salary
End of performance periods % vesting at threshold M S Weiner Conditional share award 588697 300 %
28 Feb 2019 29 Feb 2020 20.0% R Upton 549450 300 M O Shepherd 170068 100 The face value has been calculated based on the share price of 191.10 pence taken on 9 June 2016 as an average of the closing midmarket price from the preceding five days Awards are subject to UIs NAV per share growth including dividends 50% measured over a threeyear period and 50% measured over a four year period see page 84 for further information Executive Directors shareholdings audited Executive Directors are subject to a shareholding requirement of one half basic salary within two years of appointment rising to an amount equivalent to one times basic salary after four years.
Executive Directors will be subject to an additional shareholding requirement of two times basic salary for the CEO and one and a half times basic salary for the Deputy CEO and CFO.
50% of net vested shares will be retained until these guidelines are achieved.
Executive Directors participating in the Companys focused profit plans are also subject to an additional shareholding requirement.
Where payments under the profit plans exceed 1.0 million in a financial year two thirds of the payment above 1.0 million will be made in shares.
This will apply if the Executive Directors shareholding is less than two times salary.
The amount paid in shares will be subject to a twoyear retention period.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual remuneration report continued The interests of all the Directors together with interests held by his or her connected persons all of which were beneficial in the share capital of the Company are Executive Director Shares owned outright as at 28 February 2017 % of shareholding guideline achieved
Interest in shares options subject to continued employment only M S Weiner 298736 143 961776 10044 R Upton 3006034 1537 922529 0 M O Shepherd 158301 87 259223 10044 Nonexecutive Director P W Williams 50000  0 0 N H Thomlinson 20000  0 0 B Bennett 35000  0 0 L Krige 0  0 0 Including shares held by connected persons Calculation derived from the market value of 179 pence per share and Directors salary as at 28 February 2017 Historical total shareholder return performance TSR The graphs below demonstrate the Companys TSR performance over eight financial periods as represented by share price growth plus reinvested dividends against both the FTSE Real Estate Investment Trust Index and the FTSE Real Estate Investment Services Index.
The Company is a constituent of the FTSE Real Estate Investment Services Index but a number of constituents of the FTSE Real Estate Investment Trust Index are also considered as within the Companys peer group.
20tel50 Dec 08
Feb 15 Feb 16 Feb 17 Dec 09 Dec 10 Feb 12 Feb 13 Feb 14 FTSE Real Estate Investment Trust Index UI FTSE Real Estate Investment Services Index Dec 08 Feb 15 Feb 16 Feb 17 Dec 09 Dec 10 Feb 12 Feb 13 Feb 14 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chief Executives remuneration for previous eight years The table below shows the total remuneration figure for the Chief Executive for the same eightyear period as the TSR chart on page 100.
The annual bonus and LTIP percentages show the payout for each year as a percentage of the maximum opportunity.
1tel 2016 2017 M H
M S
Single total figure of remuneration 000 76tel882 1002 257 1633 1723 Annual bonus % of maximum  86.7  59 26.8 LTIP PSP vesting % of maximum       18 18 As a result of the change in the Companys yearend amounts shown for 2012 are in respect of a 14month period ending 29 February 2012 whereas all the other amounts are in respect of a twelvemonth financial period M H Marxs figure relates to both the time he was Chief Executive of the Company from 1 March 2015 to 14 July 2015 and from 15 July 2015 to 29 February 2016 when he received a basic fee as a Nonexecutive Director M S Weiners figure relates to both the time he was a Executive Director of the Company from 1 March 2015 to 14 July 2015 and from 15 July 2015 to 29 February 2016 when he was Chief Executive of the Company Percentage change in Chief Executives remuneration The table below sets out in relation to salary taxable benefits and annual bonus the percentage change in remuneration in relation to the Chief Executive compared to the wider workforce Chief Executive % change
Salary 0 5.9 Taxable benefits 4.5 11 Annual bonus 52.9 33.4 Relative importance of spend on pay The following table sets out the overall expenditure on pay and total dividends paid in the year.
2017 2016 % change
7381 7372 0.1 Supplemental dividend Overall expenditure on pay 13525 13503 0.1 These figures have been extracted from Note 7 to the Consolidated financial statements on page 144 A supplemental dividend of 8.00 pence per share amounting to 9997000 for 2016 was declared post 2016 year end and therefore not deducted from net assets in 2016.
A supplemental dividend of 2.80 pence per share amounting to 3506000 for 2017 was declared post 2017 year end and therefore not deducted from the net assets in 2017 These figures have been extracted from Note 4 to the Consolidated financial statements on page 141 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Role and constitution of the Committee The Committees full terms of reference are set out on the Companys website site and are available on request from the Company Secretary.
Its principal role is to determine the total remuneration of the Executive Directors and to ensure that senior management remuneration is consistent with corporate policy.
Advisors
The Committee sought professional advice from external remuneration consultant Deloitte LLP which is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting.
The Committee is satisfied that the advice it receives is objective and independent.
Deloittes fees for providing advice to the Committee amounted to 48450.
Representatives of Deloitte LLP attended four meetings of the Committee by invitation.
During the year Deloitte LLP also provided services to the Company in relation to planning and development real estate advice.
M S Weiner Chief Executive provided recommendations in respect of the remuneration of the other Executive Directors but was not in attendance when his own remuneration was discussed.
The Remuneration Committee as constituted by the Board The Committee met five times in the year under review.
Committee members Joined the Committee on Considered independent Nonexecutive Director Number of meetings attended number of meetings possible % attendance N H Thomlinson Chairman 03.01.12 Yes 55 100 P W Williams L Krige D S Jenkins S C Bates Chairman independent on appointment L Krige was appointed as a member of the Committee following the AGM on 14 July 2016 D S Jenkins and S C Bates left the Committee following the AGM on 14 July 2016 Following the Board evaluation process the effectiveness of the Committee was reviewed and the Committee was considered to be operating effectively.
No member has any personal financial interest in the matters to be decided.
Annual remuneration report continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Statement of voting at the last Annual General Meeting The Company remains committed to ongoing shareholder dialogue and takes an active interest in voting outcomes.
The following table sets out the actual voting in respect of the advisory vote to approve the Annual Report on Remuneration at the Companys AGM on 14 July 2016 as well as the binding vote to approve the Remuneration Policy at the Companys AGM on 16 July 2014.
Votes for % of vote Votes against % of vote Votes witheld Approve Remuneration Report 2016 AGM 84526106 82.74 17628011 17.26 6095 Approve Remuneration Policy 2014 AGM 96066754 85.47 16327899 14.53 76616 One of our largest shareholders operates a general policy of voting against remuneration reports and policies where for longterm incentives the performance period plus holding period is less than five years.
At the time of the above votes our performance plus holding period for the LTIP was five years for two thirds of the award.
As a result of its voting policy guidelines it was unable to support our Remuneration Policy at the 2014 AGM or the implementation of our Policy at the 2016 AGM.
This had a significant impact on the overall voting outturn at both AGMs.
Our revised Policy updates the holding period so that the combined performance and holding period for the entire LTIP award is five years.
Incentive awards outstanding at year end audited Details of incentive awards outstanding at the year end are shown in the tables below Performance Share PlanLongTerm Incentive Plan Date of grant Market price at date of grant Pence per share 29 February Number of shares Granted Lapsed Exercised 28 February Number of shares
M S Weiner 05.06.15 273.40 373079    373079 05.06.1819 M O Shepherd 22.05.14 244.00 66598    66598 28.02.17 05.06.15 273.40 89155    89155 05.06.1819 R Upton 05.06.15 273.40 373079    373079 05.06.1819 The new LTIP introduced for the year beginning 1 March 2015 replaced the previous Performance Share Plan.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Save as You Earn SAYE audited 29 February Number of shares Granted Lapsed Exercised 28 February Number of shares
Market price at exercise pence per share Gain on exercise Date from which exercisable
M S Weiner 10044    10044 179.20   01.02.18 31.07.18 M O Shepherd 10044    10044 179.20   01.02.18 31.07.18 These options are not subject to performance conditions.
The options may be exercised after three years at a price not less than 80.0% of the market value of the shares at the time of invitation.
Development Profit Plan audited Awards granted in previous years Project M S Weiner Airport House Croydon 6.50% Axis Tower Manchester 6.00% Barwood  BDSL 7.00% Barwood  BLEL 7.00% Beyond Green Norwich 6.00% Beyond Green Pincents Hill 7.00% Vertium Dublin 6.50% Cathedral Projects 5.00% Chill Factor Manchester 5.00% Deeley Freed 6.00% Donnybrook House Dublin 6.50% Friarsgate Shopping Centre Lichfield 1.00% Kensington Church Street London 6.00% Luneside Lancaster 10.00% Morden Wharf Greenwich 6.00% Robswall Dublin 5.50% Shepherds Bush Market London 5.50% South Woodham Ferrers Essex 4.50% The Movement Greenwich 7.00% The Old Vinyl Factory Hayes 6.00% Valentines House Ilford 6.50% Wessex Launceston 2.00% Wind Farms 5.00% Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Nick Thomlinson Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 26 April 2017 Annual remuneration report continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors report The Directors present their report and the audited Consolidated financial statements for the financial year ended 28 February 2017.
This report contains forwardlooking statements.
These statements are not guarantees of future performance rather they are based on current views and assumptions and involve known and unknown risks uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results to differ from any future results or developments expressed or implied from the forwardlooking statements.
Principal activities The principal activity of the Company is that of a holding company.
The principal activities of the Group during the year were property investment and development investment and trading.
Incorporation
U and I Group PLC is incorporated in Great Britain and registered in England and Wales registration number Business review and future developments A review of the Groups operations the Companys business model the current state of the business and future prospects including financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators and principal risks and uncertainties is contained within the Strategic Report and should be read in conjunction with this report.
Further details of the financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators the principal risks and the information which comprises the business review as required by Section  of the Companies Act 2006 may be found in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 54.
Results and dividends The loss for the financial year attributable to shareholders amounted to 3003000 2016 21828000 profit.
An interim Ordinary dividend of 3003000 representing 2.40 pence per Ordinary share was paid on 25 November 2016 27 November 2015 2999000 representing 2.40 pence per Ordinary share.
The Board recommends a final Ordinary dividend of 3.50 pence per Ordinary share amounting to 4379000 payable on 17 August 2017 to shareholders on the register at 21 July 2017 19 August 2016 4378000 representing 3.50 pence per Ordinary share.
A further supplemental dividend of 2.80 pence per Ordinary share was announced to market on 26 April 2017 amounting to 3506000 payable on 16 June 2017 to shareholders on the register at 12 May 2017 .
Subject to shareholder approval this makes a total dividend declared of 8.70 pence per Ordinary share for the financial year 2016 13.90 pence per Ordinary share.
Further information on the Companys dividend policy can be found on page 46.
Group structure Details of the Groups subsidiary undertakings are disclosed in note 41 to the Company financial statements on pages Operations outside the UK The Group currently operates or has subsidiaries associates or joint ventures which are located in the Netherlands Luxembourg and Ireland.
Share capital The Companys issued share capital at 28 February 2017 consisted of 125107948 Ordinary shares of 50 pence each and 118792 shares held in treasury which do not have a dividend or voting entitlement.
During the period under review the Company allotted 152460 shares to members of staff in connection with the exercise of options under the Performance Share Plan.
These shares were allotted from the block listing maintained in respect of these options.
At the date of this report 125226740 Ordinary shares of 50 pence each have been issued including 118792 shares held in treasury are fully paid up and are quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
The Companys share capital represents a single class of shares with all shares ranking equally and fully paid.
Details of the share capital are set out in note 19 to the Consolidated financial statements on pages 170 and 171.
The rights and obligations attaching to the shares are specified in the Companys Articles of Association or alternatively may be governed by statute.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of shares in the Company other than those specified by law or regulation.
There are no restrictions on voting rights other than as specified by the Articles of Association.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors report continued Three resolutions relating to share capital will be proposed as Special Business at the forthcoming Annual General
The full text of the resolutions can be found in the Notice of the Annual General Meeting.
At a General Meeting of the Company every member has one vote on a show of hands and on a poll one vote for each share held.
The Notice of General Meeting specifies deadlines for exercising voting rights either by proxy or being present in person in relation to the resolutions proposed at the General Meeting.
Purchase of the Companys shares At the Annual General Meeting held on 14 July 2016 members authorised the Company to make market purchases of up to 12507428 of its own Ordinary shares of 50 pence each.
That authority expires at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting of the Company on 11 July 2017 when a resolution will be put to shareholders to renew it so as to allow purchases of up to a maximum of no more than 10% of the Companys issued share capital.
No shares in the Company have been purchased by the Company in the period from 14 July 2016 the date the current authority was granted to the date of this report.
The Company currently holds 118792 shares in treasury.
Change of control The Group has entered into significant agreements with its commercial partners which contain change of control clauses and which may give rise to termination or renegotiation in that event.
If enforced the Company may be deprived of potential future earning capacity from such schemes.
The Company is party to a number of committed bank facilities which upon a change of control are terminable at the banks discretion.
In addition under such circumstances the Companys share option schemes would normally vest or become exercisable subject to the satisfaction of the performance conditions.
Takeover directive Details of the required disclosure under the Takeover Directive can be found in this Directors Report and also in the Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 104 and are incorporated herein by crossreference.
Corporate governance The Companys statement on corporate governance can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on page 61 of the Annual Report.
The Corporate Governance Report forms part of this report and is incorporated into it by crossreference.
Share option schemes On 22 December 2014 a grant was made under the Save As You Earn Option Plan 2005 for a total of 321275 options over shares at 179.2 pence per share to 57 members of staff.
All employees of the Company are eligible to participate in the Save As You Earn Option Plan.
Further details of the share option schemes are contained in note 19 to the Consolidated financial statements.
Directors
The Directors serving during the year and up to the date of signing the Group financial statements were as follows P W Williams Chairman from 14 July 2016.
Independent Nonexecutive Director 4 January 2016  14 July 2016 M S Weiner Chief Executive Officer R Upton Deputy Chief Executive Officer M O Shepherd Chief Financial Officer N H Thomlinson Independent Nonexecutive Director B Bennett Nonexecutive Director L G Krige Independent Nonexecutive Director appointed 10 March 2016 D Jenkins Resigned as Chairman on 14 July 2016 S Bates Resigned as Nonexecutive Director on 14 July 2016 Biographical details of the Directors as at 28 February 2017 are shown on page 59.
All Directors will retire at the 2017 Annual General Meeting and being eligible will offer themselves for reelection see page 71.
The Directors are voluntarily offering themselves for reelection as a matter of best practice in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Following the performance evaluation of the Board all Directors were judged to have made a significant contribution to the Boards deliberations reflecting their commitment to the role.
The rules that the Company has governing the appointment and replacement of Directors are contained in its Articles of Association.
Conflicts of interest Under the Companies Act 2006 a Director must avoid a situation where he or she has or can have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or possibly may conflict with the Companys interests.
The Directors are required to notify the Board as soon as they become aware of any actual or potential conflicts of interest with their duties to the Company or of any material changes in any existing actual or potential conflicts that may have been authorised by the Board.
No significant conflicts of interest arose during the year under review.
Directors service contracts and interests in the Companys shares The details of Directors service contracts and the interests in the shares of the Company of the Directors who were in office as at 28 February 2017 are disclosed in the Remuneration Policy and Remuneration Report on pages None of the Directors had any material interest in any contract that was significant in relation to the Groups business at any time during the year other than a service contract and as disclosed in the Remuneration Report.
Related party transactions Related party transactions between the Directors and the Company are set out in note 25 on page 175.
Directors and Officers liability insurance Article 153 of the Companys Articles of Association provides among other things that insofar as permitted by law every Director shall be indemnified by the Company against all costs charges expenses losses or liabilities incurred in the execution and discharge of the Directors duties power or office.
The Company maintains at its expense a Directors and Officers liability insurance policy at an adequate level which is reviewed annually.
This insurance policy does not provide cover where a Director or Officer is proved to have acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
This third party indemnity insurance was in force during the financial year and also at the date of approval of the financial statements.
Articles of Association The Articles of Association may be amended by a Special Resolution of the shareholders.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting will be held on 11 July 2017 at 12 noon at 7A Howick Place London SW1P 1DZ.
At the Annual General Meeting the following resolutions will be proposed Ordinary Resolution 1  Report and Accounts The Directors will present the financial statements and Reports of the Directors and Auditors for the financial year ended 28 February 2017.
Ordinary Resolutions 2 and 3  To approve the Directors Remuneration Report and Policy In accordance with the directors remuneration reporting regime as set out in Schedule 8 to the Large and Medium sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended the Companys 2017 Directors Remuneration Report comprises the Remuneration Committee Chairmans Annual Statement the Annual Report on Remuneration the Annual Remuneration Report and the Directors Remuneration Policy the Policy.
Resolution 2 seeks shareholder approval for the Annual
Remuneration Report.
This is set out on pages 92 to 104 of the Annual Report and sets out details on how our Directors were paid in the financial year ended 28 February 2017 and how their pay will be structured in the financial year ending 28 February 2018.
The Annual Remuneration Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors report continued Report will be prepared on an annual basis and is subject to an advisory shareholder vote.
Resolution 3 seeks shareholder approval for the Policy as set out on pages 81 to 91 this is a binding vote.
The Policy was previously approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM and was effective from 1 March 2015.
The Policy if approved will take effect from 11 July 2017 following the 2017 AGM and will apply until replaced by a new or amended Policy.
The Policy is subject to a shareholder vote at least once every three years.
Once the Policy is effective the Company will not be able to make remuneration or loss of office payments to a current or past Director unless the payment is consistent with the approved Policy or has been otherwise approved by shareholders.
Ordinary Resolutions 4 to 10  Reelection of Directors The Directors seek to maintain the highest standards of corporate governance and in accordance with the recommendations of the UK Corporate Governance Code those Directors elected or reelected at the 2016 Annual General Meeting will voluntarily retire and those wishing to serve again shall submit themselves for reelection by the shareholders at the 2017 Annual General Meeting.
The
Chairman is satisfied that following individual formal performance evaluations the performance of the Directors standing for reelection continues to be effective and demonstrates commitment to the role.
The Nomination Committee has considered each of the Nonexecutive Directors seeking reelection and concluded that their collective background skills experience independence and knowledge of the Company enables the Board and Committees to discharge their respective duties and responsibilities effectively.
The workings of the Board and Committees are more particularly detailed in the Corporate Governance section on pages 56 to 104.
Biographical details of all the Directors appear on page 59 of the Annual Report.
Ordinary Resolution 11  Declaration of final dividend A final dividend can only be paid after the shareholders at a general meeting have approved it.
A final dividend of 3.50 pence per Ordinary share is recommended by the Directors for payment to shareholders who are on the register at the close of business on 21 July 2017.
Ordinary Resolutions 12 and 13  Reappointment and remuneration of auditors Resolutions 12 and 13 propose the reappointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the Company and authorise the Directors to set their remuneration.
Special Resolution 14  Authority to purchase own shares The Company is seeking authority to purchase up to 10% of the Companys issued Ordinary share capital at or between the minimum and maximum prices specified in this Resolution.
This power would only be used after careful consideration by the Directors having taken into account market conditions prevailing at that time the investment needs of the Company its opportunity for expansion and its overall financial position.
The Directors have no present intention of making any market purchases of the Companys shares but if they believed such action would be in the best interests of shareholders and would enhance net assets or earnings per share they would consider exercising their authority.
As at 25 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to publication of the Notice of Annual General Meeting the Company has an unexpired authority to repurchase 12507428 Ordinary shares of which 12507428 Ordinary shares remain outstanding.
As at 25 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to publication of the Notice of the Annual General Meeting the total number of options to subscribe for shares in the capital of the Company was 228172 approximately 0.18% of the Companys issued share capital and approximately 0.20% of the Companys issued share capital if the full authority proposed by Resolution 14 was used.
Under the Companies Act 2006 the Company is allowed to hold its own shares in treasury following a buyback instead of cancelling them.
Such shares may be resold for cash or used for the purpose of employee share schemes but all rights attaching to them including voting rights and any right to receive dividends are suspended whilst they are held in treasury.
Accordingly if the Directors exercise the authority conferred by Resolution 14 the Company will have the option of holding these shares in treasury rather than cancelling them.
The authority sought at the Annual General Meeting will expire at the conclusion U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or on 1 September 2018 being the latest date by which the Company must hold an Annual General Meeting in 2018.
The Company currently holds 118792 shares in treasury.
Ordinary Resolution 15  Allotment of shares The Directors may only allot Ordinary shares or grant rights over Ordinary shares if authorised to do so by shareholders.
The authority granted to the Directors at the Companys previous Annual General Meeting in 2016 to allot shares or grant rights to subscribe for or convert any securities into shares is due to expire at the conclusion of this years Annual General Meeting.
Accordingly the Directors will be seeking new authority under Section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 to allot shares including treasury shares or grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares which will expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or on 1 September 2018 being the latest date by which the Company must hold an Annual General Meeting in 2018.
If passed paragraph a of Resolution 15 would give the Directors authority to allot Ordinary shares or grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into Ordinary shares up to an aggregate nominal amount of 20851325 representing approximately one third 33.33% of the Companys issued Ordinary share capital excluding shares held in treasury and calculated as at 25 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to publication of the Notice of the Annual General Meeting.
In accordance with the latest institutional guidelines issued by the Association of British Insurers ABI paragraph b of Resolution 15 if passed would give the Directors authority to allot further shares in connection with a fully preemptive offer by way of a rights issue to shareholders up to a further aggregate nominal amount of 20851325 representing approximately one third 33.33% of the Companys issued Ordinary share capital excluding shares held in treasury and calculated as at 25 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to publication of the Notice of the Annual General Meeting.
As at 25 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to publication of the Notice of the Annual General Meeting the Company held 118792 shares in treasury which represent approximately 0.10% of the total Ordinary share capital of the Company in issue excluding shares held in treasury.
The Directors are currently giving consideration to the possible exercise of this authority.
The Directors consider it desirable to have the maximum flexibility permitted by corporate governance guidelines to respond to market developments and to enable allotments to take place to finance business opportunities as they arise.
Accordingly the Directors intend to renew this authority annually.
Special Resolution 16  Disapplication of preemption rights Under Section  of the Companies Act 2006 if the Directors wish to allot any shares and other relevant securities grant rights over shares or sell treasury shares for cash other than in connection with an employee share scheme they must in the first instance offer them to existing shareholders in proportion to their holdings.
The Directors seek authority to renew the disapplication of shareholders preemptive rights.
The purpose of paragraph i of Resolution 16 is to authorise the Directors to allot any shares pursuant to the authority given by paragraph a of Resolution 15 for cash either a in connection with a pre emptive offer or rights issue or b otherwise up to an aggregate nominal value of 3130669 being equivalent to 5.0% of the total issued Ordinary share capital of the Company as at 25 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to publication of the Notice of the Annual General Meeting and which includes the sale on a nonpreemptive basis of any shares held in treasury in each case without the shares first being offered to existing members in proportion to their existing holdings.
The purpose of paragraph ii of Resolution 16 is to authorise the Directors to allot any shares pursuant to the authority given by paragraph b of Resolution 15 for cash in connection with a rights issue without the shares first being offered to existing members in proportion to their existing holdings.
This is in line with corporate governance guidelines issued by the Preemption Group.
The Board considers the authority sought to be appropriate in order to allow the Company flexibility to finance business opportunities or to conduct a preemptive offer or rights issue without the need to comply with the strict requirements of the statutory preemption provisions.
The Board intends to adhere to the provisions in the Preemption Groups Statement of Principles not to allot shares on a nonpreemptive basis other than pursuant to a rights issue or preemptive offer Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors report continued in excess of an amount equal to 7.5% of the total issued Ordinary share capital of the Company within a rolling threeyear period without prior consultation with shareholders.
Special Resolution 17  Notice period for general meetings The Companies Shareholders Rights Regulations 2009 increased the notice period for general meetings of a company to 21 clear days unless shareholders approve a shorter period which cannot be less than 14 clear days.
At the Annual General Meeting of the Company held on 14 July 2016 shareholders authorised the calling of general meetings other than an Annual General Meeting on not less than 14 clear working days notice.
Resolution 17 seeks the approval of shareholders to renew the authority to be able to call general meetings other than an Annual General Meeting on 14 clear days notice.
The shorter notice period would not be used as a matter of routine for general meetings but only where the flexibility is merited by the business of the meeting and is thought to be to the advantage of shareholders as a whole.
If the proposals at a given meeting are not time sensitive the Company will not normally use the shorter notice period.
The approval will be effective until the Companys next Annual General Meeting when it is expected that a similar resolution will be proposed.
It should also be noted that the changes to the Companies Act 2006 mean that in order to be able to call a general meeting on less than 21 clear days notice the Company must make a means of electronic voting available to all shareholders for that meeting.
Ordinary Resolution 18  Political donations Part 14 of the Companies Act 2006 amongst other things prohibits the Company and its subsidiaries from making political donations or from incurring political expenditure in respect of a political party or other political organisation or an independent election candidate unless authorised by the Companys shareholders.
Aggregate donations made by the Group of 5000 or less in any twelvemonth period will not be caught.
Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries has any intention of making any political donation or incurring any political expenditure.
However the Companies Act 2006 defines political organisation political party political donation and political expenditure widely.
Accordingly the Company wishes to ensure that neither it nor its subsidiaries inadvertently commits any breaches of the Companies Act 2006 through the undertaking of routine activities which would not normally be considered to result in the making of political donations and political expenditure being incurred.
The Resolution authorises the Company and its subsidiaries to make political donations to political parties or independent election candidates not exceeding 10000 in total make political donations to political organisations other than political parties not exceeding 10000 in total and incur political expenditure not exceeding 10000 in total provided that the aggregate amount of any such donations and expenditure shall not exceed 10000 during the period beginning with the date of the passing of the Resolution and ending on the date of the Companys next Annual General Meeting.
Financial risk management Disclosures in respect of financial risk management objectives and exposures are set out in note 17d to the Consolidated financial statements on pages 165 to 168.
Financial instruments Details of the financial instruments used by the Group and the Company are set out in note 17c to the Consolidated financial statements on pages 164 to 165.
Charitable and political donations Charitable donations during the year were 56244 2016 34350.
The Group supported a number of charities serving the community in which the Group operates.
These included national and local charitable organisations and covered a wide range of causes including education public services community support schemes and events organised on behalf of major charities.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant shareholdings Information provided to the Company pursuant to the Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR 5 is published on a Regulatory Information Service and on the Companys website.
As at 25 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to publication of the Annual Report the following information had been received in accordance with DTR 5 from holders of notifiable interests in the Companys issued share capital.
The information provided below was correct at the date of notification however the date the notification was received may not be within the financial year under review.
It should be noted that these holdings and percentage of share capital held are likely to have changed since the Company was notified.
Notification of any change is the responsibility of those with the notifiable interest and is not required until the next notifiable threshold has been crossed.
Holder Shares % holding FIL Limited 14883732 12.17 J O Hambro Capital Management 12533474 10.03 Aberdeen Asset Management plc 12498588 9.99 Aberforth Partners LLP 6479557 5.18 BMO Global Asset Management UK 5875946 4.71 Threadneedle Asset Management 5722553 4.68 Ennismore Fund Management Ltd 5149730 4.12 % holding at the time of notificationsiteinvestors for further information Human rights This report does not contain information about any policies of the Group in relation to human rights issues since it is not considered necessary for an understanding of the development performance or position of the Groups business activity due to the existing regulatory requirements in the UK.
The Company does have policies which adhere to internationally proclaimed human rights principles.
In the year to 28 February 2017 the Group is not aware of any incident in which the Groups activities have resulted in an abuse of human rights.
Employees
The Board acknowledges the importance of diversity in all forms and is committed to the principle of equal opportunity in employment.
Current and potential employees are offered the same opportunities regardless of gender gender reassignment race colour religion nationality ethnic origin age sexual orientation marital status or disability.
It is the Groups policy to apply best practice in the employment of disabled people including wherever possible the retraining and retention of staff who become disabled during their employment.
Details of the gender diversity within the Company as at 28 February 2017 can be found in the Sustainability Report on page 54.
Employee engagement The Group recognises the importance of the involvement of its employees and keeps them regularly informed on matters affecting them through various media including display of notices in communal areas memoranda and emails presentations meetings and the Companys website.
It is the Directors belief that employees are instrumental in the continued improvement in the Groups performance and they are committed to encouraging and facilitating the continuing professional development of employees to ensure they are equipped to perform their particular roles.
Training and development are provided and available to all employees.
The Company operates a number of share option schemes which seek to incentivise and reward employees for the sustainable creation of shareholder value over the longer term.
Independent auditors Our auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP  have indicated their willingness to continue in office.
The Board on the advice of the Audit and Risk Committee recommends their reappointment and a resolution that they be reappointed will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Post balance sheet events Details of events which have occurred since 28 February 2017 and up to the date of this report are disclosed in note 27 to the Consolidated financial statements on page 177.
Greenhouse gas emissions The Company has reported greenhouse gas GHG emissions in line with the requirements set out in the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013.
The Companys GHG emissions are reported based on an operational control boundary for sources of emissions falling within the Companys Consolidated financial statements.
The reporting period for GHG emissions is 1 March 2016 to 28 February 2017 which aligns with the financial reporting year covered by the Directors Report.
The Company has used the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition and Defra GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2016 for the financial year ended 28 February 2017 to calculate its GHG emissions.
Greenhouse Gas GHG Emissions Scope tCO
28 February 2017
29 February 2016 Scope 1 abd Scope 2 cd 1340 2624 Total 1688 3046 a.
Scope 1 covers emissions from direct combustion of fuel from operation of properties and companyowned vehicles b.
Fugitive emissions data from use of air conditioning was not available for this report in the absence of data it was considered that a reasonable estimation could not be calculated based on the limited information available c.
Scope 2 covers emission from electricity purchased for own use.
There were no purchases of heat steam and cooling for own use in the reporting period d.
Where gaselectricity consumption data was not available to cover all months of the reporting period an estimation of the emissions have been calculated using an average of gaselectricity consumption from the overall available data for properties within the reporting scope An intensity ratio of GHG emissions per square foot of investment property managed and property occupied by the Company is reported.
Intensity Ratio tCO esq.
Reporting year ended 28 February 2017
29 February 2016 GHG emissions per square foot of property occupied 0.005 0.005 GHG emissions per square foot of investment property managed 0.002 0.003 Disclosure of information to auditors Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of this report confirms that So far as heshe is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditors are unaware and Heshe has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken as a Director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Approved by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Chris Barton Company Secretary 26 April 2017 Directors report continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Directors remuneration report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Group financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Having taken advice from the Audit and Risk Committee the Directors consider that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names are listed on page 59 of the Directors Report confirm that to the best of each persons knowledge and belief the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and Company and the Strategic Report contained in the Annual Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website site Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
On behalf of the Board Matthew Weiner Marcus Shepherd
Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer
26 April 2017 Statement of Directors responsibilities Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of U and I Group PLC Report on the Group financial statements Our opinion In our opinion U and I Group PLCs Group financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 28 February 2017 and of its loss and cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
What we have audited The financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report comprise the Consolidated Balance Sheet as at 28 February 2017 the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year then ended the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement for the year then ended the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These are crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and applicable law.
Our audit approach
Audit scope Areas of focus
Overall Group materiality 4.4 million 2016 4.8 million which represents 0.75% of total assets.
Specific materiality of 0.8 million 2016 1.8 million which is calculated as 5% of profit before tax before net finance costs and investment property valuation movements.
All work in support of the Group audit opinion is performed by the Group audit team.
Valuation of investment properties.
Valuation of development and trading properties.
Recoverability of financial assets.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The scope of our audit and our areas of focus We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland.
We designed our audit by determining materiality and assessing the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
The risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit including the allocation of our resources and effort are identified as areas of focus in the table below.
We have also set out how we tailored our audit to address these specific areas in order to provide an opinion on the financial statements as a whole and any comments we make on the results of our procedures should be read in this context.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Valuation of investment properties The Groups investment properties were valued at 179.2 million as at 28 February 2017 and a revaluation loss of 9.5 million was accounted for under Loss on revaluation of property portfolio in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The portfolio consists of a variety of assets located throughout the UK and Ireland predominantly retail units and shopping centres.
The majority of valuations are carried out by third party valuers in accordance with the RICS Valuation  Professional Standards and IAS 40.
A small element of the portfolio 15.1 million is valued internally by the Directors.
There are significant judgements and estimates inherent in the valuation of the Groups investment properties.
Where available the valuations take into account evidence of market transactions for properties and locations comparable to those of the Groups properties.
The most significant judgements and estimates affecting all the valuations include yields and estimated rental value ERV growth as described in note 9 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The investment property portfolio is heavily dominated by retail assets with a number of shopping centres retail parades and a factory outlet.
Yields and ERVs have generally remained stable or improved in prime high street retail locations.
However secondary or tertiary locations and shopping centres have performed poorly in the year.
A majority of the revaluation loss of 9.5 million is attributable to shopping centres.
The valuers used by the Group are CBRE Limited.
They are a wellknown and established firm.
We assessed the competence and capabilities of the firm and verified their qualifications.
We also assessed their independence by discussing the scope of their work and reviewing the terms of their engagements for unusual terms or fee arrangements.
Based on this work we are satisfied that CBRE Limited remains independent and competent and that the scope of their work was appropriate.
We tested the data in the investment property valuation for a sample of properties including rental income acquisitions and capital expenditure data by agreeing this to the underlying property records held by the Group.
The underlying property records were themselves tested back to signed and approved lease contracts or salepurchase contracts and approved third party invoices as applicable.
We met with the external valuers independently of management and obtained the valuation reports for all material properties.
We read the valuation reports and confirmed that the valuation approach for each was in accordance with RICS Valuation  Professional Standards and IAS 40 and suitable for use in determining the carrying value for the purpose of the financial statements.
We involved our internal valuation specialists to compare the valuations of each property to our independently formed market expectations and to discuss and challenge the valuation methodology and assumptions.
In doing this we used evidence of comparable market transactions and focused in particular on properties where the growth in capital values was higher or lower than our expectations based on market indices.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Valuation of investment properties continued The existence of significant estimation uncertainty coupled with the fact that only a small percentage difference in individual property valuations when aggregated could result in material misstatement is why we have given specific audit focus and attention to this area.
Refer also to note 9 to the financial statements pages 146 to 149 in the Report of the Audit and Risk Committee and pages 73 to 77.
We found that yield rates and ERVs were predominantly consistent with comparable information for the location of the assets and assumptions appropriately reflected comparable market information.
Where assumptions fell outside of our expected range we assessed whether additional evidence presented in arriving at the final valuations was appropriate and whether this was corroborated by the external independent valuers where appropriate.
Variances were predominantly due to property specific factors such as assets under offer or tenants entering into administration.
We verified the movements to supporting documentation including evidence of comparable market transactions where appropriate.
We challenged the Directors on the movements in the valuations and found that they were able to provide explanations and appropriate supporting evidence.
Valuation of development and trading properties The Groups development and trading properties were valued at 208.3 million as at 28 February 2017.
These properties are held at the lower of cost and net realisable value in accordance with IAS 2  Inventory.
As qualifying costs are incurred on existing developments these are added to the asset balance.
The portfolio consists of a variety of assets located throughout the UK and Ireland and while several disposals were recorded during the year the portfolio includes certain assets acquired prior to the economic downturn of 2008 which could indicate a higher risk that the carrying value is higher than net realisable value.
In addition there are assets subject to significant judgements as a result of contractor and development risk assets acquired in 2016 and still held since which period the market has declined and assets valued by the external valuers below their carrying value.
The UK property market has seen falling capital values and ERVs during the year across many sectors and geographic locations increasing the risk of impairment across the portfolio due to market conditions.
A change in conditions for specific assets or a relatively small percentage change in the either the property or construction markets could result in a material impact to the financial statements.
Refer also to note 14 to the financial statements page 158 in the Report of the Audit and Risk Committee and pages Management performed an assessment of the net realisable value for each individual asset including producing and reviewing development appraisals.
We assessed the competence and capabilities of management and were satisfied that the individuals are sufficiently qualified.
We met with management to understand the status and future plans for each asset and challenge key assumptions inherent in the appraisals.
We also visited a sample of assets with management.
We sensitised cost and revenue assumptions on significant developments and compared assumptions to readily available market data and recent comparable market transactions.
Where applicable due to the advanced stage of the development we also agreed third party documentation supporting the book value through a review of preletting agreements forward sales quantity surveyor cost to complete estimates board minutes and planning consent forms.
Additionally we performed a lookback test comparing historic book values of assets to disposal proceeds following their sale.
There have been no significant losses made on disposals in recent years including assets previously subject to writedowns.
Based on this work we are satisfied with the evidence that development and trading properties are held at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Independent auditors report to the members of U and I Group PLC continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Area of focus How our audit addressed the area of focus Recoverability of financial assets The Group holds a number of loans with joint ventures associates and other third parties that must be assessed for recoverability at each period end.
Financial assets which include loans to joint ventures associates and other third parties totalled 38.4 million at 28 February 2017 split between 19.9 million in noncurrent and 18.5 million within current assets.
We focused on this area as the recoverability of the financial assets is assessed through cash flow models which can be complex with a number of different inputs and judgement involved.
There continues to be risk associated with certain financial assets and in particular the recoverability of the working capital and projectspecific loans to Northpoint Developments Limited which rely on a number of property developments being completed over the next five year period.
Refer also to note 17 to the financial statements and pages 73 to 77 in the Report of the Audit and Risk Committee.
We obtained managements assessment of the recoverability of the loans which includes cash flow projections over the next five years for each of the loans.
These projections are based on underlying property development appraisals.
We benchmarked and sensitised managements assumptions and expectations for future disposals including the comparison of expected sales prices to publically available market data and the benchmarking of future cost assumptions to current live developments within the portfolio.
We tested cash receipts received in relation to these loans during the year and post year end through to bank statements.
In relation to the loans to Northpoint Developments Limited we held discussions with management obtained the appraisals supporting the profitability of the underlying scheme and corroborated this to publicly available market data and costs incurred to date.
Based on this work we are satisfied that the financial assets are recoverable.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the geographic structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which the Group operates.
The Group is structured across over 200 statutory entities and joint ventures in the UK Republic of Ireland Jersey Guernsey the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
These statutory entities and joint ventures represent the reporting units which are included in the Group financial statements.
The preparation of the Group financial statements is managed on a consolidated basis and the audit team carries out all the work in support of the Group audit opinion and the consolidation for the purposes of the Group audit.
In establishing the overall approach to our audit we assessed the risk of material misstatement taking into account the nature likelihood or potential magnitude of any misstatement.
Following this assessment we applied professional judgement to determine the extent of testing required over each balance in the financial statements.
This work all of which was carried out by the Group audit team together with additional procedures performed on the consolidation gave us sufficient appropriate audit evidence for our opinion on the Group financial statements as a whole.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and on the financial statements as a whole.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall Group materiality 4.4 million 2016 4.8 million.
How we determined it Consistent with prior year 0.75% of total assets.
Specific materiality 0.8 million 2016 1.8 million.
How we determined it Consistent with prior year 5% of profit before tax before net finance costs and investment property valuation movements.
Rationale for benchmark applied The key driver of the business and determinant of the Groups value is direct property investments.
Due to this the key area of focus in the audit is the investment development and trading properties.
On this basis we set an overall Group materiality level based on total assets.
In addition a number of key performance indicators of the Group are driven by income statement items and we therefore also applied a lower specific materiality for testing determinants of profit excluding the revaluation movements of investment properties gain on disposal of investment properties and net finance costs.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 0.2 million 2016 0.3 million as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Directors statement set out on page 77 in relation to going concern.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to the Directors statement about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
As noted in the Directors statement the Directors have concluded that it is appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
The going concern basis presumes that the Group has adequate resources to remain in operation and that the Directors intend it to do so for at least one year from the date the financial statements were signed.
As part of our audit we have concluded that the Directors use of the going concern basis is appropriate.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted these statements are not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Other required reporting Consistency of other information and compliance with applicable requirements Companies Act 2006 reporting In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic report and the Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic report and the Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group the Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the Strategic report and the Directors report.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Corporate Governance Statement set out on page 60 with respect to internal control and risk management systems and about share capital structures is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements and the information given in the Corporate Governance Statement set out on page 60 with respect to the Companys corporate governance code and practices and about its administrative management and supervisory bodies complies with rules 7.2.2 7.2.3 and 7.2.7 of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules sourcebook of the Financial Conduct Authority.
Independent auditors report to the members of U and I Group PLC continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the information referred to above in the Corporate Governance Statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
ISAs UK and Ireland reporting Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
We have no exceptions to report.
C.1.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit.
We have no exceptions to report.
C.3.8 of the Code describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We have no exceptions to report.
The Directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or to draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation on page 75 of the Annual Report in accordance with provision C.2.1 of the Code that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to. they are being managed or mitigated.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and the Directors statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the Directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing our audit.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
Adequacy of accounting records and information and explanations received Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of the Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Corporate governance statement Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion a Corporate Governance Statement has not been prepared by the Company.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to ten further provisions of the Code.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Our responsibilities and those of the Directors As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 113 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
What an audit of financial statements involves An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the Strategic report and Directors report and Corporate Governance Statement we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
Other matter We have reported separately on the Company financial statements of U and I Group PLC for the year ended 28 February 2017 and on the information in the Directors remuneration report that is described as have been audited.
Julian Jenkins Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
26 April 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of U and I Group PLC continued U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes
Total
Revenue 2 123931 242282 Direct costs 2 86863 192430 Gross profit 2 37068 49852 Operating costs 2 22061 21752 Lossgain on disposal of investment properties 2 2273 440 Lossgain on revaluation of property portfolio 9 9506 229 Operating profit before exceptional item 3 3228 28769 Exceptional impairment of operating segment 2b 2150 Operating profit after exceptional item 3 1078 28769 Other income 1320 673 Share of posttax profits of joint ventures and associates 13b 6134 7127 Profit from sale of investment 567 2174 Loss on sale of other plant and equipment 25 87 Profit before interest and income tax 9074 38656 Finance income 5a 711 2483 Finance costs 5b 11495 15351 Lossprofit before income tax 1710 25788 Income tax 6 1293 2453 Lossprofit for the year 3003 23335 Lossprofit attributable to Owners of the Parent 3003 21828 Noncontrolling interest  1507 3003 23335 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Lossprofit for the year 3003 23335 Items that may be subsequently reclassified to profit or loss Currency translation differences 2958 2438 Revaluation of operating property  129 Fair value adjustment of availableforsale asset realised  142 Deferred income tax credit 618 127 28 Total comprehensive income for the year 82 25788 Attributable to Owners of the Parent 82 24281 Noncontrolling interest  1507 82 25788 Basic lossearnings per share attributable to the Parent 8 2.4p 17.5p Diluted lossearnings per share attributable to the Parent 8 2.4p 17.5p Adjusted earnings per share from continuing activities is given in note 8 All amounts in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income relate to continuing operations.
The notes on pages 125 to 177 are an integral part of these Consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended 28 February 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Balance Sheet As at 28 February 2017 Notes 000 NONCURRENT ASSETS Direct real estate interests Investment properties 9 179199 203318 Operating property 10 800 860 Trade and other receivables 15a 2858 3403 182857 207581 Indirect real estate interests Investments in associates 13a 8372 4309 Investments in joint ventures 13b 46089 46782 Intangible assets  goodwill 11 2328 2328 Loans to joint operations and other real estate businesses 17a 19859 37357 76648 90776 Other noncurrent assets Other plant and equipment 12 5770 7017 Derivative financial instruments 17c 257 315 Deferred income tax assets 18 1359 1230 7386 8562 Total noncurrent assets 266891 306919 CURRENT ASSETS Inventory  development and trading properties 14 208342 199779 Other financial assets 17a 18524 1700 Trade and other receivables 15b 48720 86420 Current income tax asset 16 Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits 27486 8096 Cash and cash equivalents 23785 43752 326873 339747 Total assets 593764 646666 CURRENT LIABILITIES Trade and other payables 16b 53369 55110 Current income tax liabilities  2508 Borrowings 17b 4508 65471 Provisions 16c 1394 14 59271 123103 NONCURRENT LIABILITIES Trade and other payables 16a 14395 7134 Borrowings 17b 167617 147818 Deferred income tax liabilities 18 3568 3555 Provisions 16c 1288 1731 186868 160238 Total liabilities 246139 283341 Net assets 347625 363325
Share capital 19 62613 62537 Share premium 20 104325 104113 Other reserves 20 54551 51861 Retained earnings 20 126136 144814 Total equity 347625 363325 Basicdiluted net assets per share attributable to the owners of the Parent 8 278p277p 291p290p The notes on pages 125 to 177 are an integral part of these Consolidated financial statements.
Approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 26 April 2017 and signed on its behalf by M S Weiner
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 28 February 2017
Share capital
Other
Retained earnings
Non controlling interest
At 1 March 2015 62529 104094 48677 130358 345658 722 346380 Profit for the year ended 29 February 2016    21828 21828 1507 23335 Other comprehensive income Revaluation of operating property   129  129  129 Fair value adjustment realised   142  142  142 Currency translation differences   2438  2438  2438 Deferred income tax credited directly to equity 618   28  28  28 Total comprehensive income for the year ended 29 February 2016   2453 21828 24281 1507 25788 Issue of Ordinary shares 20 8 19   27  27 Sharebased payments 20   731  731  731 Final dividend 2015 7    4373 4373  4373 Interim dividend 2016 7    2999 2999  2999 Total contributions by and distributions to owners of the Company 8 19 731 7372 6614  6614 Transactions with noncontrolling interest      2229 2229 Balance at 29 February 2016 62537 104113 51861 144814 363325  363325 Loss for the year ended 28 February 2017    3003 3003  3003 Other comprehensive income Revaluation of operating property realised on sale   1073 1073 Fair value adjustment realised   630 630 Currency translation differences   2958  2958  2958 Deferred income tax credited directly to equity 618   127  127  127 Total comprehensive income for the year ended 28 February 2017   1382 1300 82  82 Issue of Ordinary shares 20 76 212   288  288 Sharebased payments 20   1308  1308  1308 Final dividend 2016 7    4378 4378  4378 Supplemental dividend 2016 7    9997 9997  9997 Interim dividend 2017 7    3003 3003  3003 Total contributions by and distributions to owners of the Company 76 212 1308 17378 15782  15782 Balance at 28 February 2017 62613 104325 54551 126136 347625  347625 The notes on pages 125 to 177 are an integral part of these Consolidated financial statements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement For the year ended 28 February 2017
CASH GENERATED FROM OPERATIONS Cash flows generated from operating activities 21 56859 7995 Interest paid 7774 11445 Income tax paid 3806 2791 Net cash generated fromused in operating activities 45279 6241 CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES Interest received 443 2822 Proceeds on disposal of other plant and equipment 11 38 Proceeds on disposal of investment properties 16250 11106 Purchase of other plant and equipment 601 5459 Purchase of investment properties 3051 7094 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash and including acquisition costs  4222 Cash outflow to joint ventures and associates 19197 9001 Cash inflow from joint ventures and associates 24245 9603 Investment in financial assets 518 3605 Cash inflow from financial assets 1816 3152 Dividends received  40 Net cash generated fromused in investing activities 19398 2620 CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES Dividends paid 17378 17367 Issue of new shares 288 27 Repayments of borrowings 81677 59788 New bank loans raised net of transaction costs 32855 60404 Equity repayment to noncontrolling interest  2229 Increasedecrease in monies held in restricted accounts and deposits 19390 11284 Net cash used in financing activities 85302 7669 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 20625 16530 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 43752 59949 Exchange gains on cash and cash equivalents 658 333 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 23785 43752 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS COMPRISE Cash at bank and in hand 23785 43752 Bank overdrafts 17b Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 23785 43752 NET DEBT COMPRISES Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits 27486 8096 Cash and cash equivalents 23785 43752 Financial liabilities Current borrowings 17b 4508 65471 Noncurrent borrowings 17b 167617 147818 Net debt 120854 161441 The notes on pages 125 to 177 are an integral part of these Consolidated financial statements.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements For the year ended 28 February 2017 1 Basis of preparation and accounting policies i General information The Consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year ended 28 February 2017 comprise the results of U and I Group PLC and its subsidiaries and were authorised by the Board for issue on 25 April 2017.
The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The address of its registered office is 7A Howick Place London SW1P 1DZ.
The Group adopts the going concern basis in preparing its Consolidated financial statements.
The Groups financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRIC and the Companies Act 2006.
The accounting policies which follow set out those policies which were applied consistently in preparing the financial statements for the year ended 28 February 2017 and 29 February 2016.
The Consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis and under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of investment property operating property availableforsale financial assets and derivative instruments at fair value through profit and loss.
When preparing the Group financial statements management are required to make judgements assumptions and estimates concerning the future.
These judgements and assumptions are made at the time the financial statements are prepared and adopted based on the best information available.
Actual outcomes may be different from initial estimates and are reflected in the financial statements as soon as they become apparent.
Management believe that the underlying assumptions are appropriate.
Areas requiring judgements or estimates are discussed in the following section.
Judgements other than estimates 1.1 Classification of directly owned property assets The Group earns revenue from property development trading and investment and operating serviced offices.
Property development includes the entire development process from identification of an opportunity through to construction letting and sale of a completed scheme.
This activity is undertaken both on the Groups own Balance Sheet and in partnership with institutional investors usually via a presale of the completed development.
Property trading refers to participation in the development process where the Group acquires an interest in land and enhances the potential development for instance by procuring or changing planning permission before selling on to a third party to complete the development.
Property investment represents the acquisition of income generating real estate which is held for the purposes of income and capital gain through active asset management.
In most cases the property interest is held directly by the Group and is classified either as investment property refer note 9 or as inventory for development and trading properties refer note 14.
The varied nature of the Groups properties is such that a number exhibit characteristics consistent with more than one classification also the Directors strategy for an asset may change during its ownership.
The Directors determine the status of each asset according to their intention on acquisition.
A change in classification is made only in exceptional circumstances where the strategy has demonstrably changed for a period of over one year.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued Critical accounting judgements and estimates continued 1.2 Classification of projects in partnership In addition to its directly owned and managed activities the Group participates in similar activities in partnership with others typically to access expertise in different locations or market sectors.
The Groups financial participation may be by way of equity investment or loan.
In each case a judgement is required as to the status of the Groups interest as an associate a joint venture a joint operation or a financial asset typically focusing on the extent of control exercised by the Group.
The Groups share of control is governed and achieved by a mixture of rights set out in agreements and participation in the management of each business.
The exercise of control in practice does not always follow the legal structure.
The Directors have considered the position in respect of each venture taking account of the operation in practice and have determined the status of each accordingly.
These investments are reported under the relevant balance sheet headings with a summary in note 26.
1.3 Acquisition of subsidiaries The Group sometimes acquires properties through the purchase of entities which own real estate.
At the time of acquisition the Group considers whether the transaction represents the acquisition of a business.
In cases where the entity is capable of being operated as a business or an integrated set of activities is acquired in addition to the property the Group accounts for the acquisition as a business combination.
When the acquisition does not represent a business it is accounted for as the purchase of a group of assets and liabilities.
In making this distinction the Group considers the number of items of land and buildings owned by the entity the extent of ancillary services provided by the entity and whether the entity has its own staff to manage the property over and above the maintenance and security of the premises.
1.4 Accounting for presold development assets Where development is undertaken on the Groups Balance Sheet under a contract for a presale a judgement is required as to whether this represents a sale of property or a contract for construction as described in note 1hvi.
As at 28 February 2017 and 29 February 2016 the Group does not have any construction contracts under IAS 11.
Estimates
1.5 Valuation of property assets The key source of estimation uncertainty rests in the values of property assets which affects several categories of asset in the Balance Sheet.
The investment property portfolio and the operating property are stated at fair value which requires a number of judgements and estimates in assessing the qualities of the Groups assets relative to market transactions.
Details of the judgements and assumptions made are set out in notes 1i 1j 9 and 10.
The same uncertainties affect the determination of fair value of certain availableforsale financial instruments described in note 17 with the further complexity that the value of these assets requires estimates of future construction costs tenant demand and market yields.
The Groups development and trading properties are carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
The determination of net realisable value relies upon similar estimates with the added challenge in some cases of judgements about uncertain planning outcomes.
These amounts are disclosed in note 14.
1.6 Impairment reviews The Groups Curzon Park Limited joint venture owns a development site in Birmingham known as Curzon Street.
The current proposal for the highspeed train link between London and Birmingham HS2 indicates that the planned route of HS2 passes through the site including provision for part of the prospective station.
In view of this the ultimate value of the site is uncertain.
It is not clear what impact HS2 will have on the development of the 10.5acre site.
The
Directors believe that the site will recover at least its carrying value in the books of the joint venture although the interim and ultimate uses of the site and timing of its development remain unclear.
The site is discussed in note 17a.
Following a review of investment strategy and in view of operating losses at Executive Communication Centres ECC the Groups serviced office subsidiary the Group has conducted a review of its investment in the business.
During the year the Group decided to exit two centres and carried out a full impairment review on this basis.
The review required significant judgements and estimates concerning customer demand competitor behaviour and discount U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 rates for the sites that will continue to operate.
The review determined that a net impairment of 2150000 was required against the closure certain centres and future losses across the business.
This impairment has been shown as an exceptional item refer note 2b.
1.7 Derivative financial instruments The Group is party to a number of interest rate swap and foreign currency agreements which are accounted for as derivatives and measured at fair value.
The estimation of this figure is based upon market assumptions about future movements in interest and exchange rates.
The estimated fair values and the movements in the year are set out in note 17c.
1.8 Group LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP During the year the Group made awards to staff under the Groups LTIP.
The awards vest according to a number of performance criteria the primary measure being net asset value growth over a threeyear period.
In calculating the provision to accrue management are required to estimate net asset growth over the vesting period.
The estimate is reassessed at each reporting date.
The following standards have been adopted by the Group for the first time for the financial year beginning on 1 March 2016.
The adoption of these amendments did not have any impact on the financial statements of the Group.
Accounting for acquisitions of interests in joint operations Amendment to IFRS 11.
Clarification of acceptable methods of depreciation and amortization  Amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 38.
Annual Improvements to IFRSs  20122014 cycle.
Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS 1.
A number of new standards amendments and interpretations are effective for annual periods beginning after 1 March 2017 and have not been applied in preparing these Consolidated financial statements.
None of these are expected to have a significant impact on the Groups operations.
IAS 12 Income taxes was amended to clarify the accounting for deferred tax where an asset is measured at fair value and that fair value is below the assets tax base.
The amendment confirms that i A temporary difference exists whenever the carrying amount of an asset is less than its tax base at the end of the reporting period ii An entity can assume that it will recover an amount higher than the carrying amount of an asset to estimate its future taxable profit iii Where the tax law restricts the source of taxable profits against which particular types of deferred tax assets can be recovered the recoverability of the deferred tax can only be assessed in combination with other deferred tax assets of the same type and iv Tax deductions resulting from the reversal of deferred tax assets are excluded from the estimated future taxable profit that is used to evaluate the recoverability of those assets.
This amendment is effective for accounting period commencing 1 March 2017 .
The Group does not expect the amendment to have a material impact on its financial statements since fair value exceeds the cost for almost all of its Investment Properties as at 1 March 2015 29 February 2016 and 28 February 2017.
The Group is monitoring fair value movements below cost to assess the impact of the amendment in future periods.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments addresses the classification measurement and recognition of financial assets and financial liabilities and replaces parts of IAS IFRS 9 requires financial assets to be classified into two measurement categories those measured at fair value and those measured at amortised cost.
The determination is made at initial recognition and will depend on characteristics of the instrument.
For financial liabilities the main change from IAS 39 is where the fair value option is taken for financial liabilities the part of the fair value change due to an entitys own credit risk is recorded in Other comprehensive income rather than the Income Statement unless it creates an accounting mismatch.
The standard is effective for the accounting period commencing 1 March 2018.
The Group expects IFRS 9 to have an immaterial impact on accounting for financial instruments.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued New and amended accounting standards continued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers deals with revenue recognition and sets out principles for reporting the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
Revenue is recognised when a customer gains control of goods or services and has the ability to use and benefit from the goods or services.
The standard replaces IAS 18 Revenue and IAS 11 Construction Contracts.
The standard is effective for the accounting period commencing 1 March 2018.
The
Group expects IFRS 15 to have an immaterial impact on accounting for revenue.
IFRS 16 Leases was issued in January 2016 and will become mandatory for the accounting period commencing 1 March 2019 with early adoption permitted.
Under the new standard an asset right of use asset and the financial liability to pay rentals are recognised with the exception of shortterm and low value leases.
The accounting for lessors will not significantly change.
The Group is assessing the full impact of IFRS 16 and expects it to have an immaterial impact on its accounting practices.
There are no other IFRSs or IFRIC interpretations that are not yet effective that would be expected to have a material impact on the Group.
Summary of significant accounting policies e Basis of consolidation The Consolidated financial statements of the Group include the financial statements of U and I Group PLC the Company its subsidiaries and its share of results of joint ventures and associates.
Subsidiaries are all entities including special purpose entities over which the Group has control.
The Group has control when it has rights to variable returns from its involvement in the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
The Group is deemed to have control where it does not have more than 50% of the voting power but is able to govern the financial and operating policies by virtue of de facto control taking account of how the entity operates in practice.
The results of subsidiaries acquired during the year are included from the effective date of acquisition being the date on which the Group obtains control.
They are deconsolidated on the date that control ceases.
Where property is acquired via corporate acquisition or otherwise management considers the substance of the assets and activities of the acquired entity in determining whether the acquisition represents the acquisition of a business.
The basis of the judgement is set out in note 1c 1.3.
Where such acquisitions are not judged to be an acquisition of a business they are not treated as business combinations.
Rather the cost to acquire the corporate entity is allocated between the identifiable assets and liabilities of the entity based on their relative fair values at the acquisition date.
Accordingly no goodwill or additional deferred taxation arises.
Otherwise acquisitions are accounted for as business combinations.
Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method.
Any excess of the purchase price of the business combination over the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
If the business combination is achieved in stages the acquisition date carrying value of the acquirers previously held interest in the acquiree is remeasured to fair value at the acquisition date.
Any gains or losses arising from remeasurement are recognised in profit or loss.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is the fair value of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred and the equity interests issued by the
This fair value includes any contingent consideration at the acquisition date.
Any subsequent change to the fair value of the contingent consideration that is deemed to be an asset or liability is recognised with either the profit or loss recognised in the income statement.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred.
The Group recognises any noncontrolling interest on an acquisitionbyacquisition basis either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the identifiable net assets acquired.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Intragroup balances and any unrealised gains and losses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the Consolidated financial statements.
Where necessary adjustments have been made to the financial statements of subsidiaries associates and joint ventures to bring the accounting policies used and accounting periods into line with those of the Group.
An associated company is defined as an undertaking other than a subsidiary or joint venture over which the Group has significant influence but not control generally accompanying a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
Investments in associates are accounted using the equity method of accounting.
The Groups investment in associates includes goodwill identified on acquisition.
The Group applies IFRS 11 to all joint arrangements.
Under
IFRS 11 investments in joint arrangements are classified as either joint operations or joint ventures depending on the contractual rights and obligations of each investor.
The
Group has assessed all of its joint arrangements and determined them to be joint ventures accounted for using the equity method.
Under the equity method the interest in associates or joint ventures is carried in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at cost adjusted thereafter for the Groups share of post acquisition profits or losses and movements in Other comprehensive income.
When the Groups share of losses in an associate or joint venture equals or exceeds the Groups interest including any unsecured receivables the Group does not recognise further losses unless it has incurred obligations or made payments on behalf of the associate or joint venture.
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the net identifiable assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is included in Intangible assets.
Goodwill is tested annually or more frequently if circumstances change for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Any impairment is recognised immediately as an expense and is not subsequently reversed.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units CGUs for the purpose of impairment testing.
The allocation is made to those CGUs that are expected to benefit from the business combination in which the goodwill arose identified according to operating segment.
Assets that have an indefinite useful life for example goodwill are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be subsequently reversed.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and valueinuse.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows
Prior impairment of nonfinancial assets other than goodwill are reviewed for possible reversal at each reporting date.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable.
The Group recognises revenue when the amount of the revenue can be reliably measured when it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity and when the specific criteria have been met for each of the Groups activities as described below. over the term of the lease.
Incentives for lessees to enter into lease agreements are spread evenly over the lease term even if payments are not made on such a basis.
The lease term is the noncancellable period of the lease together with any further term for which the tenant has the option to continue the lease where at inception of the lease the Directors are reasonably certain that the tenant will exercise that option.
Lease incentives are usually in the form of rentfree periods or capital contributions.
Assets held within both the investment and development and trading segments earn rental income. in income when they are contractually agreed. normally on unconditional exchange of contracts.
For conditional exchanges sales are recognised only when all of the significant conditions are satisfied.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued h Revenue recognition continued iv Licence fee income from serviced offices is recognised on a straightline basis over the term of the licence.
Other income from serviced offices is recognised when the service is provided.
The income is classified within the operating segment. project management services are provided. development agreement.
Where only the construction risk remains the revenue and profit on the development is recognised under IAS 11 so as to match the proportion of development work completed on a percentage completion basis as determined by consultant monitoring surveyors or using a suitable method particular to the contract concerned.
Profits are only recognised where the outcome can be determined with reasonable certainty.
Full provision is made for losses as soon as such losses are foreseen.
Where revenue and profit is recognised under IAS 18 disposals are recognised where the risks and rewards of ownership are considered to have been transferred to the purchaser.
Profits are recognised within the development and trading segment. income statement. established. or for capital appreciation or both.
Investment
For leasehold properties that are classified as investment properties the associated leasehold obligations are accounted for as finance lease obligations if they qualify to be treated as such. thereafter are stated at fair value.
Surpluses and deficits arising from changes in the fair value of investment properties are recognised in the income statement in the year in which they arise. category of the investment property being valued.
In determining the fair value the capitalisation of net income method and the discounting of future cash flows to their present value have been used which are based upon assumptions including future rental income anticipated maintenance costs and appropriate discount rate and make reference to market evidence of transaction prices for similar properties.
A deduction is made to reflect purchasers acquisition costs. appropriate adjustments for risk and finance costs.
In preparing these valuations the Directors consult with agents and other advisors to derive appropriate assumptions specific to each asset. is normally on unconditional exchange of contracts.
For conditional exchanges sales are recognised only when all of the significant conditions are satisfied.
Gains and losses are recognised within Gains or losses on disposal of investment properties in the income statement. in the Balance Sheet.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 j Property plant and equipment i Operating properties  serviced offices Operating properties are held for business purposes rather than for investment generating revenue by way of licence fees and ancillary services.
These properties are recognised initially at cost which includes the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
Thereafter the asset is carried at valuation less depreciation and impairment charged subsequent to the date of revaluation.
A revaluation surplus is credited to Other comprehensive income and accumulated in equity under the heading of Net unrealised gainloss reserve unless it reverses a revaluation decrease on the same asset previously recognised as an expense where it is first credited to the income statement to that extent.
Operating properties are valued at each reporting date by independent professional valuers on the basis of Existing Use Value.
Surpluses and deficits in the period are included in the Property revaluation reserve within equity except where carrying value is below depreciated cost in which case surpluses and deficits are included in the income statement.
Depreciation is provided so as to write off the value of the properties excluding land over their expected useful lives usually 25 years.
Other plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the assets.
Depreciation is provided so as to write off the cost less estimated residual value of the assets over their expected useful lives on a straightline method.
The principal annual rates used for this purpose are as follows Fixtures fittings and computer equipment  10% to 33% Motor vehicles 20% The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
An assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the net proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised within Other gains and losses in the income statement.
Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Rents payable under operating leases net of any incentives received from the lessor are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Property and development interests acquired or being constructed for sale in the ordinary course of business rather than to be held for rental or capital appreciation are held as inventory and are measured at the lower of cost and estimated net realisable value.
Cost includes directly attributable expenditure and interest.
No element of overhead is included in cost since it is not practical to identify overhead amounts in respect of particular assets.
Where the Directors consider that the costs are not recoverable from the sale or development of the asset the project or site is written down to its net realisable value with the write down taken to the income statement.
Net realisable value is calculated as the estimated selling price of the project or site based upon the current plans less all further costs to be incurred in making the sale.
The tax expense for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in Other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
In this case the tax is also recognised in Other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
The current income tax charge is calculated on the basis of the tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date together with any adjustment in respect of previous years in the jurisdiction where the Company and its subsidiaries operate and generate taxable income.
Appropriate provisions are made based on the amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued m Current and deferred income tax continued Deferred income tax is recognised using the liability method on all temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes at the reporting date with the following exceptions Where the temporary differences arise from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
In respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries joint ventures and associates where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled by the Parent venture partner or investor respectively and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary difference can be utilised.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised on the Groups Balance Sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual terms of the instrument.
The Group determines the classification of its financial assets at initial recognition.
The classification depends on the purpose for which the financial assets were acquired as follows Loans and other receivables with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted on an active market.
The
Groups loans and receivables are included within Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits and Other financial assets in the Consolidated Balance
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss.
This represents interest and currency swaps which are categorised as held for trading unless they are designated as hedges.
Availableforsale financial assets are nonderivatives that are designated as such or are not classified in any other category.
After initial recognition at cost available forsale assets are measured at fair value with gains or losses being recognised as a separate component of equity until the investment is derecognised or until the investment is determined to be impaired at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is included in the income statement.
Equity instrument financial assets are held at cost in the event that the fair value of the instruments is not reliably measurable.
Trade receivables are recognised and carried at the lower of their original invoiced value and recoverable amount.
Where the time value of money is material receivables are carried at amortised cost.
Provision is made when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to recover balances in full.
Balances are written off when the probability of recovery is assessed as being remote.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against the appropriate cost line in the income statement.
Amounts due from customers for contract work are included in Trade and other receivables and represent revenue recognised in excess of payments on account received.
Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits represent cash held by the Group in accounts with conditions that restrict the use of these monies by the Group and as such does not meet the definition of Cash and cash equivalents as defined in IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Cash and cash equivalents comprise deposits held at call with banks and other shortterm highly liquid investments with no significant risk of changes in value.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and which form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a financial liability.
For the purposes of the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement cash and cash equivalents are stated net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Financial assets are included within current assets except for assets maturing after one year which will be classified as noncurrent.
Financial assets are assessed for impairment at each reporting date.
Assets are impaired where there is evidence that as a result of events that occurred after initial recognition the estimated future cash flows from the assets have been adversely affected.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced and the amount of the loss is recognised in the income statement.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment decreases the reversal of the previously recognised impairment is recognised in the income statement.
Loans and borrowings are initially recognised at fair value net of directly attributable transaction costs and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Gains and losses arising on the repurchase settlement or otherwise cancellation of liabilities are recognised respectively in Finance income and Finance costs.
Other financial liabilities including trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost and are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
The Group enters into derivative financial instruments including interest rate swaps caps and collars and cross currency swaps to manage its exposure to interest rate and foreign exchange rate risk.
Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at each reporting date.
The resulting gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss immediately unless the derivative is designated as an effective hedging instrument in which case the fair value is taken through Other comprehensive income.
The fair value of hedging derivatives is classified as a non current asset or a noncurrent liability if the remaining maturity of the hedge relationship is more than twelve months and as a current asset or a current liability if the remaining maturity of the hedge relationship is less than twelve months.
At the inception of the hedge relationship the Group documents the relationship between the hedging instrument and hedged item along with its risk management objectives and its strategy for undertaking various hedge transactions the nature of the risk being hedged and how effectiveness will be measured throughout its duration.
Furthermore at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis the Group documents whether the hedging instruments that are used in hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows of hedged items.
The gain or loss of the effective portion of changes in the fair value of the hedging instrument is recognised in Other comprehensive income.
The gain or loss relating to an ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Amounts taken to equity are recycled to the income statement in the periods when the hedged item is recognised in profit or loss.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the Group revokes the hedging relationship or the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
The Group does not have any hedging instruments as at 28 February 2017.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued o Borrowing costs Gross borrowing costs relating to direct expenditure on investment properties and inventories under development are capitalised.
The interest capitalised is calculated using the rate of interest on the loan to fund the expenditure or the Groups weighted average cost of borrowings where appropriate over the period from commencement of the development work until substantially all the activities necessary to prepare the qualifying asset for its intended use or sale are complete.
The capitalisation of finance costs is suspended if there are prolonged periods when development activity is interrupted.
Capitalised interest is written off to direct costs on disposal of inventory or to operating profit on disposal of investment properties.
Other borrowing costs are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they are incurred.
Fees paid on establishment of loan facilities are capitalised as a prepayment for liquidity services and amortised over the period of the facility to which it relates.
All other borrowing costs are recognised in the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
A provision is recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Onerous lease provisions are created for properties that are unoccupied sublet at below the rent payable on the head lease or for operating sites where the projected future trading revenue is insufficient to cover the valueinuse.
Provisions are measured at the present value of the expenditure expected to be required to settle the obligation.
The amortisation in the discount is recognised as an interest expense.
The Group operates a defined contribution scheme whereby the Group pays fixed contributions into a pension fund.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient assets to pay all employees relating to employee service in the current or prior periods.
The charge to the income statement in the year represents the actual amount payable to the scheme in the year.
Differences between contributions payable in the year and contributions paid are shown as either accruals or prepayments in the Balance Sheet.
The Group recognises a liability and expense for bonus and profitsharing in accordance with the bonus plans outlined in the Remuneration report on pages 80 to 104.
The Group recognises a liability when contractually obliged.
The Consolidated financial statements of the Group are presented in UK Sterling the Companys functional and presentation currency.
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rates of exchange ruling at the dates of the transactions or valuation when items are remeasured.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated at the rates ruling at that date.
Exchange movements are dealt within the income statement with exchange differences on borrowings taken to Finance income or Finance costs except when deferred in equity as qualifying cash flow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Chief Operating DecisionMaker CODM.
The CODM who is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the Board.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 t Share capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new Ordinary shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Where a Group company purchases its own share capital out of distributable reserves the shares can be held as treasury shares.
The shares are carried at the consideration paid including any directly attributable costs of acquiring the shares.
The value of the shares is deducted from the equity attributable to the Companys equity holders until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
If the shares are subsequently reissued their value is reattributed to the Companys equity holders.
The Group operates a number of sharebased compensation plans both equity and cash settled under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for cash or equitysettled instruments of the Group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the option is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP The LTIP commenced on 1 March 2015 and replaced the Performance Share Plan PSP.
Under the scheme Ordinary shares are conditionally awarded based on the performance of the Group over a fouryear period for Executive Directors and a threeyear period for staff.
The performance of the Group is referenced to the net asset value per share growth over the vesting period and is based on nonmarket conditions.
The
Directors assess the likelihood of the award vesting and the maximum amount that will vest based on forward looking forecast of the Group.
Ordinary shares conditionally awarded under the PSP are valued at their fair value on the date of the award taking into account the probability of the Ordinary shares vesting based on an equal probability of achieving appropriate total shareholder return ranking as determined under the performance condition.
The Group has used a BlackScholes option valuation model to determine the fair value of share options granted.
The cost of cashsettled transactions with employees and Directors is measured by reference to the fair value at the date at which they are granted and is recognised as an expense over the vesting period which ends on the date on which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance conditions are satisfied.
At each balance sheet date before vesting the cumulative expense is calculated representing the extent to which the vesting period has expired and managements best estimate of the achievement or otherwise of nonmarket conditions and of the number of options that will ultimately vest or in the case of an instrument subject to a market condition be treated as vesting as described above.
The movement in cumulative expense since the previous balance sheet date is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding entry in accruals o reserves as appropriate.
Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Exceptional items are disclosed separately in the financial statements where it is necessary to do so to provide further understanding of the financial performance of the Group.
They are material items of income or expense that have been shown separately due to the significance of their nature or amount.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued x Definitions Operating profit stated after loss on disposal of investment properties the revaluation of the investment property portfolio and exceptional items and before the results of associates jointly controlled entities and finance income and costs.
IPD Index and Total Portfolio Return total return from the completed investment property portfolio comprising net rental income or expenditure capital gains or losses from disposals and revaluation surpluses or deficits divided by the average capital employed during the financial year as defined and measured by Investment Property Databank Limited IPD a company that produces independent benchmarks of property returns.
Total shareholder return movement in share price over the year plus dividends paid as a percentage of the opening share price.
Gearing expressed as a percentage and measured as net debt divided by total shareholders funds.
Loan to value gearing expressed as a percentage of net debt as a proportion of total property assets including shares of properties and net debt in all projects in partnership refer note 26.
Net debt total debt less cash and shortterm deposits including cash held in restricted accounts.
2 Segmental analysis a The segmental information presented consistently follows the information provided to the CODM and reflects the three sectors in which the Group operates.
The CODM which is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the Executive Committee.
The three operating divisions are Investment  management of the Groups investment property portfolio generating rental income and valuation movements from property management Development and trading  managing the Groups development and trading projects.
Revenue is received from project management fees development profits and the disposal of inventory and Operating  serviced office operations.
Revenue is principally received from shortterm licence fee income.
Unallocated assets and liabilities comprise amounts that cannot be specifically allocated to operating segments an analysis is provided below.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 These divisions are the basis on which the Group reports its primary segmental information.
All operations occur and all assets are located in the United Kingdom except assets of 30193000 2016 38871000 which are located in the Republic of Ireland.
All revenue arises from continuing operations.
Investment
Development and trading
Total
Segment revenue 12934 106939 4058 123931 Direct costs 3449 78467 4947 86863 Segment result 9485 28472 889 37068 Operating costs 5031 17030  22061 Loss on disposal of investment properties 2273   2273 Loss on revaluation of property portfolio 9506   9506 Operating lossprofit before exceptional item 7325 11442 889 3228 Exceptional impairment of operating segment   2150 2150 Operating lossprofit after exceptional item 7325 11442 3039 1078 Other income 666 654  1320 Share of posttax profits of joint ventures and associates 3144 2990  6134 Profit on sale of investment  567  567 Unallocated loss on sale of other plant and equipment 25 Profit before interest and income tax 9074 Finance income 532 179  711 Finance costs 6714 4781  11495 Loss before income tax 1710 Income tax 1293 Loss for the year 3003 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Segment assets 226016 334609 2361 562986 Unallocated assets 30778 Total assets 593764 Segment liabilities 104059 132358 3796 240213 Unallocated liabilities 5926 Total liabilities 246139 A summary of unallocated assets and liabilities is shown on page 140.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 2 Segmental analysis continued
Development and trading
Total
OTHER SEGMENT INFORMATION Capital expenditure 3746 119 83 3948 Unallocated capital expenditure 380 Exceptional impairment of operating segment assets   1173 1173 Impairment of assets  155  155 Depreciation 6  347 353 Unallocated depreciation 663
Rental income 12736 3361  16097 Serviced office income   4058 4058 Project management fees  1052  1052 Trading property sales  34917  34917 Other trading property income  2834  2834 Development proceeds  64775  64775 Other 198   198 12934 106939 4058 123931 In the year ended 28 February 2017 two projects with turnover totalling 28765000 generated in excess of 10.0% of total revenue and fell within the development and trading segment.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2016
Development and trading
Total
Segment revenue 14397 223652 4233 242282 Direct costs 2365 184701 5364 192430 Segment result 12032 38951 1131 49852 Operating costs 3617 18135  21752 Gain on disposal of investment properties 440   440 Gain on revaluation of property portfolio 229   229 Operating profitloss 9084 20816 1131 28769 Other income 483 190  673 Share of posttax profitslosses of joint ventures and associates 7445 318  7127 Profit on sale of investment  2174  2174 Unallocated loss on sale of other plant and equipment 87 Profit before interest and income tax 38656 Finance income 813 1670  2483 Finance costs 6280 9071  15351 Profit before income tax 25788 Income tax 2453 Profit for the year 23335 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Segment assets 243191 356196 4394 603781 Unallocated assets 42885 Total assets 646666 Segment liabilities 105500 160108 3353 268961 Unallocated liabilities 14380 Total liabilities 283341 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 2 Segmental analysis continued
Development and trading
Total
OTHER SEGMENT INFORMATION Capital expenditure 6819 532 160 7511 Unallocated capital expenditure 5032 Impairment of assets  1837  1837 Depreciation  337 465 802 Unallocated depreciation 242
Rental income 14242 4649  18891 Serviced office income   4233 4233 Project management fees  915  915 Trading property sales  87818  87818 Other trading property income  2681  2681 Development proceeds  127589  127589 Other 155   155 14397 223652 4233 242282 In the year ended 29 February 2016 four projects with turnover totalling 134797000 generated in excess of 10.0% of total revenue and fell within the development and trading segment.
UNALLOCATED ASSETS CAN BE ANALYSED AS FOLLOWS Other plant and equipment 4616 4924 Deferred income tax asset 1359 1230 Derivative financial instruments 257 315 Trade and other receivables 5014 4169 Cash and cash equivalents 19532 32247 30778 42885 UNALLOCATED LIABILITIES CAN BE ANALYSED AS FOLLOWS Current borrowings 17 17 Trade and other payables 2344 10808 Deferred income tax liability 3568 3555 5929 14380 b Exceptional item In view of the operating losses at the Groups serviced office subsidiary the Group conducted a review of the business.
The review concluded that as this business sector was not core to Group strategy it should be exited by way of either trade sale or phased closure of individual centres.
The business operates across six separate centres.
A provision of 2150000 has been made in this respect.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 3 Operating profit OPERATING PROFIT IS STATED AFTER CHARGING Sharebased payments charge 1308 731 Corporate rebranding costs  846 Exceptional impairment of operating segment refer note 2b 2150 Write down of development and trading properties to net realisable value 155 1837 Depreciation  Operating property 60 60 Other plant and equipment 956 984 Impairment of trade receivables recognised in direct costs 1318 46 AUDITORS REMUNERATION Fees payable to the Companys auditors and their associates for the audit of Company and Group financial statements 237 217 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and their associates for other services The audit of the Companys subsidiaries 366 331 Fees in respect of conversion to FRS 102 41 108 Half year review 44 43 Tax services 14 20 All other services  Employees Employee benefit expense Wages and salaries 9741 10405 Social security costs 1668 1306 Cost of employee share option schemes 1308 731 Other pension costs  defined contribution plans 808 1061 13525 13503 Average monthly number of employees including Directors
Number
Property development and investment 83 82 Operating property activities The Directors are considered to be the only key management personnel.
Their remuneration is shown in the Remuneration report on pages 80 to 104.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 5 Finance income and costs a Finance income Interest receivable on loans and deposits 711 2147 Fair value gains on financial instruments  interest rate swaps caps and collars  336 Total finance income 711 2483 b Finance costs Interest on bank loans and other borrowings 9091 11923 Interest on debenture  1833 Amortisation of transaction costs 1114 1109 Provision unwinding of discount 14 243 Fair value loss on financial instruments  interest rate swaps caps and collars 58 Net foreign currency differences arising on retranslation of cash and cash equivalents 3398 3180 13675 18288 Capitalised interest on development and trading properties 2180 2937 Total finance costs 11495 15351 Net finance costs 10784 12868 Net finance costs before foreign currency differences 7386 9688 Interest was capitalised at an average rate of 6.51%.
Capitalised interest of 1195000 2016 2858000 was written off in the year.
The tax treatment of capitalised interest follows the accounting treatment.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 6 Taxation Current tax 1939 2760 Adjustment in respect of prior years 657 7 Total current tax charge 1282 2753 Deferred tax chargecredit 11 300 Income tax charge 1293 2453 Tax on items credited to equity Deferred tax credit on other revaluations 127 28 Total credit in the income statement 127 28 Tax on the Groups profit before tax differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the weighted average tax rate applicable to profits of the consolidated entities as follows Lossprofit before tax 1710 25788 Tax on lossprofit on ordinary activities at 20.0% 2016 20.1% 342 5180 Tax effects of Amounts not deductible for tax purposes 713 56 Differences between accounting and tax profit on disposal  794 Nontaxable capital gains 1688 2500 Adjustment in respect of prior years 496 28 Impact on change in UK tax rate 415 1 Income tax at lower rates 178 45 Recognition of tax losses 340 36 Brought forward losses utilised 663 1187 Total tax charge 1293 2453 The UK corporation tax rate decreased on 1 April 2015 from 21.0% to 20.0%.
Deferred income tax is calculated on the temporary differences under the liability method using a tax rate of 20.0% 2016 20.0%.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 7 Dividends DECLARED AND PAID DURING THE YEAR Equity dividends on Ordinary shares Final dividend for 2016 3.50 pence per share 2015 3.50 pence per share 4378 4373 Interim dividend for 2017 2.40 pence per share 2016 2.40 pence per share 3003 2999 Supplemental dividend for 2016 8.00 pence per share 9997 17378 7372 DIVIDEND DECLARED BUT NOT PAID SINCE 28 FEBRUARY 2017 Supplemental dividend for 2017 2.80 pence per share 2016 8.00 pence per share 3506 10006 PROPOSED FOR APPROVAL BY SHAREHOLDERS AT THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING Final dividend for 2017 3.50 pence per share 2016 3.50 pence per share 4379 4373 On 25 April 2017 the Board approved the payment of a supplemental dividend of 2.80 pence per share which will be paid on 16 June 2017 to Ordinary shareholders on the register at the close of business on 12 May 2017 and will be recognised in the year ending 28 February 2018.
Subject to approval by shareholders the final dividend was approved by the Board on 25 April 2017 and has not been included as a liability or deducted from retained earnings as at 28 February 2017.
The final dividend is payable on 17 August 2017 to Ordinary shareholders on the register at the close of business on 21 July 2017 and will be recognised in the year ending 28 February 2018.
8 Earnings per share and net assets per share Basic earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing profit or loss for the year attributable to owners of the Parent by the weighted average number of Ordinary shares outstanding during the year excluding shares purchased by the Parent and held as treasury shares.
Diluted earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to owners of the Parent by the weighted average number of Ordinary shares outstanding during the year plus the weighted average number of Ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all the dilutive potential Ordinary shares into Ordinary shares.
Basic net assets per share amounts are calculated by dividing net assets by the number of Ordinary shares in issue at the balance sheet date excluding shares purchased by the Parent and held as treasury shares.
Diluted net assets per share amounts are calculated by dividing net assets by the number of Ordinary shares in issue at the balance sheet date plus the number of Ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all the dilutive potential Ordinary shares into Ordinary shares.
Management have chosen to disclose the European Public Real Estate EPRA adjusted net assets per share and earnings per share from continuing activities in order to provide an indication of the Groups underlying business performance and to assist comparison between European property companies.
EPRA earnings is the profit or loss after taxation excluding investment property revaluations including valuations of joint venture investment properties impairment of development and trading properties exceptional items and mark tomarket movements of derivative financial instruments including those of joint ventures and intangible asset movements and their related taxation.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EPRA net assets EPRA NAV are the Balance Sheet net assets adjusted to reflect the fair value of development and trading assets excluding marktomarket adjustment on effective cash flow hedges and related debt adjustments and deferred taxation on revaluations and diluting for the effect of those shares potentially issuable under employee share schemes.
EPRA NAV per share is EPRA NAV divided by the number of Ordinary shares in issue at the balance sheet date.
EPRA triple net assets EPRA NNNAV is EPRA NAV adjusted to reflect the fair value of debt and derivatives and to include deferred taxation on revaluations.
EPRA NNNAV per share is EPRA NNNAV divided by the number of Ordinary shares in issue at the balance sheet date.
The calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share and EPRA profit per share is based on the following data
Lossprofit for the purpose of basic and diluted earnings per share 3003 21828 Revaluation deficitsurplus including share of joint venture revaluation surplus 6812 1697 Lossgain on disposal of investment properties 2273 440 Impairment of development and trading properties 155 1837 Exceptional impairment of operating segment 2150 Marktomarket adjustment on interest rate swaps including share of joint venture marktomarket adjustment 23 216 EPRA adjusted profit from continuing activities attributable to owners of the Company 8364 21312 NUMBER OF SHARES Weighted average number of Ordinary shares for the purpose of earnings per share 125072 124953 Effect of dilutive potential Ordinary shares Share options 1 84 Weighted average number of Ordinary shares for the purpose of diluted earnings per share 125073 125037 Basic lossearnings per share pence 2.4p 17.5p Diluted lossearnings per share pence 2.4p 17.5p EPRA adjusted earnings per share pence 6.7p 17.1p EPRA adjusted diluted earnings per share pence 6.7p 17.1p The Directors consider the acquisition and disposal of trading assets to be part of the core business of the Group and therefore have not adjusted profit for the gain on disposal when calculating EPRA adjusted earnings per share.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 8 Earnings per share and net assets per share continued Net assets per share and diluted net assets per share have been calculated as follows Net assets
Net assets per share
Net assets
Net assets per share
Basic net assets per share attributable to the owners 347625 125227 278 363325 125074 291 Fair value of development and trading assets 15486 Fair value of joint venture assets 2416 Cumulative marktomarket adjustment on interest rate swaps 126 148 EPRA adjusted net assets per share 360821 125227 288 363473 125074 291 Cumulative marktomarket adjustment on interest rate swaps 126 148 Fair value of debt 14344 14713 EPRA adjusted triple net assets per share 346351 125227 277 348612 125074 279 Effect of dilutive potential Ordinary shares 47telDiluted net assets per share 348100 125455 277 363888 125377 290 EPRA diluted net assets per share 361296 125455 288 364036 125377 290 EPRA diluted triple net assets per share 346826 125455 276 349175 125377 279 Refer note 14 9 Investment properties
Long leasehold
At valuation 1 March 2015 163147 40189 203336
Disposals 9886 780 10666 Transfer from inventory 3600  3600 Surplus on revaluation 218 11 229 At valuation 29 February 2016 159285 44033 203318
Disposals 18023  18023 Deficit on revaluation 6996 2510 9506 At valuation 28 February 2017 136873 42326 179199 Direct costs of 3449000 2016 2365000 arose as a result of ownership of investment properties.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Reconciliation of market value of investment properties to the net book amount The following table reconciles the market value of investment properties to their net book amount.
The components of the reconciliation are included within their relevant balance sheet heading.
Market value as assessed by the independent valuers or Directors 182359 207111 Amount included in prepayments and accrued income in respect of lease incentives 3160 3793 Net book amount of Investment properties  noncurrent assets 179199 203318 At 28 February and 31 August each year the Group engages professionally qualified valuers who hold a recognised professional qualification and who have recent experience in the locations and sectors of the investment portfolio.
As at 28 February 2017 completed investment properties have been valued by CBRE Ltd at a value of 164106000 2016 180888000.
The current value equates to the highest and best use of the asset.
The valuers have consented to the use of their name in the financial statements.
Included within Investment properties are freehold land and buildings representing investment properties under development amounting to 15093000 2016 18830000 which have been valued by the Directors.
These properties comprise buildings and landholdings for current or future development as investment properties.
This approach has been taken because the value of these properties is dependent on a detailed knowledge of the planning status the competitive position of these assets and a range of complex project development appraisals.
Investment properties under development include 8075000 2016 8065000 of landholdings adjacent to retail properties within the Groups portfolio acquired for the purpose of extending the existing shopping centres.
The fair value of these properties rests in the planned extensions and is difficult to estimate pending confirmation of designs and planning permission and hence has been estimated by the Directors at cost as an approximation to fair value.
167205000 2016 192613000 of total investment properties are charged as security against the Groups borrowings.
Valuation methodology Our valuers are engaged as external valuers as defined in the current edition of the RICS Valuation Professional
The valuation process involves the Investment Team our asset services provider and valuers.
Prior to the valuation date full tenancy information verified by both the Investment Team and asset services provider is provided to the valuers.
New lettings completed and pending lease events and asset management proposals are provided by the Investment Team on an assetbyasset basis.
The valuers assimilated income information is checked by the Investment Team before the valuers report numbers.
The valuers benefit from their own internal databases and proprietaryexternal resources for both rental and capital evidenceyield evidence.
The comparator method is used for establishing rental values.
Rental evidence is either selfgenerating for multilet assets in particular shopping centres or sourced through market evidence.
Where appropriate net effective rents are applied during extant lease terms and market rents applied at reversion.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 9 Investment properties continued With the majority of the investment portfolio comprising incomeproducing property fair value is established using an investment method of valuation.
Appropriate capitalisation rates are applied to the assets income stream in order to arrive at a yield profile i. net initial yield equivalent yield and reversionary yield that can be reconciled with market evidence.
For multilet properties generally the approach involves applying differential capitalisation rates to the income stream making adjustments for tenant covenant term to expiry and unit quality in order to arrive at a blended position.
For example a foodstore anchor tenant with a strong covenant could be capitalised at a rate of 4.75% and an independentsole trader could be capitalised at a rate of 10.00% at the same property.
Similarly outward adjustments to capitalisation rates applied to vacant units in multilet properties are made to reflect letting and covenant risk associated with future tenants.
There were no changes to valuation techniques during the year.
The following table analyses the nonfinancial assets carried at fair value by valuation method.
The different hierarchy levels have been defined as follows i Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
This may be the agreed sales price of an asset where exchange has occurred after the yearend date Level 1. that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices Level 2. iii Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data that is unobservable inputs.
These assets are valued by external valuers and Directors Level 3.
An analysis of Level 3 assets is provided below.
It is the Groups policy to recognise transfers into and out of hierarchy levels at the date of the change in circumstance.
There are no Level 1 assets or transfers between Levels 1 and 3 during the year ended 28 February 2017 or 29 February 2016.
Analysis of Level 3 Investment properties Class of property Level 3 Market value 28 February 000 Valuation technique Key unobservable inputs
28 February 50 basis point yield contraction 50 basis point yield expansion Shopping centres 127960 Income capitalisation Equivalent yields 5.71% 9.52% 10140 8760 Retailcommercial space 31916 Income capitalisation Equivalent yields 5.25% 8.20% 1893 1806 Office 4230 Income capitalisation Equivalent yields 7.50% 380 335 Land held for development 6583 Residual development method Price per acre development margin per acre 15.0% 20.0% Buildings held for development 8510 Residual development method Estimated profit margin 15.0% 20.0% Further information relating to the Groups investment portfolio is set out in the Portfolio review on pages 22 to 39.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Group engages external independent and qualified valuers to determine the fair value of Level 3 assets.
The valuers liaise with the Investment Team regularly reviewing tenant information relating to covenant strength lease period and rental terms.
Valuers will also review comparable transactions in the market.
The fair value of Level 3 assets is also determined by reviewing local sales data or where the assets are held for the purpose of extending an existing retail asset by reviewing appraisals relating to the proposed scheme.
10 Operating property  serviced office Long leasehold
At 1 March 2015 1612 Surplus on revaluation 100 At 29 February 2016 and 28 February 2017 1712 ACCUMULATED DEPRECIATION At 1 March 2015 792 Charge for the year 60 At 29 February 2016 852 Charge for the year 60 At 28 February 2017 912 Net book amount 28 February 2017 800 Net book amount 29 February 2016 860 Net book amount 1 March 2015 820 Original cost of operating property at 28 February 2017 and 29 February 2016 1583 The operating property is charged as security against the Groups borrowings.
Depreciation expense of 60000 2016 60000 is included within operating costs.
There is no surplus on revaluation of long leasehold property for the year ended 28 February 2017 2016 100000.
If the operating property was measured using the cost model the carrying value would be 671000 2016 731000.
The Groups operating property has been valued at market value as at 28 February 2017 by independent professional valuers CBRE Ltd on the basis of Existing Use Value in accordance with the RICS Valuation Professional Standards and without any special assumptions.
The values disclosed above are as stated by the valuer in its valuation report to the Directors.
The valuer has consented to the use of its name in the financial statements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 11 Intangible assets
At 1 March 2015 2059 Adjustment to goodwill in respect of business combination 269 At 29 February 2016 and 28 February 2017 2328 On 19 May 2014 the Group acquired 100% of the issued shares in Cathedral Group Holdings Limited Cathedral Special Projects Holdings Limited and Cathedral ESCO Limited and 95% of the shares issued in Deadhare Limited a property development group specialising in mixeduse regeneration schemes in the South East.
The goodwill of 2328000 represents the unrecognised asset of the highly skilled workforce and specialist development knowledge acquired with Cathedral.
Goodwill has been tested for impairment at the reporting date.
Goodwill is allocated to the Groups cashgenerating units CGUs identified according to the operating segment.
The recoverable amount of all CGUs has been determined based on valueinuse calculations.
The calculations use pretax cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by management covering a period up to the completion of each project or less than five years.
The pretax discount rate used was 11.0%.
No provision for impairment was considered necessary.
No reasonable change in any assumption would give rise to a material impairment.
12 Other plant and equipment Fixtures fittings and computer equipment
Total
COST
At 1 March 2015 10450 200 10650 Additions 5713 11 5724 Disposals 326 30 356 At 29 February 2016 15837 181 16018 Additions 915 3 918 Disposals 219 5 224 Impairment of fixed assets 8458 71 8529 At 28 February 2017 8075 108 8183 ACCUMULATED DEPRECIATION At 1 March 2015 8102 146 8248 Charge for the year 970 14 984 Disposals 204 27 231 At 29 February 2016 8868 133 9001 Charge for the year 935 21 956 Disposals 187 1 188 Impairment of fixed assets 7288 68 7356 At 28 February 2017 2328 85 2413 Net book amount 28 February 2017 5747 23 5770 Net book amount 29 February 2016 6969 48 7017 Net book amount 28 February 2015 2348 54 2402 Depreciation expense of 663000 2016 242000 is included within operating costs and 293000 2016 742000 is included within direct costs.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 13 Investments Investments in associates Investments in joint ventures At 1 March 2015 8253 40544 Additions 846 8306 Share of profit  5779 Share of revaluation surplus  1468 Share of marktomarket adjustment on interest rate swaps  120 Share of results  7127 Foreign currency differences 478 138 Disposal of joint venture  4523 Capital distributions 4312 4810 At 29 February 2016 4309 46782 Additions 114 19267 Share of profitloss 4340 935 Share of revaluation surplus  2694 Share of marktomarket adjustment on interest rate swaps  35 Share of results 4340 1794 Disposal of joint venture  48 Capital distributions 391 21706 At 28 February 2017 8372 46089 A summary of the Groups projects in partnership and the balance sheet classification of its interests are set out in note 26.
The Group has the following interest in associates % of holding Country of incorporation Principal activity Reporting segment
Barwood Development Securities Limited 40 United
Property development
January
Barwood Land and Estates Limited 25 United
Property development
November
CDSR Burlington House Developments Limited 20 Ireland Property development
July
Northpoint Developments Limited 42 United
Property development
November
Wessex Property Fund 47 Jersey Investment property Investment September The investment in the associate has been fully provided against The Group disposed of its interest in Atlantic Park Bideford Limited in January 2017.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 13 Investments continued a Investment in associates continued
Development
Securities
Limited
Barwood
Land and
Limited
CDSR
Burlington
House
Developments
Limited
Northpoint
Developments
Limited
Wessex
Property
Fund
Total
SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEETS Noncurrent assets 185 440  579  1204 Current assets 3564 768 22045 8943 334 35654 Current liabilities 302  42 1718 11270 13332 Noncurrent liabilities    24257  24257 Net assetsliabilities 3447 1208 22003 16453 10936 731 Share of net assetsliabilities 1378 302 4372 6910 5140 5998 Net liabilities not recognised    6910 5140 12050 Goodwill 1122 1198    2320 Groups share of net assets 2500 1500 4372   8372 SUMMARISED INCOME STATEMENTS Revenue 1431 301 21950 1081  24763 Posttax profitslosses of associates 379 33 21606 783 5 21164 Share of profitslosses 151 8 4340 329 2 4152 Share of profitslosses not recognised 151 8  329 2 188 Share of profits recognised   4340   4340 Dividends received from associates Any contingent liabilities in relation to our associate investment partners are disclosed in note 23.
Atlantic Park
Limited
Barwood
Development
Securities
Limited
Barwood
Land and
Limited
CDSR
Burlington
House
Developments
Limited
Northpoint
Developments
Limited
Wessex
Property
Fund
Total
SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEETS Noncurrent assets  269 576  579  1424 Current assets 312 3086 718 559 9212 334 14221 Current liabilities 747 195 52 221 677 11270 13162 Noncurrent liabilities    68 24321  24389 Net liabilitiesassets 435 3160 1242 270 15207 10936 21906 Share of net liabilitiesassets 174 1264 311 33 6387 4863 9816 Net liabilities not recognised     6387 4863 11250 Goodwill 450 1236 1189    2875 Groups share of net assets 276 2500 1500 33   4309
INCOME STATEMENTS Revenue  1349 442 42927 117  44835 Posttax lossesprofits of associates 239 311 6 269 203 5 127 Share of lossesprofits 239 124 6 54 85 2 154 Share of lossesprofits not recognised 239 124 6 54 85 2 154 Share of lossesprofits recognised Dividends received from associates  40     40 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 b Investment in joint ventures As at 28 February 2017 the Group has the following interests in joint ventures % of holding Country of incorporation Principal activity Reporting segment Acquisition date
Accrue Student Housing GP Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
September 2011 31 August Becket House Unit Trust 15 Jersey Investment property Investment March 2014 31 December Curzon Park Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
November 2006 28 February Development Equity Partners Limited 50 Jersey Property development
December 2011 28 February DSP Piano Investments BV 34 Netherlands Investment property Investment July 2015 31 December DSP Tirol Limited 50 United Kingdom Investment property Investment January 2015 28 February DS Renewables LLP 50 United Kingdom Property development
May 2012 28 February Harwell Oxford Developments Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
December 2013 28 February Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South Woodham Ferrers Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
July 2013 28 February Luxembourg Investment Company 112 Sarl 50 Luxembourg Property development
November 2016 31 December Manchester Arena Complex LP 30 United Kingdom Investment property Investment June 2010 28 February Notting Hill Guernsey Holdco Limited 24 Guernsey Investment property
June 2011 31 December Opportunities for Sittingbourne Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
January 2015 28 February OSB Holdco 1 Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
February 2014 28 February UAIG Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
June 2016 28 February UAIPDrum BV 20 Netherlands Investment property Investment August 2016 28 February UAIH Yorkshire Limited 50 United Kingdom Property development
April 2016 28 February Winnebago Holdings Sarl 35 Luxembourg Investment property Investment April 2012 31 December The company is dormant and therefore no balance sheet or income statement is presented In April 2016 the Group acquired 50% of the share capital in UAIH Yorkshire Limited with its partner R Horton holding the remaining 50%.
The Company is registered and incorporated in the United Kingdom.
In June 2016 the Group acquired a 50% share of the share capital in UAIG Limited with its partner Galliard Homes
The Company is registered and incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 13 Investments continued b Investment in joint ventures continued In August 2016 the Group acquired a 20% share of the share capital in UAIP Drum BV with its partner PSSF Drum BV.
The Company is registered and incorporated in the Netherlands.
In November 2016 the Group acquired a 50% share of the share capital in Luxembourg Investment Company 112 Sarl with its partner ColVinyl Holdings Sarl.
The Company is registered and incorporated in Luxembourg.
In October 2016 the Group disposed of its interest in DSCP Property Holdings Limited.
Investments under joint arrangements are not always represented by an equal percentage holding by each partner.
In a number of joint ventures the Group holds a minority shareholding but has joint control and therefore the arrangement is accounted for as a joint venture.
The Groups share of the assets liabilities income and expenses of its joint ventures which includes amounts receivable from those joint ventures is as follows Curzon Park
DSCP
Property
Holdings
Limited
DSP Piano
BV
DSP Tirol
Harwell
Oxford
Developments
Limited
Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South
Ferrers
Limited
Luxembourg
Investment
Company 112
Notting Hill
Holdco
Limited
OSB
Holdco 1
UAIG
Limited
UAIPDrum
BV
UAIH
Yorkshire
Limited
Winnebago
Holdings
Sarl
Other joint ventures
SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEETS Noncurrent assets   29690 16847       10867    57404 Current assets 35556  1499 4394 52603 1865 57204 61298 34369 282 406 5001 369 1143 255989 Current liabilities 54  524 6694 3469 8 17418 4584 465  79 25 354 134 33808 Noncurrent liabilities 10505  10882 10580 12538  16746 25905 36959  5383 4817   134315 Net assets 24997 19783 3967 36596 1857 23040 30809 3055 282 5811 159 15 1009 145270 Net assets not recognised 24997        3055      21942 Share of net assets recognised   6772 4535 12881 929 11520 7486  141 1089 SUMMARISED INCOME STATEMENTS Revenue 304 518 859 8408 1903   1420 1299  264 172  6 15153 Direct costs 290 138 514 7092 1248  1044 615 711  321 41 334 187 12535 Interest costs  245 400 890 420  249 1848 3570  52 473   8147 Gain on revaluationsale   2351  7578         562 10491 Profitloss before and after tax 14 135 2296 426 7813  1293 1043 2982  109 342 334 381 4962 Share of profitloss before and after tax 7 75 781 62 2479  488 252 1399  31 171 568 287 1794 Within the current net asset balance of Luxembourg Investment Company 112 Sarl there is a cash balance of 5926000.
Qualifying development assets held via joint ventures were fair valued at 28 February 2017.
19.6% of assets qualified under EPRA guidelines.
The Groups share of the valuation after tax was a deficit of 2416000.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 Curzon Park
DSCP
Property
Holdings
Limited
DSP Piano
BV
DSP Tirol
Harwell
Oxford
Developments
Limited
Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South
Ferrers
Limited
Luxembourg
Investment
Company 112
Notting Hill
Holdco
Limited
OSB
Holdco 1
UAIG
Limited
UAIPDrum
BV
UAIH
Yorkshire
Limited
Winnebago
Holdings
Sarl
Other joint ventures
SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEETS Noncurrent assets   29690 16847       10867    57404 Current assets 35556  1499 4394 52603 1865 57204 61298 34369 282 406 5001 369 1143 255989 Current liabilities 54  524 6694 3469 8 17418 4584 465  79 25 354 134 33808 Noncurrent liabilities 10505  10882 10580 12538  16746 25905 36959  5383 4817   134315 Net assets 24997 19783 3967 36596 1857 23040 30809 3055 282 5811 159 15 1009 145270 Net assets not recognised 24997        3055      21942 Share of net assets recognised   6772 4535 12881 929 11520 7486  141 1089 SUMMARISED INCOME STATEMENTS Revenue 304 518 859 8408 1903   1420 1299  264 172  6 15153 Direct costs 290 138 514 7092 1248  1044 615 711  321 41 334 187 12535 Interest costs  245 400 890 420  249 1848 3570  52 473   8147 Gain on revaluationsale   2351  7578         562 10491 Profitloss before and after tax 14 135 2296 426 7813  1293 1043 2982  109 342 334 381 4962 Share of profitloss before and after tax 7 75 781 62 2479  488 252 1399  31 171 568 287 1794 Within the current net asset balance of Luxembourg Investment Company 112 Sarl there is a cash balance of 5926000.
Qualifying development assets held via joint ventures were fair valued at 28 February 2017.
19.6% of assets qualified under EPRA guidelines.
The Groups share of the valuation after tax was a deficit of 2416000.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 13 Investments continued b Investment in joint ventures continued
Student
Housing GP
Becket
House Unit
Curzon Park
Development
Equity
Partners
Limited
DSCP
Property
Holdings
Limited
DSP Piano
BV
DSP Tirol
Harwell
Oxford
Developments
Limited
Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South
Ferrers
Limited
Manchester
Arena
Complex LP Notting Hill
Holdco
Limited
Opportunities
Sittingbourne
Limited
OSB
Holdco 1
Winnebago
Holdings
Sarl
Total
SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEETS Noncurrent assets      16265 18325   13    4541 39144 Current assets 10486 112078 35403 552 10669 1765 4620 24628 1014 293 60050 474 35312 8786 306130 Current liabilities 434 55761 10  77 374 2030 4597 8 73 4083 118 1052 1860 70477 Noncurrent liabilities 4846  10505  6407 6541 14514 9820   25979  31462  110074 Net assets 5206 56317 24888 552 4185 11115 6401 10211 1006 233 29988 356 2798 11467 164723 Net assets not recognised   24888            24888 Share of net assets recognised 2603 9093  276 2091 3779 5121 7915 503 175 7197 178 1399 6452 46782 SUMMARISED INCOME STATEMENTS Revenue 10657 4985 251  760 271 9209 1545   1471  1366 900 31415 Direct costs 8767 737 219  348 315 7911 990   525  998 549 21359 Interest costs 156 3506 26  364 85 1200 477 23  1950  3258 431 11476 Gain on revaluation  18292            16324 34616 Profitloss before and after tax 1734 19034 6  48 129 98 78 23  1004  2890 16244 33196 Share of profitloss before and after tax 837 3336 3  108 44 78 585 12  241  1445 3898 7127 Any contingent liabilities in relation to our joint ventures are disclosed in note 23.
The Groups principal subsidiaries at 28 February 2017 are set out below.
They have share capital consisting solely of Ordinary share capital that are held directly by the Group and the proportion of ownership interest equals the voting rights held by the Group.
Principal subsidiaries are those undertakings with net assets in excess of 5.0% of Group net assets.
Development Securities Estates PLC 100 United Kingdom Management and investment company Development Securities Investments PLC 100 United Kingdom Property investment DS Jersey No.1 Limited 100 Jersey Investment holding company A full list of subsidiaries is disclosed in note 41.
The total noncontrolling interest for the year is nil 2016 nil.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 13 Investments continued b Investment in joint ventures continued
Student
Housing GP
Becket
House Unit
Curzon Park
Development
Equity
Partners
Limited
DSCP
Property
Holdings
Limited
DSP Piano
BV
DSP Tirol
Harwell
Oxford
Developments
Limited
Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South
Ferrers
Limited
Manchester
Arena
Complex LP Notting Hill
Holdco
Limited
Opportunities
Sittingbourne
Limited
OSB
Holdco 1
Winnebago
Holdings
Sarl
Total
SUMMARISED BALANCE SHEETS Noncurrent assets      16265 18325   13    4541 39144 Current assets 10486 112078 35403 552 10669 1765 4620 24628 1014 293 60050 474 35312 8786 306130 Current liabilities 434 55761 10  77 374 2030 4597 8 73 4083 118 1052 1860 70477 Noncurrent liabilities 4846  10505  6407 6541 14514 9820   25979  31462  110074 Net assets 5206 56317 24888 552 4185 11115 6401 10211 1006 233 29988 356 2798 11467 164723 Net assets not recognised   24888            24888 Share of net assets recognised 2603 9093  276 2091 3779 5121 7915 503 175 7197 178 1399 6452 46782 SUMMARISED INCOME STATEMENTS Revenue 10657 4985 251  760 271 9209 1545   1471  1366 900 31415 Direct costs 8767 737 219  348 315 7911 990   525  998 549 21359 Interest costs 156 3506 26  364 85 1200 477 23  1950  3258 431 11476 Gain on revaluation  18292            16324 34616 Profitloss before and after tax 1734 19034 6  48 129 98 78 23  1004  2890 16244 33196 Share of profitloss before and after tax 837 3336 3  108 44 78 585 12  241  1445 3898 7127 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 14 Inventory
Trading properties
DEVELOPMENT AND TRADING PROPERTIES At 1 March 2015 139188 78286 217474
Disposals 112947 63950 176897 Foreign currency differences 1056 1895 2951 Write back of previous adjustment to net realisable value 1041  1041 Fair value uplift on transfer of inventory to investment properties 549  549 Net write down of development properties to net realisable value 1837  1837 At 29 February 2016 147927 51852 199779
Disposals 54884 23619 78503 Foreign currency differences 906 1887 2793 Net write down of development properties to net realisable value 155  155 At 28 February 2017 165588 42754 208342 Included in the above amounts are projects stated at net realisable value of 5486000 2016 7583000.
Net realisable value has been estimated by the Directors taking account of the plans for each project the planning status and competitive position of each asset and the anticipated market for the scheme.
For material developments the Directors have consulted with third party chartered surveyors in setting their market assumptions.
Interest of 2 180000 2016 2937 000 was capitalised on development and trading properties during the year.
Capitalised interest included within the carrying value of such properties on the Balance Sheet is 3614000 2016 2629000.
This year the Group engaged CBRE Ltd to provide valuations in respect of its development and trading assets.
A large proportion of the Groups development and trading portfolio falls outside of the criteria for a reliable fair value exercise.
For example the Group often has conditional land options in place to purchase land at a future date rather than ownership whilst planning is progressed at the Groups expense.
Under the EPRA guidelines only a percentage of assets qualify as shown below % of portfolio valued Book value EPRA value
Trading assets 42.3 18098 20569 1977 Development assets 43.0 71202 87195 12794 42.9 89300 107764 14771 Uplift shown net of tax Further information in respect of EPRA can be found on pages 46 and 47 of the Finance review.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 15 Trade and other receivables a Noncurrent Prepayments and accrued income 2858 3403 b Current Trade receivables 7278 4784 Other receivables 34996 76172 Other tax and social security 1738 1748 Prepayments and accrued income 4708 3716 48720 86420 The Group has provided 1318000 2016 46000 for outstanding balances where recovery is considered doubtful.
Apart from the receivables that have been provided for at the year end there are no other material receivables past due but not impaired.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the carrying value of the receivable.
Transactions and balances with related parties are disclosed in note 25.
16 Trade and other payables a Noncurrent Trade payables 14395 7134 b Current Trade payables 7088 4075 Other payables 10889 11539 Other tax and social security 3604 1691 Accruals and deferred income 31788 37805 53369 55110 c Provisions
Other
Total
At 1 March 2016 1731 14 1745 Credited to the income statement  5 5 Charged to the income statement  2247 2247 Utilised during the year 49  49 Provisions released 1270  1270 Unwind of discount 14  14 At 28 February 2017 426 2256 2682 Analysis of total provisions Noncurrent 1288 1731 Current 1394 14 2682 1745 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 16 Trade and other payables continued A total provision of 2247000 has been made in respect of the Groups serviced office business.
1692000 has been provided for the closure of two centres and a further provision of 555000 for the obligations at the remaining centres.
In 2016 1270000 was provided to cover the onerous liability associated with leases at three of our serviced office centres.
This provision has now been released following a review of the business.
Two provisions of 183000 2016 204000 and 243000 2016 257000 relate to onerous lease obligations entered into in 2009 and 1974 respectively.
17 Financial assets and financial liabilities The following table is a summary of the financial assets and financial liabilities included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet NONCURRENT ASSETS Availableforsale financial assets 19859 28544 Loan notes at amortised cost less impairment  8813 Derivative financial instruments not used for hedging at fair value through profit or loss 257 315 20116 37672 CURRENT ASSETS Loan notes at amortised cost less impairment 8813 Loans and receivables 9711 1700 Trade and other receivables at amortised cost less impairment 44850 82481 Monies held in restricted accounts and deposits 27486 8096 Cash and cash equivalents 23785 43752 114645 136029 Total financial assets 134761 173701 CURRENT LIABILITIES Trade and other payables at amortised cost 46693 50059 Borrowings at amortised cost 4508 65471 51201 115530 NONCURRENT LIABILITIES Trade and other payables at amortised cost 14395 7134 Borrowings at amortised cost 167617 147818 182012 154952 Total financial liabilities 233213 270482 a Other financial assets
Availableforsale financial assets  development loans 19859 28544 Loan notes at amortised cost less impairment  8813 19859 37357 The Group provided a loan of 10505000 2016 10505000 to the Curzon Park Limited joint venture in order to repay a share of its bank debt.
The joint venture partner provided the equivalent amount.
The bank loan originally secured against the 10.5acre site in Birmingham has since been fully repaid.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Group has two funding agreements totalling 8727000 2016 9214000 in respect of projects in partnership.
The loans attract fixed coupon rates of 6.0% and 8.5%.
Funding of 627000 2016 553000 has been provided to Henry Davidson Developments Limited in respect of two projects.
Interest of 12.5% is charged in respect of this funding.
CURRENT
Loan notes at amortised cost less impairment 8813 Loans and receivables  Northpoint Developments Limited 8211 200 Loans and receivables  Property Alliance Group 1500 1500 18524 1700 The Group holds loan notes with a carrying value of 8813000 2016 8813000 issued by Northpoint Developments Limited with a fixed term of ten years and a fixed coupon rate of 4.25%.
These loan notes are repayable in November 2017 and have therefore been reclassified as current financial assets.
The loan notes are currently being restructured.
As at 28 February 2017 the Group has made a provision of 973000 2016 582000 against interest receivable in respect of these loan notes.
Development loans include a number of working capital and projectspecific loans of 8211000 2016 200000 to Northpoint Developments Limited.
The loans attract fixed coupon rates of between 5.0% and 13.0%.
Included in the above amount are two interestfree loans of 408000 2016 200000.
Loans totalling 8011000 are repayable in November 2017 and have therefore been reclassified as due within one year.
As at 28 February 2017 the Group has made a provision of 1223000 2016 820000 against interest receivable in respect of these loans.
The Group has provided a shortterm noninterest bearing loan of 1500000 to Property Alliance Group as a contribution to a prospective future project this amount is repayable on demand.
CURRENT
Bank overdrafts Current instalments due on bank loans 2630 5544 Current loans maturing 2579 60939 Unamortised transaction costs 701 1012 4508 65471
Bank loans and loan notes 168940 149583 Unamortised transaction costs 1323 1765 167617 147818 Bank loans are secured by way of mortgages and legal charges on certain properties and cash deposits held by the Group.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 17 Financial assets and financial liabilities continued b Borrowings continued
38000000 variable rate loan 2016  28307 25100000 variable rate loan 2016  20879 5430000 variable rate loan 2016  4134 20000000 variable rate loan 2017 2562 7602 12276000 variable rate loan 2018 12276 11398 6296000 variable rate loan 2018  6296 4539000 variable rate loan 2018 1310 2751000 variable rate loan 2018 153 24307000 variable rate loan 2018 3075 11025 30750000 fixed rate loan 2018 4053 5149 28000000 variable rate loan 2018 28000 12000000 variable rate loan 2019 11839 11389 2795000 variable rate loan 2020 2312 2588 47000000 variable rate loan notes 2021 40133 36644 57565000 fixed rate loan 2025 49135 50711 22470000 fixed rate loan 2025 19284 19927 16500 variable rate loan notes 1999 17 17 174149 216066 Less current instalments due on bank loans 2631 5544 Current loans maturing 2578 60939 168940 149583 38000000 variable rate loan This loan was repaid on 16 December 2016.
25100000 variable rate loan The loan was repaid on 16 March 2016.
5430000 variable rate loan The loan was repaid on 11 July 2016.
20000000 variable rate loan This secured loan is repayable was one instalment on 20 April 2017.
6750000 was repaid on 18 November 2016.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 2562000.
This facility has been extended to 20 August 2017 since the year end.
12276000 variable rate loan This is a 9500000 secured development facility on which interest can be rolled up.
The loan is repayable in one instalment on 31 March 2018.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 12276000 including 2776000 of rolled up interest.
6296000 variable rate loan The loan was repaid on 17 March 2016.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 4539000 variable rate loan This secured loan is repayable on the earlier of individual units being disposed of or 14 June 2018.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 1310000.
2751000 variable rate loan This secured loan is repayable on the earlier of individual units being disposed of or 19 July 2018.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 153000.
24307000 variable rate loan This secured loan is repayable on the earlier of individual units being disposed of or 1 August 2018.
The current Sterling balance outstanding on the facility is 3075000 at the balance sheet date.
30750000 fixed rate loan This secured loan is repayable in one instalment on 25 November 2018.
This is a development facility where the loan is drawn down over the progress of the development.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 4053000.
28000000 variable rate loan This secured investment facility is repayable in one instalment on 16 December 2018.
12000000 variable rate loan This secured loan is repayable in one instalment on 5 January 2019.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 11839000.
2795000 variable rate loan 1311000 loan capital amortises over the term of the loan.
The remaining 1484000 is repayable in one instalment on 22 May 2020.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 2312000.
47000000 variable EURIBOR loan notes These unsecured Eurodenominated loan notes are repayable on 24 April 2021.
57565000 fixed rate loan 25665000 loan capital amortises over the term of the loan.
The remaining 31900000 is repayable in one instalment on 12 March 2025.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 49135000.
22470000 fixed rate loan 9980000 loan capital amortises over the term of the loan.
The remaining 12490000 is repayable in one instalment on 12 March 2025.
The current balance outstanding on the facility is 19284000.
16500 loan notes These unsecured loan notes were repayable in 1999.
The balance of 16500 represents the residual amount of unredeemed loan notes.
A full explanation of the Groups borrowings and any changes since the balance sheet date can be found in the Financial review on pages 40 to 47.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 17 Financial assets and financial liabilities continued c Derivative financial instruments
Derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss Interest rate swaps caps and collars 36 57 Foreign exchange contracts 221 525 Derivative financial assets 257 582
Derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss Interest rate swaps caps and collars  267 Derivative financial liabilities  267 Net derivative financial assets 257 315 At 28 February 2017 the Group held interest rate swaps caps and collars designated as economic hedges and not qualifying as effective hedges under IAS 39.
The derivatives are used to mitigate the Groups interest rate exposure to variable rate loans of 51972000 2016 64951000.
The fair value of the derivatives amounting to 36000 are recorded as financial assets at 28 February 2017 2016 57000 asset and 267000 liability with the fair value loss taken to finance costs.
Fair value estimation The table below analyses financial instruments carried at fair value by valuation method.
The different levels are defined as follows i Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 1. that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices Level 2.
Level 3.
Discounted cash flows are used to determine fair values of these instruments.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The following table presents the Groups assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
ASSETS
Availableforsale financial assets   27870 27870   28544 28544 Derivative financial instruments Derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss  36  36  57  57 Foreign exchange contracts through profit or loss  221  221  525  525 Total assets  257 27870 28127  582 28544 29126
Derivative financial instruments Derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss      267  267 Total liabilities      267  267 d Financial risk management The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks market risk including fair value interest rate risk cash flow interest rate risk and foreign currency risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments to hedge certain risk exposures.
The nature and extent of the Groups financial risks and the Directors approach to managing those risks are described in the Financial review on pages 40 to 47 and below.
This note provides further detailed information on these risks.
The Group defines capital as total equity and monitors this on the basis of gearing.
Interest rate maturity profile of financial liabilities The following table sets out the carrying amount by maturity of the Groups financial instruments that are exposed to interest rate risk
One to two years Two to three years Three to four years Four to five years More than five years
Fixed rate borrowings  4053    68419 72472 Variable rate borrowings 2579 44814  2312   49705 Variable rate borrowings with interest rate caps or swaps  11839   40133  51972 2579 60706  2312 40133 68419 174149 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 17 Financial assets and financial liabilities continued d Financial risk management continued
One to two years Two to three years Three to four years Four to five years More than five years
Fixed rate borrowings   5149   70638 75787 Variable rate borrowings 32632  40108  2588  75328 Variable rate borrowings with interest rate caps or swaps 28307     36644 64951 60939  45257  2588 107282 216066 Interest on financial instruments classified as variable rate is repriced at intervals of less than one year.
Interest on financial instruments classified as fixed rate is fixed until the maturity of the instrument.
The other financial assets and financial liabilities of the Group that are not included above are noninterest bearing and are therefore not subject to interest rate risk.
Foreign currency risk During the year the Group has continued to invest in the Republic of Ireland.
Foreign currency exposure is monitored by the Board.
Foreign currency risk arises from future commercial transactions recognised assets and liabilities and net investments in foreign operations.
The Board has set up a policy to manage foreign currency risk against the Groups functional currency.
When the Group acquires property assets denominated in Euros any associated borrowings will also be denominated in Euros to limit exposure.
Where appropriate the Board will also require the foreign exchange risk to be hedged.
As at 28 February 2017 the Group was exposed to foreign currency risk from 47000000 2016 47000000 loan notes denominated in Euros and two Eurodenominated loan facilities of 24307000 and 20000000 2016 three facilities totalling 49737000.
The Sterling amount drawn against the Eurodenominated loans as at 28 February 2017 was 5637000 2016 22761000.
During the year to 28 February 2017 the movement of Sterling against the Euro was approximately 20.0%.
Management consider this movement to be exceptional following the EU referendum.
Management have therefore increased the Euro sensitivity from 8.0% to 10.0% to be a prudent measure of sensitivity on this basis.
Sensitivity for the year ended 29 February 2016 has been restated on the same basis.
The following table demonstrates the possible effect of changes in Sterling and Euro exchange rates on loan balances with all other variables held constant
Effect on loan balances Sterling against Euro 10% 4160 10% 5086 Sterling against Euro 10% 5402 10% 6603 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Interest rate risk The Groups interest rate risk arises from longterm borrowings.
Borrowings issued at variable rates are partially offset by cash held at variable rates.
The Board closely monitors interest rate risk and considers whether to fix or cap interest rates on a loanbyloan basis.
Longerterm facilities tend to be structured with fixed rates whereas for shorterterm loans a cap may be preferred.
Similar principles are also employed in respect of joint ventures.
The following table demonstrates the sensitivity in respect of variable rate debt obligations to a change in interest rates with other variables held constant of the Groups profit before income tax.
The sensitivity analysis excludes all non derivative fixed rate financial instruments carried at amortised cost as well as variable rate financial instruments.
Fair value interest rate hedging instruments that are part of a hedging relationship have been excluded.
Variable rate nonderivative financial instruments where the associated interest has been capitalised have also been excluded.
As at 28 February 2017 a movement of 50 basis points higher or lower with all other variables held constant would have the following effect on profit before tax.
Management consider a movement of 50 basis points to be a reasonable guide to sensitivity in the current interest rate environment.
Increase
Effect on profit before tax Sterling borrowings 50 382 tel Sterling borrowings 50 404 Price risk The Group is not exposed to commodity or security price risk.
Liquidity risk The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities at 28 February 2017 and 29 February 2016 on a contractual undiscounted payments basis On demand Less than three months Three to twelve months One to five years More than five years
MATURITY PROFILE OF FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Interestbearing loans and borrowings 17 4553 5792 89891 125935 226188 Trade and other payables  35804 10889 14395  61088 17 40357 16681 104286 125935 287276 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 17 Financial assets and financial liabilities continued d Financial risk management continued On demand Less than three months Three to twelve months One to five years More than five years
MATURITY PROFILE OF FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Interestbearing loans and borrowings 17 10203 60042 73794 125179 269235 Trade and other payables  38520 11539 7134  57193 17 48723 71581 80928 125179 326428 Market risk A summary of market risk and its effect on the Group is set out in the Risk review on page 19 and further discussed in the market review on pages 10 to 13 and in the Portfolio review on pages 22 to 39.
Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities except as detailed below in respect of fixed rate loan facilities the Directors consider the carrying amount to be either fair value or a reasonable approximation of fair value apart from equity instruments classified as availableforsale assets under IAS 39 where fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Fixed rate debt A valuation was carried out as at 28 February 2017 by J C Rathbone Associates Limited to calculate the market value of the Groups fixed rate debt on a replacement basis taking into account the difference between fixed interest rates for the Groups borrowings and the market value and prevailing interest rate of appropriate debt instruments.
Whilst the replacement basis provides a consistent method for valuation of fixed rate debt such financing facilities are in place to provide continuing funding for the Groups activities.
The valuation is therefore only an indication of a notional effect on the net asset value of the Group as at 28 February 2017 and may be subject to daily fluctuations in line with money market movements.
J C Rathbone Associates Limited have consented to the use of their name in the financial statements.
The fair value compared with the carrying amounts of the Groups fixed rate financial liabilities as at 28 February 2017 and 29 February 2016 is analysed below Book value Fair value Book value Fair value Fixed rate term loan due 2025 49135 60055 50711 62025 Fixed rate term loan due 2025 19284 22709 19927 23326 Total fixed rate financial liabilities 68419 82764 70638 85351 The fair value difference of 14345000 at 28 February 2017 2016 14713000 represents approximately 21.0% of gross fixed rate borrowings 2016 20.8%.
The effect on net assets per share after tax of this adjustment would be a decrease of 9.2 pence after tax 2016 9.4 pence decrease.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18 Deferred income tax The following are the deferred income tax liabilities and assets and movements thereon recognised by the Group during the current and previous financial year.
The UK corporation tax rate decreased on 1 April 2015 from 21.0% to 20.0%.
Deferred income tax is calculated on the temporary differences under the liability method using a tax rate of 20.0% 2016 20.0%.
Chargecredit for the year in the income statement refer note 6 11 300 Credited directly to equity 127 28
Provisions
Profit on disposal Tax losses Net fair value adjustments
DEFERRED INCOME TAX ASSETS LIABILITIES RECOGNISED At 1 March 2015 110 500  974 3438 1854 Acquired    493 1292 799 Chargedcredited to the income statement 63   784 1147 300 Credited directly to equity     28 28 At 29 February 2016 47 500  683 3555 2325 Creditedcharged to the income statement 13 25 545 141 405 11 Credited directly to equity     127 127 At 28 February 2017 60 475 545 824 3023 2209 Deferred income tax assets 1359 Deferred income tax liabilities 3568 NET DEFERRED INCOME TAX LIABILITIES 2209 Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are only offset where there is a legally enforceable right of offset and there is an intention to settle the balances net.
Deferred income tax assets arising from the Groups trading and capital losses are recognised on the basis that there will be sufficient profits in the foreseeable future to utilise such losses.
The Group has not recognised deferred income tax assets of 4909000 2016 5928000 in respect of losses amounting to 24549000 2016 29642000 that can be carried forward against future taxable income.
Movements in deferred income tax assets and liabilities prior to the offsetting of balances are shown above.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 19 Share capital Issued called up and fully paid 125226740 Ordinary shares of 50 pence 2016 125074280 Ordinary shares of 50 pence 62613 62537 Number of shares Shares in issue at the date of this report 125226740 The Company has one class of Ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
The Company acquired 123397 of its own shares through purchases on the London Stock Exchange in 2012.
The total amount paid to acquire the shares net of income tax was 171000 and has been deducted from shareholder equity.
The shares are held as treasury shares.
The Company has the right to reissue these shares at a later date.
All shares were fully paid.
A number of shares were subsequently sold out of treasury shares to satisfy a good leaver under the Save As You Earn Scheme SAYE.
The number of treasury shares held as at 28 February 2017 is 118792 shares.
Share option schemes As at 28 February 2017 and at the date of this report the options outstanding under the Companys share option schemes were exercisable as set out below price stated in pence per share.
The share options are more fully described in the Remuneration report on pages 80 to 104.
SAYE option plan 2005 Date of grant
Number Exercise dates Price 22 December 2014 228172 228172 1 February 2018 to 31 July 2018 179.2 Sharebased payments The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices of and movements in share options during the year
Weighted average exercise price Pence Number
Pence
At 1 March 20162015 303197 179.2 336193 174.2 Options granted Options exercised   17277 156.6 Options lapsed   710 152.0 Options cancelled 75025 179.2 15009 179.2 At 28 February 201729 February 2016 228172 179.2 303197 179.2 The options outstanding at 28 February 2017 are exercisable at 179.2 pence per share and have a weighted average remaining contractual life of 1.4 years 2016 2.4 years.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The fair value of grants is measured at the grant date using a BlackScholes pricing model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the instruments were granted.
The services received and a liability to pay for those services are recognised over the expected vesting period.
The main assumptions of the BlackScholes pricing model are as follows Grant date 22.12.14 Exercise price pence 179.2 Term years 3 Expected volatility 24% Expected dividend yield p.
2.3% Riskfree rate 0.9% Expected forfeiture p.
Nil
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the U and I Group PLC share price over multiple time periods.
The expected volatility reflects the assumption that the historical volatility is indicative of future trends which may not necessarily be the actual outcome.
The expected life of the options is based on historical data and is not necessarily indicative of exercise patterns that may occur.
Conditional awards under the LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP and the Performance Share Plan PSP The LTIP commenced on 1 March 2016 and replaced the PSP.
The terms of these plans are set out in the Remuneration report on pages 80 to 104.
The first award made under the LTIP was on 5 June 2015.
Under the scheme Ordinary shares are conditionally awarded based on the performance of the Group over a fouryear period for Executive Directors and a threeyear period for staff.
The performance of the Group is referenced to the net asset value per share growth over the vesting period and is based on nonmarket conditions.
The Directors assess the likelihood of the award vesting with the maximum amount that will vest based on forwardlooking forecast of the Group.
The final award made under the PSP has now lapsed.
The principal assumptions for calculating the fair value of the Ordinary shares conditionally awarded are
LTIP
Ordinary shares conditionally awarded no.
2319839 1481203 Date of award 9 June 2016 5 June 2015 Share price pence 191.1 273.4 Percentage probability applied for fair value 46.1% 46.1% Vesting period months 33 33 The expense recognised for equitysettled sharebased payments in respect of employee services received during the year is 1308000 charge 2016 731000 charge.
The charge recognised for cashsettled sharebased payments during the year is nil 2016 nil.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 20 Reserves and movements in equity
Share premium
Sharebased payments reserve
Capital reserve
Treasury shares At 1 March 2015 62529 104094 1702  1631 44188 4725 165 Employee share option scheme 8 19 Sharebased payments    731 Revaluation of operating property   129 Realisation of valuation uplift   142 Deferred income tax charged directly to equity   28 Currency translation differences  Group   2438 At 29 February 2016 62537 104113 751 731 1631 44188 4725 165 Employee share option scheme 76 212 Sharebased payments    1308 Revaluation of operating property realised on sale   1073 Fair value adjustment realised   630 Deferred income tax charged directly to equity   127 Currency translation differences  Group   2958 At 28 February 2017 62613 104325 2133 2039 1631 44188 4725 165 The capital redemption reserve arose from business combinations in prior financial years.
This reserve is not distributable.
The merger reserve comprises the premium on shares following the share issue to acquire Cathedral Group.
No share premium is recorded in the Companys financial statements through the operation of the Merger Relief provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Retained earnings At 1 March 2015 130358 Profit for the year 21828 Final dividend 2015 4373 Interim dividend 2016 2999 At 29 February 2016 144814 Loss for the year 3003 Revaluation of operating property realised on sale 1073 Fair value adjustment realised 630 Final dividend 2016 4378 Supplemental dividend 2016 9997 Interim dividend 2017 3003 At 28 February 2017 126136 21 Note to the cash flow statement Reconciliation of profit before income tax to net cash outflow from operating activities Lossprofit before income tax 1710 25788 Adjustments for Lossgain on disposal of investment properties 2273 440 Lossgain on revaluation of property portfolio 9506 229 Other income 1320 673 Share of posttax profits of joint ventures and associates 6134 7127 Profit from sale of investment 567 2174 Loss on sale of other plant and equipment 25 87 Exceptional impairment of operating segment 2150 Finance income 711 2483 Finance cost 11495 15351 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 1016 1044 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 16023 29144 Increasedecrease in development and trading properties 3590 32096 Decreaseincrease in receivables 36991 41061 Increasedecrease in payables 7490 11021 Decrease in provisions 55 1163 Cash flows generated from operating activities 56859 7995 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 22 Financial commitments and operating lease arrangements Capital commitments At 28 February 2017 the Group had no contracted capital expenditure 2016 955000.
The Group has no commitments for loans to its associates 2016 nil.
Operating lease arrangements Operating lease arrangements in respect of land and buildings where the Group is lessee Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised for the year 4466 4664 At the balance sheet date the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows Within one year 4363 4020 In the second to fifth years inclusive 14451 14926 After five years 7778 12529 26592 31475 Operating lease payments represent rentals payable by the Group for certain of its leasehold properties.
Leases were negotiated for an average term of 12.8 years 2016 13.5 years.
In respect of operating lease arrangements where the Group is lessor at the balance sheet date the Group had contracted with tenants for the following future minimum payments Within one year 15140 21374 In the second to fifth years inclusive 47846 68945 After five years 88446 77989 151432 168308 Property investment income earned during the year was 12934000 2016 14397000.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 23 Contingent liabilities In the normal course of its development activity the Group is required to guarantee performance bonds provided by banks in respect of certain obligations of Group companies.
At 28 February 2017 such guarantees amounted to 6917000 2016 6917000.
The Group has provided guarantees for rent liabilities in respect of properties previously occupied by Group companies.
In the event that the current tenants ceased to pay rent the Group would be liable to cover any shortfall until the building could be relet.
The Group has made provision against crystallised liabilities in this regard.
In respect of potential liabilities where no provision has been made the annual rentroll of the buildings benefiting from such guarantees is 7000 2016 165000 with an average unexpired lease period of 70 years 2016 3.7 years.
The Group has guaranteed its share of interest up to a maximum of 575000 in respect of the 26000000 loan in Notting Hill Guernsey Holdco Limited.
24 Pension scheme The Company operates a defined contribution scheme for Directors and employees.
Monthly premiums are invested in an independent insured fund.
The amounts charged to the income statement during the year are set out in note 4.
25 Related parties During the year the Group entered into transactions in the ordinary course of business with related parties.
Transactions entered into and balances outstanding at 28 February 2017 and 29 February 2016 with related parties are set out below.
Only Directors are considered to be key management personnel.
Richard Upton owed a total of 57000 to the Group in respect of activities at St Thomas Church the office previously occupied by Cathedral Group.
This amount will be settled in due course.
There were no further transactions with Directors other than remuneration set out in the Remuneration report on pages Finance income from related parties
JOINT VENTURES 2017 1319 43202 2016 671 34620
2017  20065 2016 40 20325 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 26 Projects in partnership The following is a summary of the Groups projects in partnership and the Balance Sheet classification of its financial interests Projectpartner Project activity Accounting classification Atlantic Park Bideford Limited Strategic land investment Investment in associates  276 Barwood Development Securities Limited Strategic land investment Investment in associates 2500 2500 Barwood Land and Estates Limited Strategic land investment Investment in associates 1500 1500 CDSR Burlington House Developments Limited Property development Investment in associates 4372 33 Wessex Property Fund Property investment Investment in associates Wessex Investors Property development Development properties Cathedral Movement Greenwich LLP Property development Financial assets 127 441 Northpoint Developments Limited Property development Financial assets 17024 17285 Curzon Park Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures Curzon Park Limited Property development Financial assets 10505 10505 Deeley Freed Limited Property development Financial assets 8600 8773 Henry Davidson Developments Limited Property development Financial assets 627 553 Property Alliance Group Property development Financial assets 1500 1500 Accrue Student Housing GP Limited Student accommodation Investment in joint ventures  2603 Becket House Unit Trust Investment property Investment in joint ventures  9093 Development Equity Partners Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures 269 276 DSCP Property Holdings Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures  2091 DSP Piano Investments BV Investment property Investment in joint ventures 6772 3779 DSP Tirol Limited Investment property Investment in joint ventures 4535 5121 DS Renewables LLP Property development Investment in joint ventures Harwell Oxford Developments Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures 12881 7915 Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South Woodham Ferrers Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures 929 503 Luxembourg Investment Company 112
Property development Investment in joint ventures 11520 Manchester Arena Complex LP Investment property Investment in joint ventures 169 175 Notting Hill Guernsey Holdco Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures 7486 7197 Opportunities for Sittingbourne Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures 128 178 Orion Land and Leisure Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures  1399 UAIG Limited Property development Investment in joint ventures 141 UAIH Yorkshire Property development Investment in joint ventures 15 UAIP Drum BV Property development Investment in joint ventures 1201 Winnebago Holdings Sarl Investment property Investment in joint ventures 43 6452 92844 90148 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The aggregate amounts included within each relevant balance sheet account are as follows Investment in associates 8372 4309 Investment in joint ventures 46089 46782 Financial assets  current 18524 1700 Financial assets  noncurrent 19859 37357 Development properties 92844 90148 27 Post balance sheet events As at 28 February 2017 the Group had exchanged contracts on the sale of a number of assets held directly and in joint venture.
These sales have since successfully completed.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of U and I Group PLC In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the Strategic report and the Directors report.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
ISAs UK and Ireland reporting Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the Annual Report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Company acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Adequacy of accounting records and information and explanations received Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Directors remuneration
Directors Remuneration report
Companies Act 2006 opinion In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Report on the Company financial statements Our opinion In our opinion U and I Group PLCs Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Companys affairs as at 28 February 2017 have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
What we have audited The financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report comprise the Company Balance Sheet as at 28 February 2017 the Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These are crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and applicable law United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Other required reporting Consistency of other information and compliance with applicable requirements Companies Act 2006 reporting In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic report and the Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic report and the Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the Strategic report Directors report and Corporate Governance statement we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
Other matter We have reported separately on the Group financial statements of U and I Group PLC for the year ended 28 February 2017.
Julian Jenkins Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
26 April 2017 Other Companies Act 2006 reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Our responsibilities and those of the Directors As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 113 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
What an audit of financial statements involves We conducted our audit in accordance with ISAs UK and
An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company Balance Sheet As at 28 February 2017 Notes 000 FIXED ASSETS Tangible assets 31 4615 4924 Debtors  loans and receivables 35 9227 17598 Derivative financial instruments 257 582 Deferred income tax asset 36 798 Investments 32 104258 123250 119155 146354 CURRENT ASSETS Debtors  loans and receivables 34 18524 1700 Debtors 33 399785 403880 Cash at bank and in hand 44285 31884 462594 437464
Amounts falling due within one year 35a 185639 177134 Net current assets 276955 260330 Total assets less current liabilities 396110 406684
Amounts falling due after more than one year Bank loans 35b 105172 103789 Deferred income tax liabilities 36 109 Provisions for liabilities 35c 183 205 105464 103994 Net assets 290646 302690 CAPITAL AND RESERVES Called up share capital 37 62613 62537 Share premium account 38 104325 104113 Other reserves 38 8230 6922 Profit and loss account 38 115478 129118 Total shareholders funds 290646 302690 The profit after tax for the year was 3738000 2016 316000 loss.
The notes on pages 182 to 194 are an integral part of these financial statements.
Approved by the Board of Directors on 26 April 2017 and signed on its behalf by M S Weiner
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes
Share premium
Retained earnings
At 1 March 2015 62529 104094 6191 136806 309620 Loss and total comprehensive income for the year ended 29 February 2016    316 316 Issue of Ordinary shares 38 8 19   27 Sharebased payments 38   731  731 Final dividend 2015    4373 4373 Interim dividend 2016    2999 2999 Total contributions by and distributions to owners of the Company 8 19 731 7372 6614 Balance at 29 February 2016 62537 104113 6922 129118 302690 Profit and total comprehensive income for the year ended 28 February 2017    3738 3738 Issue of Ordinary shares 38 76 212   288 Sharebased payments 38   1308  1308 Final dividend 2016    4378 4378 Supplemental dividend 2016    9997 9997 Interim dividend 2017    3003 3003 Total contributions by and distributions to owners of the Company 76 212 1308 17378 15782 Balance at 28 February 2017 62613 104325 8230 115478 290646 Company Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 28 February 2017 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements For the year ended 28 February 2017 ii Critical accounting judgements and estimates When preparing the Company financial statements management are required to make judgements assumptions and estimates concerning the future.
These judgements and assumptions are made at the time the financial statements are prepared and adopted based on the best information available.
Actual outcomes may be different from initial estimates and are reflected in the financial statements as soon as they become apparent.
Management believe that the underlying assumptions are appropriate.
Areas requiring judgements or estimates are discussed below.
Judgements other than estimates 1.1 Derivative financial instruments The Company is party to a number of interest rate swap and foreign currency agreements which are accounted for as derivatives and measured at fair value.
The estimation of this figure is based upon market assumptions about future movements in interest and exchange rates.
The estimated fair values and the movements in the year are set out in note 17c to the Group financial statements.
1.2 Group LongTerm Incentive Plan LPIT During the year the Company made awards to staff under the Groups LTIP.
The awards vest according to a number of performance criteria the primary measure being net asset value growth over a threeyear period.
In calculating the provision to accrue management are required to estimate net asset growth over the vesting period.
The estimate is reassessed at each reporting date.
The Companys investments in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures are accounted for in the financial statements at cost less any provision for impairment.
Loans and receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Rental payments under operating leases are charged on a straightline basis to the profit and loss account over the lease term even if the payments are not made on such a basis.
28 Accounting policies a General information The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
U and I Group PLC is the holding company for the U and I Group of companies.
The Companys financial statements have been prepared in compliance with United Kingdom Accounting Standards including Financial Reporting Standard 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland FRS 102 and the Companies Act 2006.
Accounting policies adopted are consistent with the previous year unless otherwise stated and are set out below.
The Company has not presented its own profit and loss account as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The Company has also taken advantage of the following exemptions i from presenting a reconciliation of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and end of the year ii from preparing a statement of cash flows on the basis that it is a qualifying entity and the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement included in these financial statements includes the Companys cash flows iii from the financial instrument disclosures required under FRS 102 as the information is provided in the Consolidated financial statements iv from disclosing the sharebased payment arrangements required under FRS 102 concerning its own equity instruments.
The Company financial statements are presented within the Consolidated financial statements and the relevant disclosures are included therein and v from disclosing key management personnel compensation as required by FRS 102.
The financial statements were approved by the Directors for issue on 26 April 2017.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 d Tangible assets Tangible assets are held at cost less accumulated depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Cost includes the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
Depreciation is provided so as to write off the cost less estimated residual value of such assets over their expected useful lives on a straight line basis.
The principal annual rates used for this purpose are as follows Fixtures fittings and computer equipment  10% to 33% Motor vehicles  20% e Provisions for liabilities A provision is recognised when the Company has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Provisions are measured at the present value of the expenditure expected to be required to settle the obligation.
The accretion in the discount is recognised as an interest expense.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using tax rates applicable at the balance sheet date together with any adjustment in respect of previous periods.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax basis used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences or unutilised tax losses can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Income tax relating to items recognised directly in equity is recognised in equity and not in the profit and loss account.
Deferred tax is measured on a nondiscounted basis.
The Company operates a defined contribution scheme on behalf of the U and I Group.
The charge to the profit and loss in the year represents the actual amount payable to the scheme in the year.
Differences between contributions payable in the year and contributions paid are shown as either accruals or prepayments in the Balance Sheet.
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies are translated into UK Sterling at the rates ruling at the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated at the rates ruling at that date.
Exchange movements are dealt with in the profit and loss account.
Derivatives including interest rate swaps and foreign exchange contracts are not basic financial instruments.
Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognised in profit or loss in financial costs or income as appropriate.
The Company does not currently apply hedge accounting for interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 At each balance sheet date before vesting the cumulative expense is calculated representing the extent to which the vesting period has expired and managements best estimate of the achievement or otherwise of nonmarket conditions and of the number of cashsettled sharebased instruments that will ultimately vest or in the case of an instrument subject to a market condition be treated as vesting as described above.
The movement in cumulative expense since the previous balance sheet date is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding entry in accruals.
29 Operating profit Details relating to staff costs can be found in note 4 to the Consolidated financial statements.
Auditors remuneration in respect of the audit for the Company was 15000 2016 15000.
30 Operating lease arrangements The Company as lessee Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised for the year 2571 2371 Annual commitments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Operating leases which expire Within one year In the second to fifth years inclusive After five years 2571 2571 2571 2571 Operating lease payments represent rentals payable by the Company for its office property.
The lease payments were negotiated for an average term of 11.4 years 2016 10.6 years.
28 Accounting policies continued j Sharebased payments The Group operates a number of sharebased compensation plans both equity and cash settled under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for cash or equitysettled instruments of the Group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the option is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP The LTIP commenced on 1 March 2015 and replaced the Performance Share Plan PSP.
Under the scheme Ordinary shares are conditionally awarded based on the performance of the Group over a fouryear period for Executive Directors and a threeyear period for staff.
The performance of the Group is referenced to the net asset value per share growth over the vesting period and is based on nonmarket conditions.
The
Directors assess the likelihood of the award vesting and the maximum amount that will vest based on forward looking forecast of the Group.
Ordinary shares conditionally awarded under the PSP are valued at their fair value on the date of the award taking into account the probability of the Ordinary shares vesting based on an equal probability of achieving appropriate total shareholder return ranking as determined under the performance condition.
The Group has used a BlackScholes option valuation model to determine the fair value of share options granted.
The cost of cashsettled transactions with employees and Directors is measured by reference to the fair value at the date at which they are granted and is recognised as an expense over the vesting period which ends on the date on which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance conditions are satisfied.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31 Tangible assets Fixtures fittings and computer equipment
Total
COST
At 1 March 2016 5984 119 6103 Additions 380  380 Disposals 209  209 At 28 February 2017 6155 119 6274 ACCUMULATED DEPRECIATION At 1 March 2016 1094 85 1179 Charge for the year 653 11 664 Disposals 184  184 At 28 February 2017 1563 96 1659 Net book amount 28 February 2017 4592 23 4615 Net book amount 29 February 2016 4890 34 4924 32 Investments Shares in subsidiary undertakings Interest in associated undertakings Interest in joint ventures Interest in loan notes
COST
At 1 March 2016 162867 997 100 8813 172777 Additions   354  354 Reclassification to current assets    8813 8813 At 28 February 2017 162867 997 454  164318 AMOUNTS PROVIDED At 1 March 2016 48530 997   49527 Impairment of investments 10533    10533 At 28 February 2017 59063 997   60060 Net book amount 28 February 2017 103804  454  104258 Net book amount 29 February 2016 114337  100 8813 123250 The Company holds loan notes with a carrying value of 8813000 2016 8813000 issued by Northpoint Developments Limited with a fixed term of ten years and a fixed coupon rate of 4.25%.
These loan notes are repayable in November 2017 and have therefore been reclassified as current investments.
The loan notes are currently being restructured.
As at 28 February 2017 the Company has made a provision of 973000 2016 582000 against interest receivable in respect of these loan notes.
The full list of subsidiaries of the Company are set out in note 41.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 33 Debtors Amounts falling due within one year Trade debtors 13 26 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings 391861 399163 Other debtors 4882 3520 Current income tax asset 1680 Other taxation recoverable 724 622 Prepayments and accrued income 625 549 399785 403880 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings are unsecured interest free and repayable on demand.
34 Debtors  loans and receivables Amounts falling due after more than one year FIXED ASSETS Development loans 9227 17598 Amounts falling due within one year CURRENT ASSETS Loans and receivables 9711 1700 Loans notes receivable 8813 18524 1700 The Company has a development loan agreement of 8600000 2016 8773000 in respect of a project in partnership.
The loan attracts a fixed coupon rate of 6.0% and had been repaid since the year end.
Funding of 627000 2016 553000 has been provided to Henry Davidson Developments Limited in respect of two projects.
Interest of 12.5% is charged in respect of this funding.
Development loans to joint operations include a number of working capital and projectspecific loans of 8211000 2016 8272000 to Northpoint Developments Limited.
The loans attract fixed coupon rates of between 5.0% and 13.0%.
Included in the above amount are two interestfree loans of 408000 2016 208000.
As at 28 February 2017 the Company has made a provision of 1223000 2016 820000 against interest receivable in respect of these loans.
Loan notes receivable from Northpoint Developments Limited have been reclassified as current assets as they are repayable in November 2017 refer note 32.
The Company also provided a shortterm noninterest bearing loan 1500000 to Property Alliance Group repayable on demand as a contribution to a prospective future project.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 35 Creditors a Amounts falling due within one year Bank loans and overdrafts 17 17 Bank loans 4643 9182 Trade creditors 176 264 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 172159 152830 Amounts owed to associated undertakings 1932 2450 Other creditors 991 4027 Accruals and deferred income 5721 8364 185639 177134 Bank loans are secured against investment assets held in other Group companies.
Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings are unsecured interest free and repayable on demand.
Bank loans 105172 103789 c Amounts falling due after more than one year Provisions for liabilities 183 205 The provision of 183000 2016 205000 relates to an onerous lease obligation entered into in 2009.
ASSETS
Derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss Interest rate swaps 36 57 Foreign exchange contracts 221 525 Derivative financial assets 257 582 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 36 Deferred income tax The following are the deferred income tax assets and liabilities recognised by the Company during the current financial year.
Deferred income tax is calculated on the temporary differences under the liability method using an income tax rate of 20.0%.
Accelerated capital allowances
Tax losses Net fair value adjustments
At 28 February chargedcredited to the income statement 61 475 323 48 689 Deferred income tax assets 798 Deferred income tax liabilities 109 Net deferred income tax assets 689 Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are only offset where there is a legally enforceable right of offset and there is an intention to settle the balances net.
Movements in deferred income tax assets and liabilities are shown above.
37 Called up share capital Issued called up and fully paid 125226740 Ordinary shares of 50 pence 2016 125074280 Ordinary shares of 50 pence 62613
Shares in issue at the date of this report 125226740 The Company has one class of Ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
The Company acquired 123397 of its own shares through purchases on the London Stock Exchange in 2012.
The total amount paid to acquire the shares net of income tax was 171000 and has been deducted from shareholder equity.
The shares are held as Treasury shares.
The Company has the right to reissue these shares at a later date.
All shares were fully paid.
A number of shares were subsequently sold out of treasury shares to satisfy a good leaver under the Save As You Earn SAYE scheme.
The number of treasury shares held as at 28 February 2017 is 118792 shares.
Share option schemes As at 28 February 2017 and at the date of this report the options outstanding under the Companys share option schemes were exercisable as set out below price stated in pence per share.
The share options are more fully described in the Remuneration report on pages 80 to 104.
SAYE option plan 2005 Date of grant
Number Exercise dates Price 22 December 2014 228172 228172 1 February 2018 to 31 July 2018 179.2 Details relating to sharebased payments are disclosed in note 19 to the Consolidated financial statements.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 38 Reconciliation of movements in shareholders funds Called up share capital
Sharebased payments reserve
Merger reserve
At 1 March 2016 62537 104113 731 1631 4725 165 Employee share option scheme 76 212 Sharebased payments   1308 At 28 February 2017 62613 104325 2039 1631 4725 165 PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT At 1 March 2015 136806 Loss for the financial year 316 Final dividend 2015 4373 Interim dividend 2016 2999 At 29 February 2016 129118 Profit for the financial year 3738 Final dividend 2016 4378 Supplemental dividend 2016 9997 Interim dividend 2017 3003 At 28 February 2017 115478 The profit after tax of the Company was 3738000 2016 316000 loss.
39 Contingent liabilities The contingent liabilities of the Group are set out in note 23.
The Company has provided guarantees in respect of loans and overdrafts of its subsidiary entities totalling 63018000 2016 101165000.
In addition the Company has guaranteed the performance of subsidiary entities under a range of operating obligations none of which is expected to give rise to a liability in the Company.
40 Related parties Related party transactions are the same for the Company as for the Group.
Details can be found in note 25 to the Consolidated financial statements.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 41 Details of related undertakings of U and I Group PLC In accordance with Section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 a full list of subsidiaries partnerships associates joint ventures and joint arrangements the country of incorporation the registered address and the effective percentage of equity owned as at 28 February 2017 is disclosed below.
Unless otherwise stated the Groups shareholding represents ordinary shares held directly or indirectly by U and I Group PLC and the registered office is 7A Howick Place London SW1P 1DZ.
All interests are in Ordinary share capital and have been consolidated.
Whollyowned subsidiaries 399 Edgware Road Management Company Limited Airport House Business Centre Limited Barrack Close Limited Becket House Asset Management Limited Beyond Green Developments Broadland Limited Beyond Green Developments Thame Limited Birmingham International Park  Limited Birmingham International Park Limited Blue Living Pincents Hill Limited Brownsea View Developments Limited Bruform Limited Bryn Blaen Wind Farm Limited Buckshaw Village Commercial Centre Management Company Limited Burghfield Bolt Limited Calabrese Court Limited Cambourne Business Park Limited Cambourne Business Park Management Limited Capital Business Parks Developments Limited Cathedral Brighton Limited Cathedral Bromley 2 Limited Cathedral Bromley Esco Limited Cathedral Bromley Limited Cathedral Deptford 2 Limited Cathedral Goswell Limited Cathedral Greenwich Beach Limited Cathedral Moss Limited Cathedral Preston Barracks Limited Cathedral Sittingbourne Limited Cathedral Special Projects H Limited Central Research Laboratory Hayes Ltd Church Aston Developments Limited CM Winchester Limited D S Property Developments Limited Development Securities 10 St Bride Street Limited Development Securities Abbey Wood Limited Development Securities Armagh Limited Development Securities Ashford Limited Development Securities Bicester Ltd Development Securities Blackpool Developments Limited Development Securities Bond Street Limited Development Securities Brentford Limited Development Securities Cannock Limited Development Securities Colston Tower Limited Development Securities Curzon Park Limited Development Securities Edgware Road No.1 Ltd Development Securities Edgware Road No.2 Ltd Development Securities Furlong Limited Development Securities Glasgow Airport Limited Development Securities Greenwich Beach Limited Development Securities Greenwich Limited Development Securities Hale Barns Limited Development Securities Hammersmith Limited Development Securities HDD Limited Development Securities Ilford Limited Development Securities Investment Ventures Limited Development Securities Investments PLC Development Securities Launceston Limited Development Securities Lichfield Limited Development Securities Littlehampton Limited Development Securities Maidstone Limited Development Securities Marsh Mills Limited Development Securities Moreton Woods Limited Development Securities Nailsea Limited Development Securities No.
11 Limited Development Securities No.
14 Limited Development Securities No.
19 Limited Development Securities No.
22 Limited Development Securities No.
24 Limited Development Securities No.1 Limited Development Securities No.25 Limited Development Securities No.26 Limited Development Securities No.28 Limited Development Securities No.37 Limited Development Securities No.39 Limited Development Securities No.42 Limited Development Securities No.43 Limited Development Securities No.45 Limited Development Securities No.5 Limited Development Securities No.51 Limited Development Securities No.53 Limited Development Securities No.69 Limited U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Whollyowned subsidiaries Development Securities No.7 Limited Development Securities No.75 Limited Development Securities No.78 Limited Development Securities No.79 Limited Development Securities No.80 Limited Development Securities No.81 Limited Development Securities No.85 Limited Development Securities No.88 Limited Development Securities No.9 Limited Development Securities No.90 Limited Development Securities No.91 Limited Development Securities No.95 Limited Development Securities No.97 Limited Development Securities North London Limited Development Securities Romford Limited Development Securities Sevenoaks Limited Development Securities Slough Limited Development Securities Southampton A Limited Development Securities Southampton B Limited Development Securities Southampton C Limited Development Securities Southwark Limited Development Securities Watford Limited Development Securities Wells Limited Development Securities Woking Limited Development Securities Estates PLC Development Securities Limited DS Investment Properties 2 LLP DS Investment Properties LLP DS Renewables LLP DS Wessex Barnstaple Limited ECC Investments PLC Elvidean Limited Elystan Developments Limited EPD Buckshaw Village Limited Executive Communication Centres Birmingham Limited Executive Communication Centres Cardiff Limited Executive Communication Centres London City Limited Executive Communication Centres London West End
Executive Communication Centres Milton Keynes Limited Executive Communication Centres Limited Extreme Cool Limited Furlong Shopping Centre Limited Golden Leisure North West LTD Goswell Works Limited Greenwitch Limited Griffe Grange Wind Farm Limited Group UI Limited Hammersmith Central General Partner Limited Hammersmith Central No.1 Limited Hammersmith Central No.2 Limited Hammersmith Central South Nominees Limited Hammersmith Central South General Partner Limited Hammersmith Central South Limited Partnership HDD Ashford Limited HDD Bannerbrook Limited HDD Bridgwater Limited HDD Burghfield Common Limited HDD Didcot Limited HDD Dover Limited HDD Lawley Residential Limited HDD Lawley Village Limited HDD Lichfield Limited HDD Llanelli Limited HDD Newcastle Under Lyme Limited HDD Newport Limited HDD Newton Leys Limited HDD Oxley Units Limited HDD Pemberton Limited HDD RAF Watton Limited HDD Stanground Limited HDD Takeley Limited HDD Tranmere Limited Hendy Wind Farm Limited I AM PRS Limited Kingsland Shopping Centre Limited Landpack Limited Luneside East Limited Manchester Arena GP Limited Men Arena GP Limited Mendip Land Limited Moss Works Limited Njord Wind Developments Limited Parkes Court Limited Public Private Partnership H Limited
Management Limited RHD Dartmouth Limited Rhoscrowther Wind Farm Limited Rivella Properties Bicester Limited Romford Management Company Limited The Deptford Project 2 Limited The Deptford Project Limited The Royals Business Park Limited The Telegraph Works Limited Triangle Developments Limited Triangle London Limited Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 41 Details of related undertakings of U and I Group PLC continued Whollyowned subsidiaries U and I 8AE Limited U and I Projects Limited U and I Finance PLC U and I Investments UK Limited U and I PPP Limited U and I Property Limited UAIH Yorkshire Limited United  Industrious Limited Wallis Court Buckshaw Limited Wassand Wind Farm Limited Waterfront Wakefield Hebble Wharf Limited Westway House Limited Wimbledon Phoenix Limited Entities where the Group holds 100% of the equity but the registered office is held elsewhere are detailed below Registered office Company First Floor Fitzwilton House Wilton Place Dublin 2 Ireland Development Securities Properties Dublin Limited Percy Place DS Ireland Limited Fisher Partners Acre House 1115 William Road London NW1 3ER United Kingdom Capital Business Parks Globeside Limited Langham Hall 5 Old Bailey London EC4M 7BA United Kingdom Heart of Slough Management Company Limited 2 Maritime House The Hart Farnham Surrey GU9 7HW United Kingdom Brook House Fleet Management Limited Fifth Floor 37 Esplanade St Helier JE1 2TR Jersey Cranmore Limited DS Jersey Manchester 1 Limited DS Jersey Corporate Services Limited DS Jersey Notting Hill Limited Drake Bideford Limited DS Jersey Capital Partners Ltd DS Jersey Renewables Limited DS Jersey Wick Lane Limited Nailsea Unit Trust DS Cardiff Unit Trust DS Jersey No 1 Limited DS Jersey No 2 Limited DS Jersey No 3 Limited DS Jersey No 5 Limited STRD Holding Company DS Jersey Retail Limited Fisher Partners Acre House 1115 William Road London NW1 3ER United Kingdom Development Securities No.
23 Limited Development Securities No.18 Limited Development Securities No.3 Limited Prins Bernhardplein 200 1097JB Amsterdam Netherlands Development Securities Netherlands B.
Other subsidiaries joint arrangements and other significant holdings incorporated in the United Kingdom where the registered office is 7A Howick Place London SW1P 1DZ % owned Cathedral Movement Greenwich LLP 50 CTP Wakefield Limited 42 Curzon Park Limited 50 U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 % owned Deadhare Limited 94.34 DSP Tirol Limited 50 Harwell Oxford Developments GP Limited 50 Harwell Oxford Developments Limited 50 Harwell Oxford Management Limited 50 HSIC GP1 Limited 25 HSIC GP2 Limited 25 Inhoco 1079 Limited 42 Inhoco 3300 Limited 42 Kensington and Edinburgh Estates South Woodham Ferrers Limited 50 Kensington NC Management Company Limited 42 Manchester Arena Complex LP 30 Mayfield Development General Partner Limited 50 Mayfield Development Partnership LP 50 Minevote Public Limited Company 50 Northpoint No.4 Limited 42 Northpoint Ch Limited 42 Northpoint Developments No 1 Ltd 42 Northpoint Developments No 2 Ltd 42 Northpoint Developments No 50 Ltd 42 Northpoint Developments No 51 Ltd 42 Northpoint Developments No 52 Ltd 42 Northpoint Developments No 53 Ltd 42 Northpoint Developments Ltd 42 Northpoint Investments Ltd 42 Northpoint Kc Limited 42 Northpoint SK Limited 42 Opportunities for Sittingbourne Limited 50 Orion Shepherds Bush Market Limited 50 Orion Shepherds Bush No.2 Limited 50 Orion Shepherds Bush No.3 Limited 50 Orion Shepherds Bush Number 42 Goldhawk Road Limited 50 Orion Shepherds Bush Limited 50 OSB Holdco 1 Limited 50 OSB Holdco 2 Limited 50 Purplexed LLP 94.34 Spectre Hayes Limited 50 Spirit of Sittingbourne LLP 65 St Pauls Place Management Company Limited 42 Tarmac Clayform Limited 50 The Harwell Quad One Limited 25 The Harwell Science and Innovation Campus General Partner Limited 25 The Harwell Science and Innovation Campus Nominee Limited 25 Tower Wharf Estate Management Limited 42 Triangle London Developments LLP 50 Waterfront Wakefield Navigation Place Limited 42 Waterfront Wakefield Management Limited 42 WPG Investment LLP 50 Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 28 February 2017 41 Details of related undertakings of U and I Group PLC continued Other subsidiaries joint arrangements and other significant holdings incorporated in the United Kingdom where the registered office is elsewhere Registered office Company % owned Alliance House Westpoint Enterprise Park Clarence Avenue Trafford Park Manchester M17 1QS Axis Manchester LLP 50 Nelson House Central Boulevard Blythe Valley Park Solihull West Midlands B90 8BG England The Harwell Science and Innovation Campus Limited Partnership Postbus 990 1000AZ Amsterdam Netherlands DSP Investments Piano B.
U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual General Meeting 11 July 2017 Payment of Ordinary dividend 17 August 2017 Announcement of Interim Results to 31 August 2017 October 2017 Company Secretary C Barton ACIS Registered office 7A Howick Place London SW1P 1DZ
Facsimiletel
Website address site Registered number
U and I Group PLC is incorporated in Great Britain and registered in England and Wales
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors Principal bankers Aviva Commercial Finance Limited Barclays Bank PLC Lloyds Banking Group Santander Group The Royal Bank of Scotland plc Corporate solicitors Linklaters LLP Financial advisors
Corporate stockbrokers Peel Hunt LLP Barclays Bank PLC Registrars and transfer office Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU
UK calls cost 10p per minute plus network extras Lines are open 9.00am  5.30pm Monday to Friday excluding public holidays Overseas telephone 44tel email Financial calendar and advisors Illustrations by Amelia Cowan Amelia is our in house events manager.
In her spare time she is a talented illustrator and this year provided the illustrations for our Annual Report.
We love to uncover potential not just in the places we create but within our team as well.
Strategic report  Corporate governance  Financial statements U and I Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 U and I Group PLC 7A Howick Place
