Interactive PDF User guide This PDF allows you to find information and navigate around this document more easily.
Links in this PDF The table of contents key page references and URLs e. are linked in this PDF.
Clicking on them will take you to the corresponding page in the document or web page online by opening a new window in your default web browser.
You can also navigate the document using the buttons described below.
Guide to buttons Back to user guide Search this PDF Print options Preceding page Next page Last visited page Annual Report and Accounts 201617 From your morning coffee to a comfy place to lay your head bringing customers brands they love Annual Report and Accounts 201617 We are the UKs largest hotel restaurant and coffee shop operator with 50000 employees serving millions of customers every week bringing customers brands they love Our vision Our vision is to grow our successful brands by building a strong Customer Heartbeat and innovating to stay ahead.
Its our Winning Teams that make everyday experiences special for our customers so they come back time and again driving Profitable Growth.
We aim to be a Force for Good in our communities and as you will see on page 2 Everyday Efficiency has now been added to our Customer Heartbeat model.
In this document
01 Financial highlights 02 Business overview Strategic report 04 Chairmans statement 06 Chief Executives review 08 Strategy 14 Business model 16 Key performance indicators 22 Group HR Directors report 24 Winning Teams 32 Customer Heartbeat 40 Profitable Growth 48 Force for Good 54 Group Finance Directors review 58 Principal risks and uncertainties
62 Corporate governance 64 Board of Directors 72 Audit Committee report 75 Nomination Committee report 78 Remuneration report 99 Directors report Consolidated accounts 201617 103 Directors responsibility statement 104 Independent auditors report 109 Consolidated financial statements 115 Notes to the consolidated financial statements Company accounts 201617 156 Balance sheet 158 Notes to the Company financial statements Shareholder information 172 Shareholder services 175 Glossary Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 01
Total revenue 3106.0m 8.2% Underlying profit before tax 6.2% Cash generated from operations From 782.2m to 860.1m Premier Inn and Restaurants like for like sales Up 2.3% Costa UK Equity like for like sales Up 2.0% Profit before tax 5.7% Fullyear dividend 6.0% Net debt From 909.8m to 890.0m Net assets From 2404.7m to 2524.8m Group return on capital 15.2% 0.1%pts Underlying basic EPS 6.0% Prior year comparatives The financial year to 2 March 2017 was a 52week year and the financial year to 3 March 2016 was 53week year.
In order to provide a clearer comparison throughout this report yearonyear growth in numbers relating to revenue underlying profit and underlying earnings per share are shown using a 52week comparative which excludes the final week of the 201516 financial year.
All other statutory comparatives and numbers shown at the balance sheet date reflect the financial statements and do not exclude the 53rd week of the prior year.
Performance measures The performance of the Group is monitored internally using a variety of statutory measures such as total revenue and profit before tax and alternative performance measures APMs such as underlying profit before tax like for like sales and return on capital.
APMs are not defined within IFRS and are used to assess the underlying operational performance of the Group.
As such these measures should be considered alongside IFRS measures.
Definitions of all APMs are included in the glossary on page 175.
highlights
Total basic EPS was 231.39p 201516 215.66p Overview Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 02
Business overview How our business works We serve our customers in the UK and beyond through our two businesses Premier Inn and Restaurants Premier Inn is the UKs leading hotel business with over 760 hotels and more than 68000 rooms across the UK.
Our unique joint site model means that more than half of our hotels are located alongside our own restaurant brands.
We also have hotels in the Middle East and Germany with more hotels in the pipeline.
Costa
Costa is the UKs favourite coffee shop with over 2200 coffee shops in the UK over 1300 stores in 29 international markets and over 6800 Costa Express selfserve units.
We have a multichannel strategy with equity stores franchise stores and stores operated by joint ventures as well as a wholesale operation.
We create value for all our stakeholders through our Customer Heartbeat model is the UKs leading hospitality company We have built two of the UKs most successful hospitality brands Premier Inn and Costa through consistent operational excellence and providing a great customer experience.
Our 50000 team members deliver outstanding service to more than 28 million customers every month across our hotels coffee shops and restaurants.
We measure our progress through key performance targets included in our balanced scorecard or Whitbread In Numbers  WINcard for Winning Teams Profitable Growth Customer Heartbeat Force for Good and Everyday Efficiency which has recently been added to our model in order to reflect the importance of efficiency to our future success.
Everyday Eciency Force for Good Overview Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 03 We are focused on three strategic themes Grow and innovate in our core UK businesses Focus on our strengths to grow internationally Build the capability and platform to support future growth We are proud of our ability to deliver great customer service and create real job opportunities We are committed to doing business responsibly and sustainably Through our Team and Community Customer Wellbeing and Energy and Environment programmes we are delivering tangible improvements across the business and we have ambitious targets for 2020 covering job creation and work experience supply chain sugar reduction carbon and water reduction and recycling.
Supported by a strong risk management and governance framework and a disciplined approach to capital management Maintaining high standards of corporate governance is vital to supporting our financial performance.
By understanding and responding to risks we can make informed decisions that strengthen our capacity to build value.
Our focus on delivering high standards for our customers through strong employee engagement is at the heart of our strategy.
We aim to create jobs for people of every background and help our people to reach their potential through training and mentoring in a supportive and inclusive environment.
Overview Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 04 Strategic report
Chairmans statement
Although the modern day Whitbread is very different from the original brewing business founded by Samuel Whitbread in 1742 we are immensely proud of our history and it is a great honour for me and my colleagues on the Board to play our own part in the Whitbread story.
The links to our heritage remain strong.
Our base is still in Bedfordshire and we are delighted to be able to welcome members of the Whitbread family to our Annual General Meeting each year whilst our core values of investing in our Winning Teams and being a Force for Good in our communities remain as important to us today as they always have been.
We are very aware of our responsibility to ensure that this great British company continues to thrive and as such we are focused both on driving growth and managing risk to an appropriate level whilst exhibiting excellent corporate governance.
We operate a conservative approach to the management of our balance sheet and this provides us with a solid base in turbulent and changing times.
Our Winning Teams are the key to our success and I would like to thank our 50000 employees for the fantastic work they do in giving our customers a great experience.
Consistent strategy I explained this time last year that the fundamentals of our strategy which is to provide sustainable longterm value for our shareholders by growing our successful Premier Inn and Costa brands whilst delivering a good return on capital were unchanged.
This remains true today as we continue undaunted by political upheaval and economic uncertainty.
We have a clear plan and we have made good progress against the three strategic priorities outlined by our Chief Executive Alison Brittain last
These are to grow and innovate in our core UK businesses to focus on our strengths to grow internationally and to build the capability and platform to support future growth.
More detail on our strategy can be found on pages 10 to 13 and information on progress against our strategic objectives can be found on pages 41 to 45.
We have remained on course to deliver our objectives whilst at the same time refreshing our Board and the executive leadership team.
I believe that the new team will enable Whitbread to enter the next phase of its life with renewed vigour and confidence.
Richard Baker
We have a clear plan and we have made good progress against our strategic priorities Whitbread one of Britains oldest and most successful companies celebrates 275 years in business this year.
This year is our 275th anniversary Raised since 2012 to fund the Premier Inn Clinical Building at Great Ormond Street Hospital Costa Foundation school projects completed in 201617 6.0% Increase in full year dividend
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 05 The third new appointment to the Board this year is that of Adam Crozier with effect from 1 April 2017.
Adam is Chief Executive of ITV plc and has been Chief Executive of a number of public and private sector organisations over the last 21 years in the media logistics and retail sectors.
Adam is a very high quality business leader with a strong background in business transformations brands communication and marketing and his expertise will be of great value to the Whitbread Board as we continue to expand our successful Premier Inn and Costa brands.
Wendy Becker stepped down from the Board on 31 December 2016 after nine years of service to Whitbread and Stephen Williams who has also just completed nine years of service will step down immediately after the AGM in June.
I would like to thank both Wendy and Stephen for their much valued contribution to the Whitbread Board during a very successful period for the Company.
Wendy has played a significant role as a member of all three Board Committees whilst Stephen has served both as Senior Independent Director and more recently as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
I would also like to thank Stephen for extending his membership of the Board so as to provide handover support to Deanna as she takes on the leadership of the Remuneration Committee.
I look forward to seeing as many of you as possible at our AGM on Wednesday 21 June 2017.
Richard Baker
24 April 2017 Force for Good I believe that it is important that companies act as a Force for Good in their communities as well as being great employers and of course delivering on financial objectives for their shareholders.
This has always been a core value at Whitbread and once again we have made some great progress this year.
I reported in last years report that we had raised 6 million for Great Ormond Street Hospital Charity towards a 7.5 million target.
I am delighted to be able to report that this target was met in November 2016 with the new Premier Inn Clinical Building due to open later this year.
Meanwhile a further 1.8 million has been raised for the Costa Foundation during the year with 72 school projects having been completed so far bringing access to education to thousands of children in coffeegrowing communities.
Modern slavery is a live topic this year as companies begin to publish a statement on the subject on their websites.
As you would expect Whitbread has published its own statement which can be found on our website.
For us this is not merely about meeting a requirement though.
I can assure you that it is a subject we take very seriously and we are in no way complacent.
More information on our activities in this area can be found on pages 50 to 51.
Corporate governance You will see in our remuneration report on pages 78 to 98 that we have proposed some updates to our remuneration policy.
The current policy was approved in 2014 and we are required to put an updated policy to shareholders for approval at the
The Remuneration Committee has taken the opportunity to ensure that our policy is well aligned to our strategy and has rebalanced the Annual Incentive Scheme so as to focus a little more on the leading indicators of future financial performance and a little less on inyear profit.
It is proposed that LTIP targets be reset so as to reflect the business plans and in particular the cost headwinds such as the National Living Wage business rates commodity price inflation and foreign exchange rates as well as planned investment of nonproductive capital in Germany China and IT.
I believe that our approach to remuneration is grounded and conservative and that we are sensibly positioned relative to other companies.
Dividend
The Board recommends a final dividend of 65.90 pence per share making a total dividend of 95.80 pence per share up by 6.0%.
The final dividend will be paid on 30 June 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 26 May 2017.
The Dividend Reinvestment Plan will continue to operate.
Details of how to participate in this plan can be found on the Companys website.
Details of the Groups dividend policy can be found on page 56 in the Group Finance Directors review.
Shareholder benefits Last year having taken account of feedback from shareholders on the previous electronic system we introduced a new shareholder benefits card.
Im pleased that the new card appears to have been well received by shareholders and has for the most part worked well.
I have certainly noticed a significant reduction in correspondence on the subject.
Shareholders who received the card last year should so do automatically this year providing that they still hold the required 64 shares in Whitbread.
Any shareholder who holds this number of shares who did not register for a card last year and would like to do so can find further details on page 173.
The Board As I mentioned earlier in this statement there have been a number of Board changes during the year as well as changes to the senior executive team which Alison reports on in her review on page 7.
Two new independent nonexecutive directors David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer joined the Board on 1 January 2017.
David is the Chief Executive of Hammerson plc a major UK property business with interests across a number of European markets.
Whitbread has a clear growth strategy which is underpinned by an extensive property portfolio and Davids experience in the European retail property sector will provide the Whitbread Board with invaluable insights as we expand both in the UK and overseas.
Deanna is a highly experienced executive with a strong background in mass consumer retail and will bring her experience of having worked with a broad range of leading edge digital businesses in her role at CameoWorks to the Whitbread Board.
In addition Deannas experience of chairing the Tesco Remuneration Committee makes her well placed to succeed Stephen Williams as Chair of our own Remuneration Committee.
I believe that it is important that companies act as a Force for Good in their communities as well as being great employers.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 06 Strategic report
Chief Executives review
Whitbread has had another year of strong growth and continued investment with total Group sales increasing 8.2% to 3.1 billion and underlying basic earnings per share increasing by 6.0% demonstrating the strength of our core brands.
Total basic earnings per share increased by 7.3%.
Strategic priorities In 201617 we made good progress in delivering on our three strategic priorities to grow and innovate in our core UK businesses to focus on our strengths to grow internationally and to build the capability and infrastructure to support longterm growth.
Premier Inns strong sales growth benefitted from the 3816 gross new UK rooms we opened this year and the accelerated maturity of the c.9000 rooms we have opened over the last two years.
We delivered high customer satisfaction by leading the market on quality and value achieved occupancy of over 80% with record levels of direct bookings at 94% all of which supported our strong return on capital.
Costa opened 255 net new stores worldwide and we continue to roll out our successful and fast growing Costa travel formats.
Costa Express had a great year installing over 1500 machines of which 248 were in international markets.
We are innovating to drive our sales growth and are pleased with the investment we are making to introduce finer coffee concepts leveraging our new state This is a significant year in Whitbreads history as we celebrate our 275th anniversary I am delighted to be leading this great British company at this historic time and with such a long and successful history it is right that we take a longterm view of our business in order to safeguard the Companys future for many more years to come.
8.2% increase in turnover in 201617 Alison Brittain Chief Executive new Premier Inn UK rooms net new Costa stores worldwide 6.2% growth in our underlying profit before tax to 565.2 million Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 07 of the art Roastery and delivering fresher food that our customers will enjoy later this year.
Internationally in Germany we grew our hotel pipeline to five hotels and our Frankfurt hotel received great guest feedback.
We continue to have success with our profitable joint venture in the Middle East while our phased withdrawal from South East Asia is on plan.
China remains an exciting platform of growth for Costa and we have a clear plan to enhance our business.
We have launched five new concept stores the results of which give us further confidence that we can capitalise on this market opportunity and grow to significant scale.
During the year we continued to strengthen our capabilities to support our longterm growth including developing the senior team with a number of new hires and promotions.
In November we announced a 150 million cost efficiency programme to help offset investment and sector cost pressures.
We have made good progress this year in areas such as procurement supplier consolidation and labour scheduling which has helped maintain margins.
In the year ahead we will continue to focus on organic growth and investing in our customer proposition.
This together with our efficiency programme and disciplined capital management gives us confidence in delivering another year of good progress in line with overall expectations.
Whilst we are only seven weeks into our new financial year Premier Inn has had a good start to the year and Costa has also seen positive like for like sales growth although we remain cautious and expect a tougher consumer environment than last year.
In the longer term we remain confident that with our significant structural growth opportunities the power of our brands and the investments we are making we will continue to deliver strong returns and sustainable longterm growth for our shareholders.
More detailed information on our three strategic priorities can be found on pages 8 to 13.
201617 performance Group underlying profit before tax rose 6.2% to 565.2 million and underlying basic earnings per share increased 6.0% to 246.48 pence.
Profit for the year was up 7.4% to 415.9 million and total basic earnings per share were up 7.3% to 231.39 pence.
Premier Inn and Restaurants underlying operating profit was up 7.4% to 468.0 million.
Premier Inn grew total sales by 9.0% and the number of rooms available by 9.3% as we opened 3816 gross new UK rooms during the year whilst achieving high total occupancy of 80.2%.
Like for like sales grew by 2.3% benefitting from good RevPAR growth of c.1.4% in catchments where we did not add capacity and from our hotel extension programme which as expected diluted our like for like RevPAR by c.2% but overall grew our like for like sales by c.1%.
Restaurants total sales increased 1.2% benefitting from the eight net new sites opened during the year and like for like sales declined by 0.3% slightly ahead of our competitor set.
Costas underlying operating profit was up 5.3% to 158.0 million with total sales growth of 10.7%.
This was driven by UK like for like sales growth of 2.0% 255 net new stores worldwide and an acceleration in our rollout of Costa Express machines with 1585 net new installations.
Margins were down 0.8% pts slightly ahead of our previous guidance due to the phasing of investments into 201718.
As we align our business towards our three strategic priorities we incurred a net nonunderlying charge of 49.8 million 201516 58.6 million predominately relating to the estimated cost of Premier Inn Internationals withdrawal from India and South East Asia and reorganisation costs associated with our cost efficiency programme.
The executive team As Richard Baker mentioned in his statement there has been some significant change to the executive team over the last couple of years and I am grateful to Nicholas Cadbury and Louise Smalley for the stability they have provided which has enabled our leadership team to be refreshed so seamlessly.
I reported this time last year that Dominic Paul would be joining the team as Managing Director Costa
Dominic joined us in June 2016 before which he was responsible for the success of Royal Caribbean outside the US.
Dominic has hit the ground running injecting energy and putting his personal stamp on our strategy for Costa.
In order to structure ourselves to meet our strategic objectives I took the decision to remove the Whitbread Hotels and Restaurants divisional infrastructure with the aim of bringing the leadership team closer to the customer and enabling a leaner more agile business with faster decisionmaking.
This led to a number of changes to my executive team.
Simon Jones was promoted to Managing Director of both Premier Inn and Restaurants and joined the Executive
Simon joined Whitbread in 2011 and since then has been pivotal to the Premier Inn story leading on key initiatives such as network planning pricing and marketing.
Another internal promotion was Mark Anderson who has been with the business for ten years and has led our property function since 2008.
Mark now reports directly to me which I believe appropriately reflects the importance of property to our business and the significant potential for value creation in this area.
Mark also became Managing Director Premier Inn
Our values At Whitbread we believe that it is not just what you achieve but how you achieve it.
We aim to deliver great financial results for our shareholders have a positive impact on communities create fantastic career opportunities for our employees and great experiences for our customers in a safe and welcoming environment.
We intend to ensure that everyone who plays a part in delivering the products and services that our customers love is treated with respect and paid appropriately for their work.
This applies not only to our 50000 team members but also to the many people working across the world who contribute to Whitbreads success.
I want to take this opportunity to thank everyone who makes Whitbread the company it is for their effort and commitment throughout the year and I am confident that we will work together to deliver on our strategic objectives in the years ahead and that we will do so in a way that will make us all proud.
Alison Brittain Chief Executive 24 April 2017 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 08 Strategic report
Both of our core brands Premier Inn and Costa have a structural growth opportunity.
Our brands are marketleading our customers are loyal and our financial approach is disciplined and prudent.
Our strategy for longterm growth Our strategy builds on the Companys core strengths and its proven brands and business models.
It also adds a number of new elements to enhance our capability.
These come in the form of increased pace and agility a focus on innovation technology and efficiency and a clear strategy for our property portfolio.
We will continue to invest to capture the growth opportunities available in both coffee and budget branded hotels.
We will improve and innovate our customer offers to retain our marketleading brand positions.
We will focus on our strengths to grow internationally and across the whole business.
We will create an efficient and productive infrastructure building capability to support our longterm growth.
Our leasehold and freehold property portfolio provides the core longterm infrastructure and competitively advantaged access to the best sites and provides operational and cost advantages for our business.
We will continue to proactively manage this key asset to ensure we have the best locations and to capture freehold development profit.
We take a longterm view of our business.
Whitbread has a 275year history and with that comes a responsibility to protect the longterm interests of all our stakeholders our shareholders our employees and pensioners and our customers.
We will continue to focus on growing earnings and dividends whilst maintaining a good return on capital.
On 29 November 2016 we held a Capital Market Day in which we reported the following highlights for Premier Inn we have clear line of sight to our 2020 milestone of 85000 UK rooms and have identified an extended growth runway beyond 100000 UK rooms for Costa we again have clear line of sight to our 2020 milestone of 2.5 billion of system sales and have identified an extended runway in the UK to at least 3000 UK stores we continue to see great potential in our international business.
Germany has strong market fundamentals and is a fabulous fit for the Premier Inn brand.
We see a tremendous longterm opportunity for Costa China and at Costa Express we are constantly challenging ourselves to accelerate and doubleup to help us offset cost headwinds from factors such as increases in business rates and the National Living Wage as well as FXrelated price inflation we have established a Groupwide efficiency programme and are targeting 150 million of gross savings over five years and we operate a unique property model which is balanced and creates unique competitive advantage.
Our property strategy directly supports our structural growth ambitions and we have recently valued our freehold property portfolio in the range of 4.2 billion to 5.1 billion.
As a result of our strong fundamentals we have the flexibility to continue to make progress despite evolving political and economic uncertainties.
We have done extensive scenario modelling are confident in our baseline plan and in our ability to make decisions with pace and agility if and when required.
Financially we are in a strong position with strong cash generation a secure balance sheet and a pattern of reinvestment in organic growth at good returns.
On the following pages you will see more detail of our structural growth opportunity together with further information on the three strategic priorities introduced this time last year Grow and innovate in our core UK businesses Focus on our strengths to grow internationally Build the capability and platform to support future growth Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 09 Structural growth opportunity Premier Inn today has 762 UK sites and a 9.5% share of the total UK hotel market.
Premier Inn has opened around 4000 UK rooms per year for the past four years.
Meanwhile Costa has 3532 stores and 6801 Costa Express machines globally.
At Premier Inn our growth continues to be at high returns and can be described as structural for three reasons the significant independent hotel segment is in structural decline.
Running a hotel is becoming more complex and costly.
Proprietors must manage to ever higher customer standards and increasingly must also be digital entrepreneurs competing with online travel agents and disrupters as well as traditional local competition the budget branded sector is capturing the growth reflecting customers increasing desire for quality and value for money and the structural shift to value brands looks set to continue and Premier Inn is the UKs Number 1 hotel company.
The business model is clearly advantaged and wellplaced to capture the shift to value brands as location and value for money are customers top choice.
We have the largest network the most compelling value for money proposition and loyal guests who give us the highest customer ratings.
Our distribution model is direct and our operating DNA delivers consistent quality.
We also have a joint site and property strategy that gives us a unique competitive advantage to be able to access the best sites at good value.
Meanwhile we are tremendously fortunate to operate in the coffee industry.
There arent many consumer product categories that can point to a global consumer lifestyle tailwind habitual purchase behaviour and a 6% global growth forecast.
Coffee has recently overtaken tea as the UKs beverage of choice and international comparisons show a lot more headroom for growth.
The strength of the category has attracted a plethora of brands independents and nonspecialists to the sector.
Our UK business is stepping forward to meet this challenge head on.
We start from a position of great strength as customers choice is still dominated by convenience and coffee quality where we are a clear winner in the UK.
We are by far the UKs Number 1 coffee chain with the strongest network and the best brand perception in the market.
Structural growth opportunities remain strong Total UK hotel market rooms 678000 686000 692000 709000 729000 752000 6% 8% 9% c.68000 10% c.77000 11% c.86000 11% Premier Inn rooms share %
Other
Independents
9.5% share of UK hotel market UK sites Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 10 Strategic report Strategy continued We are confident in our 2020 milestones but we also have considerable growth potential beyond 2020 and our advantaged business models leave us best able to capture this market opportunity.
However we have decided not to create further milestones from these opportunities.
How and when we take our opportunities will be a matter for us based on sustaining good returns delivering earnings growth and managing the business with flexibility and agility.
Our Premier Inn network is formidable.
We have 40% more sites than our nearest competitor and our consistency of customer satisfaction is a core strength.
Our marketleading occupancy and direct distribution translate to good profit generation and a strong return on capital.
We achieve over 13% returns across the Premier Inn and Restaurants portfolio which is substantially above our cost of capital.
Our ability to deliver growth is proven.
We open around 4000 UK rooms per year which roughly translates to three new hotels every month.
Our network plan is based on quantitative analysis and has been subject to continuous scrutiny and refinement taking account of the longterm UK growth in GDP and the effect we think disrupters will have on the market.
We remain on track for our 2020 milestone and have identified a growth runway beyond 100000 UK rooms.
During the year we conducted an extensive strategic review of Costa UK and there remains considerable headroom for growth.
Costa is a proposition for the whole of the country.
We operate in all types of location from high streets to retail parks and Drive Thrus and through both equity and franchised models.
Across this diverse estate Costa is the clear Number 1 preferred coffee shop reflecting our exceptional coffee our loved brand our formidable network and our Winning Teams.
Coffee in the UK is a hive of innovation.
Branded coffee shops new independents nonspecialists and product innovators all want to participate in the category growth but we plan to maintain our position of leadership.
Our plans are to enhance the UK offer through improvement of the customer proposition including building on our coffee credentials and delivering finer food and smarter thinking about how we segment and optimise the estate.
Delivering this programme will provide us with longterm sustainable like for like growth.
The structural growth of coffee is expanding the scope of operations for coffee shops.
In addition to traditional high street and retail locations we see extensive opportunity for Drive Thru coffee and believe we can access more of the best transport locations and retail parks.
Our network plan shows opportunity for at least 3000 stores in the UK compared to just over 2200 today.
Premier Inn UK  runway for growth beyond 100000 rooms Strategic Priority 1 Grow and innovate in our core UK businesses The chart above represents why Premier Inn is such a unique and differentiated model.
UK Network strength 40% more sites than closest competitor 910 sites have TripAdvisor Certificate of Excellence Strong return on capital Above hurdle returns for both freehold and leasehold providing a substantial premium to cost of capital Continued growth On track for 85000 rooms by 2020 and growth runway beyond 100000 rooms identified with strong network planning disciplines Digital direct 94% of bookings made direct via our digital channels Value for money Premier Inn is rated No.
1 by YouGov for value for money
Above 80% Digital direct destination
13% return on capital Value for money
Consistent quality delivery
Continued growth Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 11 Germany is a structurally attractive market for Premier Inn.
The German customer appreciates a high quality sleep experience at a great price and crucially can pay an economic rate to enjoy it.
The market is in steady growth currently dominated by independents and with the largest brands at a fraction of our UK scale.
Our first hotel in Frankfurt is enjoying excellent customer feedback.
Being one of the top Frankfurt hotels on TripAdvisor is a great endorsement of our potential and we are maturing the hotel without using online travel agents.
We have secured five additional sites in outstanding locations in key cities to roll out on this template.
Over the longterm we believe that Premier Inn can replicate its UK success in Germany and create longterm shareholder value growth.
In order to focus on Germany and the Middle East we took the decision to withdraw Premier Inn from India and South East Asia and our exit plans are progressing well.
For Costa China is a large market with a growing consumer middle class and coffee culture and has the potential to provide a significant future growth engine.
We believe that our current operations represent a platform to unlock the potential in China and to establish a Number 2 position in the market.
We recognise that we have more work to do to get the proposition right in China and to reinvigorate the brand.
However we are given confidence by the fact that outside a tail of underperforming stores site performance is credible.
We have learned valuable lessons from our experience to date and we have now developed a clear plan to succeed in the market.
Costa has a growing international footprint and we intend to make it work harder for us.
We will focus on the markets with the highest potential with a lean regional infrastructure to support local market growth.
We will leverage our capital light franchise model and skill in successful partner selection to replicate and build on our success.
As part of this focus we have taken the decision to withdraw from our equity business in France and to focus on a franchise model.
Costa Express represents a significant international growth opportunity.
Costa bought Coffee Nation in 2011 and since then performance has exceeded our expectations.
Costa Express is a technologically advantaged business both at the frontend in the coffee and at the backend through its infrastructure.
It succeeds in the UK and is starting to succeed overseas too.
We are excited by the prospects of Costa Express internationally and constantly looking to accelerate our growth and doubleup.
Strategic Priority 2 Focus on our strengths to grow internationally Costa Express represents a significant international growth opportunity
Costa has the potential to establish a Number 2 position in the Chinese market
The Premier Inn in Frankfurt is enjoying excellent customer feedback Im Here Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 12 Strategic report Strategy continued Outlined in the previous pages is a multifaceted growth plan with multiple brands operating in multiple territories and ambitious plans to develop our key propositions.
It is essential that we build the capability to support our longterm growth.
We have identified four themes under this heading
To grow at around 4000 or more rooms and continue the significant growth in our coffee shop estate it is essential that we can efficiently access both freehold and leasehold site opportunities at a good return on capital.
Property is a key part of the story.
Over 60% of Premier Inn rooms today are freehold and we have spent considerable time understanding the nuances of both our property portfolio and strategy.
We have a unique model which creates a competitive advantage.
Organisation
To grow as a business and succeed on more fronts we must enhance our organisation and culture.
Culturally speaking we need dynamic leadership with clear executive accountability and relentless customer focus supported by agile decision making.
Strategic Priority 3 Build the capability and platform to support future growth
We have an opportunity and a need to drive efficiency through our business.
The UK consumer sector is facing a mixture of macroeconomic uncertainty and mandated cost inflation.
Strong returns are a nonnegotiable part of the Whitbread story so we have commenced an overarching efficiency programme.
We plan to deliver significant efficiency savings worth 150 million over a five year period to help mitigate sector cost pressure.
Technology
We must take a proactive approach to our technology and our platform.
Technology touches all stages of the customer journey online at site and across our support centre and supplier network.
We will develop scalable platforms create a centre of digital excellence and embed data insight across the business.
Strategic report Competitive advantage in property
The rationale for property ownership is balanced and interconnected so to understand one element you need the bigger picture.
This is captured in the virtuous circle on this page and described below.
Our property strategy is centred on a balanced portfolio with Costa as an assetlight leasehold model and Premier Inn a majority freehold estate.
We are focused on achieving good returns under all models.
This provides us with a strong covenant.
Our strong covenant gives us preferential access to freehold and leasehold sites at lower cost and at lower rents than would be available to competitors.
We are agile in local markets and can manage planning risks with confidence.
We are the preferred partner for many vendors developers and landlords.
Our balanced portfolio creates strong operating cash flows and protection in the downturn via lower fixed costs.
Our cash flows fund our growth and our portfolio also provides an alternative funding source that adds flexibility.
Our covenant underpinned by freehold lowers our borrowing costs.
Finally we continuously achieve freehold value creation through development profits extensions and other asset opportunities.
Maintaining this majority freehold base continually supports our covenant which is the critical element to ensure our access to the best sites  both freehold and leasehold.
We have reviewed our portfolio and estimate our freehold interests to be worth 4.2 billion to 5.1 billion.
Valuations are dependent on a number of factors including the location type trading outlook rent cover and lease terms.
This value has been based on a rent cover of 2.25x which we believe to be a suitable ratio in a cyclical sector to maintain our marketleading strengths through the cycle.
We have also used an initial net yield of 4.5% to 5.5% based on individual sale and leaseback transactions.
To reach these assumptions we worked with a large property consultancy who conducted a desktop valuation sampling 37% of sites and extrapolating across the estate.
Sites were assessed individually based on available local benchmarks for rental values and their trading performance.
The yields quoted are strong and represent a robust business with a good trading outlook.
Importantly
This in turn would reduce the value of the property.
The good yield assumes we optimise the rate of supply of Premier Inn freeholds placed into the market.
The greater the supply into the market at a given time the higher the yield and the lower the value we would be able to achieve.
We have already shown tremendous value creation through hotel extensions and aim to broaden this through more active management of our property portfolio.
We will pursue small scale sale and leaseback transactions to reinvest capital and demonstrate our covenant to prospective landlords but Premier Inns objective is to remain a majority freehold business.
Currently 64% of our Premier Inn estate is freehold but this will reduce to around 60% as the pipeline is built out.
Retaining a majority freehold estate is important to maintain Premier Inns structural growth story.
Balanced portfolio Majority freehold Good returns
Freehold value creation
Access to best sites both freehold and leasehold
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 13 4.2bn to 5.1bn We estimate our freehold interests to be worth 4.2 billion to 5.1 billion Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 14 Strategic report Business model Our assets and resources How our business operates Whitbread is the UKs largest operator of hotels restaurants and coffee shops with some of the UKs most successful hospitality brands.
Our brand strength and sharp focus on markets where there is great opportunity for structural growth provide sustainable development potential for our business.
Our business performance is underpinned by Our values
Confident
Committed
Financial strength Disciplined capital management and good returns.
Read more on p54 Brand strength Premier Inn is the UKs leading hotel business and Costa is the UKs favourite coffee shop.
Read more on p32 Property portfolio Competitively advantaged access to the best sites and flexibility.
Read more on p13 Winning Teams Our 50000 team members make everyday experiences special for our customers.
Read more on p24 Network strength With 762 UK Premier Inns 3532 Costa stores and 6801 Costa Express machines worldwide we are always close to our customers.
Read more on p40
Premier Inn and Restaurants Our business operates in two divisions
Connectedandalwaysonthepulse yourpassionforinteractionwillgive ourguestsanewkindofhotel experience Focus on our strengths Grow and innovate in our core UK business Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 15 Force for Good and Everyday Efficiency We are a Force for Good in the communities in which we operate and we are committed to doing business responsibly and efficiently.
Our strategy for delivery Enabling us to create and share value for our stakeholders
6.0% EPS growth
Our
78% employee engagement
6.0% increase in dividend
No.1
Premier Inn is No.1 for value for money according to YouGov and Costa is the UKs favourite coffee shop
Growth
Build the capability and platform for growth
Heartbeat
Read more on p48 to grow internationally Focus on our strengths Grow and innovate in our core UK business Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 16 Strategic report Key performance indicators Behind each of these headings are clear and measurable targets which together make up our balanced scorecard or WINcard as we call it Whitbread In Numbers.
It is used throughout the Company.
Every hotel restaurant and coffee shop has its own WINcard.
All support centres each business and the Group as a whole have their own WINcard.
Every month the results are published throughout the Group so that everyone knows exactly how they are doing against the key targets both financial and nonfinancial for the year.
As these are key strategic measures a number of them form an important part of the incentive schemes for our teams.
Details of how the executive directors are rewarded for their performance are described in the remuneration report on pages 78 to 98.
The WINcard targets are set at the beginning of each year and agreed with the Remuneration Committee.
They are usually set above the level achieved in the previous year to target improved performance.
The table on this and the following pages has been designed so as to provide greater transparency for shareholders.
For each measure the table shows whether the measure was incentivised in 201617 as well as whether it will be incentivised in 201718.
For all incentivised measures the target for 201617 is disclosed in the table.
As explained in last years report the family synergies and market performance measures were removed from the list of key performance indicators for 201617.
Whitbreads business model which can be found on pages 14 and 15 shows how we create value for our stakeholders.
The models foundation is the Customer Heartbeat schematic Winning Teams Customer Heartbeat Profitable Growth Force for Good and Everyday Efficiency.
The progress were making What the colours generally indicate A green WINcard is achieved where the performance is better than both previous year and target.
An amber score is for performance which is better than the prior year but below target.
A red score is for a result below the previous year and target.
Team engagement Our annual Your Say survey provides us with insightful analysis on employee engagement and enablement.
This is a key leading indicator of future performance because it is our Winning Teams that make everyday experiences special for our customers so that they come back time and time again.
Team turnover We measure the percentage of team members who leave the business during the year with the aim of keeping team turnover as low as possible in order to have more settled and consistent teams to provide a better service to our customers and to help us to keep the cost of recruitment and training low.
Health and safety Nothing could be more important than the safety of our teams and customers.
Independent audits are carried out throughout the year to check that standards are being maintained with certain key areas resulting in automatic failure if they are not met.
Brand performance With our aim to make everyday experiences special it is vital that we have a robust way of measuring how our customers rate our performance in terms of recommendations and preference over other brands.
This is a leading indicator of future performance.
Incentivised
201617 X 201718 X
201718 X
201617 Acts as a hurdle 201718 Acts as a gateway
201617 Performance The Group Your Say score was 78%.
201617 Performance The Group team turnover score was 40.5%.
201617 Performance Both Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa achieved a green rating producing a green result for the Group on an addup basis.
201617 Performance The score for Costa detractors was 14.8% and for Restaurants net recommend was 46.0% both of which were better than target.
The Premier Inn net recommend score was 48.6% which did not meet a stretching target.
Disclosure of 201617 target 79% 78% to 79% Under 78% Disclosure of 201617 target Under 42.65% 43.90% to 42.65% Above 43.90% Disclosure of 201617 target The targets are based on the performance of sites across the Group in health and safety audits.
The Group result is an addup of results achieved by the businesses.
Disclosure of 201617 target Costa detractors 15% or less Premier Inn net recommend 53.6% Restaurants net recommend 43.0% The Group result is a combination of these three measures.
Team engagement will not be an incentivised measure in 201718.
Team turnover will be replaced as an incentivised key performance indicator by team retention which drives the focus on keeping people longer and reducing the cost of leavers and poor customer service.
The target will be for a year on year improvement as follows 0.5%pt 0.0%pt to 0.5%pt Reduction in team retention Health and safety will become a gateway to incentives rather than a hurdle which will have the impact of increasing the importance of health and safety performance to incentive payouts.
This is because all incentive payments will be at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee in the event of a red score.
The Group Customer Heartbeat measure for 201718 will be a combination of Restaurants net recommend Costa net recommend and Premier Inn brand health score all of which are leading indicators of future performance.
In each case a green score would require improvement beyond the 201617 outcome.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 17 Team engagement Our annual Your Say survey provides us with insightful analysis on employee engagement and enablement.
This is a key leading indicator of future performance because it is our Winning Teams that make everyday experiences special for our customers so that they come back time and time again.
Team turnover We measure the percentage of team members who leave the business during the year with the aim of keeping team turnover as low as possible in order to have more settled and consistent teams to provide a better service to our customers and to help us to keep the cost of recruitment and training low.
Health and safety Nothing could be more important than the safety of our teams and customers.
Independent audits are carried out throughout the year to check that standards are being maintained with certain key areas resulting in automatic failure if they are not met.
Brand performance With our aim to make everyday experiences special it is vital that we have a robust way of measuring how our customers rate our performance in terms of recommendations and preference over other brands.
This is a leading indicator of future performance.
Incentivised
201617 X 201718 X
201718 X
201617 Acts as a hurdle 201718 Acts as a gateway
201617 Performance The Group Your Say score was 78%.
201617 Performance The Group team turnover score was 40.5%.
201617 Performance Both Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa achieved a green rating producing a green result for the Group on an addup basis.
201617 Performance The score for Costa detractors was 14.8% and for Restaurants net recommend was 46.0% both of which were better than target.
The Premier Inn net recommend score was 48.6% which did not meet a stretching target.
Disclosure of 201617 target 79% 78% to 79% Under 78% Disclosure of 201617 target Under 42.65% 43.90% to 42.65% Above 43.90% Disclosure of 201617 target The targets are based on the performance of sites across the Group in health and safety audits.
The Group result is an addup of results achieved by the businesses.
Disclosure of 201617 target Costa detractors 15% or less Premier Inn net recommend 53.6% Restaurants net recommend 43.0% The Group result is a combination of these three measures.
Team engagement will not be an incentivised measure in 201718.
Team turnover will be replaced as an incentivised key performance indicator by team retention which drives the focus on keeping people longer and reducing the cost of leavers and poor customer service.
The target will be for a year on year improvement as follows 0.5%pt 0.0%pt to 0.5%pt Reduction in team retention Health and safety will become a gateway to incentives rather than a hurdle which will have the impact of increasing the importance of health and safety performance to incentive payouts.
This is because all incentive payments will be at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee in the event of a red score.
The Group Customer Heartbeat measure for 201718 will be a combination of Restaurants net recommend Costa net recommend and Premier Inn brand health score all of which are leading indicators of future performance.
In each case a green score would require improvement beyond the 201617 outcome.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 18 Strategic report Key performance indicators continued Underlying profit before tax As with all businesses we measure our financial success by the profits we make through growing our brands and operating our businesses efficiently.
A budget is agreed annually with the Board each year which sets a profit target.
Like for like sales growth While we are investing in the organic growth of our hotels restaurants and coffee shops it is important that we closely watch how the mature parts of our business are performing.
This enables us to make better investment decisions.
Brand expansion We have shown that we are able to create significant shareholder value by growing our successful brands.
Growing both in the UK and overseas is integral to our strategic priorities and it is important that we measure our progress against the targets we have set.
Returns on investment Our investors want to be able to judge how well we are investing their money in comparison to other investments they could make.
We also want to compare the performance of our businesses and assets in order to focus our own plans.
Measuring returns helps us to do this.
Premier Inn occupancy Costa total system sales The expansion of our successful Premier Inn and Costa brands is a key strategic goal.
We measure total Premier Inn occupancy in order to ensure that we are filling our rooms and Costa total system sales is a measure of Costas worldwide growth.
Electricity consumption Companies have a responsibility to reduce their impact on the environment which we fully endorse.
There are also clear economic benefits in reducing electricity consumption primarily through reduced energy bills.
Being a Force for Good in our communities is important to our stakeholders.
Incentivised
Incentivised
Incentivised
Incentivised
Incentivised
201718 X
201718 X 201617 Performance The Group underlying profit before tax for 201617 was 565.2 million.
201617 Performance Group like for like sales growth was 1.6%.
Like for like sales growth represents the yearon year change in total sales less sales generated by businesses acquired or disposed of and outlets opened or closed during the current year and the previous year.
201617 Performance During the year we opened 3816 Premier Inn rooms 110 net new Costa equity stores and installed 1585 net new Costa Express machines.
201617 Performance The Group return on capital was 15.2%.
The return on capital for the purposes of the Long Term Incentive Plan is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets rather than the net assets at the end of the financial year and this was 15.3%.
201617 Performance Premier Inn achieved total occupancy of 80.2% and Costa achieved total system sales of 1781.2 million.
Neither of these results quite met stretching targets.
201617 Performance Reduction in electricity consumption was 3.0%.
Disclosure of 201617 target 562.5 million Disclosure of 201617 target 3.3% 2.0% to 3.3% Under 2.0% Disclosure of 201617 target Premier Inn rooms open 3700 Costa net new equity store openings 131 Net new Costa Express machines 1390 The Group result is a combination of these three measures.
Disclosure of 201617 target Return on capital is an important indicator used when considering investment decisions and is a key measure for the Groups Long Term Incentive Plan for which the target range set in 2014 for awards vesting this year was 13.0% to 18.0%.
Disclosure of 201617 target Disclosure of 201617 target 1.0% 0% to 1.0% Under 0% Premier Inn total occupancy 80.8% 79.8% to 80.8% Under 79.8% Costa total system sales 1783.0m to 1783.0m U nde r 1694.0m The 201718 profit target is considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive at the current time.
However it will be disclosed retrospectively in the 201718 Annual Report.
The 201718 like for like sales target is considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive at the current time.
However it will be disclosed retrospectively in the 201718 Annual
In 201718 like for like sales will form part of the strategic objectives of Alison Brittain.
The growth targets for 201718 are considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive at the current time but will be disclosed in next years Annual Report.
In 201718 these targets will form part of the strategic objectives of Alison Brittain.
The target range for returns under the Long Term Incentive Plan for awards made in 2015 and due to vest in 2018 is between 13.0% and 18.0%.
Premier Inn total occupancy and Costa total system sales will not be incentivised measures for the executive directors in 201718.
We will still measure our electricity consumption and we have set a target for a further 1% reduction in 201718 but this will no longer be an incentivised measure.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 19 Underlying profit before tax As with all businesses we measure our financial success by the profits we make through growing our brands and operating our businesses efficiently.
A budget is agreed annually with the Board each year which sets a profit target.
Like for like sales growth While we are investing in the organic growth of our hotels restaurants and coffee shops it is important that we closely watch how the mature parts of our business are performing.
This enables us to make better investment decisions.
Brand expansion We have shown that we are able to create significant shareholder value by growing our successful brands.
Growing both in the UK and overseas is integral to our strategic priorities and it is important that we measure our progress against the targets we have set.
Returns on investment Our investors want to be able to judge how well we are investing their money in comparison to other investments they could make.
We also want to compare the performance of our businesses and assets in order to focus our own plans.
Measuring returns helps us to do this.
Premier Inn occupancy Costa total system sales The expansion of our successful Premier Inn and Costa brands is a key strategic goal.
We measure total Premier Inn occupancy in order to ensure that we are filling our rooms and Costa total system sales is a measure of Costas worldwide growth.
Electricity consumption Companies have a responsibility to reduce their impact on the environment which we fully endorse.
There are also clear economic benefits in reducing electricity consumption primarily through reduced energy bills.
Being a Force for Good in our communities is important to our stakeholders.
Incentivised
Incentivised
Incentivised
Incentivised
Incentivised
201718 X
201718 X 201617 Performance The Group underlying profit before tax for 201617 was 565.2 million.
201617 Performance Group like for like sales growth was 1.6%.
Like for like sales growth represents the yearon year change in total sales less sales generated by businesses acquired or disposed of and outlets opened or closed during the current year and the previous year.
201617 Performance During the year we opened 3816 Premier Inn rooms 110 net new Costa equity stores and installed 1585 net new Costa Express machines.
201617 Performance The Group return on capital was 15.2%.
The return on capital for the purposes of the Long Term Incentive Plan is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets rather than the net assets at the end of the financial year and this was 15.3%.
201617 Performance Premier Inn achieved total occupancy of 80.2% and Costa achieved total system sales of 1781.2 million.
Neither of these results quite met stretching targets.
201617 Performance Reduction in electricity consumption was 3.0%.
Disclosure of 201617 target 562.5 million Disclosure of 201617 target 3.3% 2.0% to 3.3% Under 2.0% Disclosure of 201617 target Premier Inn rooms open 3700 Costa net new equity store openings 131 Net new Costa Express machines 1390 The Group result is a combination of these three measures.
Disclosure of 201617 target Return on capital is an important indicator used when considering investment decisions and is a key measure for the Groups Long Term Incentive Plan for which the target range set in 2014 for awards vesting this year was 13.0% to 18.0%.
Disclosure of 201617 target Disclosure of 201617 target 1.0% 0% to 1.0% Under 0% Premier Inn total occupancy 80.8% 79.8% to 80.8% Under 79.8% Costa total system sales 1783.0m to 1783.0m U nde r 1694.0m The 201718 profit target is considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive at the current time.
However it will be disclosed retrospectively in the 201718 Annual Report.
The 201718 like for like sales target is considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive at the current time.
However it will be disclosed retrospectively in the 201718 Annual
In 201718 like for like sales will form part of the strategic objectives of Alison Brittain.
The growth targets for 201718 are considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive at the current time but will be disclosed in next years Annual Report.
In 201718 these targets will form part of the strategic objectives of Alison Brittain.
The target range for returns under the Long Term Incentive Plan for awards made in 2015 and due to vest in 2018 is between 13.0% and 18.0%.
Premier Inn total occupancy and Costa total system sales will not be incentivised measures for the executive directors in 201718.
We will still measure our electricity consumption and we have set a target for a further 1% reduction in 201718 but this will no longer be an incentivised measure.
Strategic report At Costa were passionate about coffee and our baristas are on a mission to inspire the world to love great coffee.
We know how important it is that our customers can get a great cup of quality coffee served with a smile without having to wait in lengthy queues.
Thats why we invest millions of pounds every year in our teams our stores and our coffee club app to make the customer experience as easy and enjoyable as possible.
Across the world millions of people love the taste of Costas iconic Mocha Italia blend and our brand new 38 million Roastery will ensure we can roast enough beans to meet demand for decades to come.
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 20 Bringing customers brands they love when they have t o be on the 637 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 20 1.2bn 255 38m 1.8m 15% Total Costa sales in 201617 up 10.7% Net new stores opened in 201617 Investment in our new Roastery Money raised for Costa Foundation Reduction in added sugar across the Costa Ice range Strategic report I cant survive my day if I dont get my daily Costa on the way to work.
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 21 Strategic report Louise Smalley Group HR Director Group HR Directors report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 22 Strategic report As detailed in the Winning Teams Section pages 24 to 29 of this report throughout 201617 we have continued to invest in building and developing our people from our customerfacing teams to our most senior executives.
Aligned to Whitbreads strategic goal to build a bigger and better Whitbread significant ongoing focus has been placed on building our leadership capability to support future growth.
Over the course of the year we have made progress against our key performance measures which underpin our business plan through inspiring Winning Teams developing leadership and creating a no limits to ambition environment.
Our culture remains strong and our people consistently report that they enjoy working at Whitbread which was highlighted by an engagement score of 78% in our annual Your Say engagement and enablement survey.
In testament to these results we have been recognised as the eighth Best Big Company to work for in the prestigious Sunday Times listing of best companies and as a Top Employer by the Top Employers Institute for the seventh year running.
Developing leadership Over the last year we have strengthened our leadership teams at every level and increased the quality of support behind our business strategies.
Focus has been placed on bringing the leadership team closer to the customer and enabling a leaner and more agile business with faster decision making.
To further evolve our portfolios significant effort has been made to promote talent moves that broaden our leadership perspectives and capability and provide stretching career moves.
We continue to recruit and develop our leaders to achieve the best talent for a strong future pipeline.
In our operations we hired over 20000 employees and offered over 500 of our team members the opportunity to become a site manager and run their own business with full accountability for profit and loss.
Whitbread has had another strong year building Winning Teams across all of our businesses and markets Our success is delivered every day through our people so ensuring our teams are engaged supported and have the means to develop their careers is at the core of our strategy.
Over
78% Team engagement
8th in the Sunday Times Best Big Companies to work for Strategic report Directors
Female
Senior managers
Female
All Whitbread employees
Female
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 23 In our support centre we have focused on developing very specific capabilities including change and transformation and we have enhanced the programme and project management teams who will deliver significant change programmes to support our business plans.
Focus has also been placed on strengthening our commercial capability from category management through to specialised procurement.
We have also taken steps to develop our IS and digital teams establishing digital firmly as a core shared service across Whitbread.
Creating a no limits to ambition environment In 201617 we have increased our focus on diversity and inclusion and made further progress towards our internal targets for nationality mix gender and minority ethnic representation.
At senior levels gender representation continues to be a key priority across the Group and we know we need to continue to work hard to ensure that women and men are more equally balanced across our senior leadership teams.
We have undertaken analysis into equal pay and gender pay and we are confident that we offer equal pay for equal work across the Group.
Our early analysis indicates that we operate with gender imbalances at senior levels with more men than women in senior roles.
We are actively committed to addressing this and we continue to use every available opportunity to improve our gender balance at senior levels including working with other organisations that have similar challenges to share best practice.
We are proud that over 50% of all our senior hires have been women and we have worked with teams throughout the Company to sponsor and celebrate women coming through the business.
In the finance function we have launched a sponsorship scheme listening groups and increased parttime and job sharing opportunities with the focus of addressing gender imbalance.
We also proactively sponsor initiatives such as the Women in Construction agenda where we are extremely proud to say that our very own Alison Lindsay Head of Architecture was awarded the Lifetime Achievement award.
In addition our focus on creating a no limits to ambition environment has seen us continue to drive leadership awareness on the importance of diversity and promoting respect and inclusion in teams where everyone can achieve their potential.
A breakdown of the directors of Whitbread senior managers and all Whitbread employees split by gender as of 2 March 2017 is set out on this page.
Reinforcing our values Our culture and leadership hold at the core that our people are treated fairly empowered to develop their talent and listened to when they are concerned.
Our Code of Conduct is a critical reinforcement of how we think and talk about ethical considerations and every employee is required to read and acknowledge the code every year.
We have recently published our first modern slavery report in compliance with the Modern Slavery Act.
The full report outlines what we are doing to mitigate the risk of modern slavery taking place in our global supply chain and across our sites.
With regard to our team members we have a number of policies in place including our right to work in the UK policy which is supported by a comprehensive compliance programme.
We also have a human trafficking policy which is available to all employees as well as Speaking Out and grievance policies enabling our team members to report any concerns they may have.
Louise Smalley Group HR Director 24 April 2017
Achievement
We are delighted that our very own Alison Lindsay Head of Architecture was awarded the Lifetime Achievement award at the Women in Construction awards recognising the fantastic work Alison has done and continues to do in her 30year career with Whitbread.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 24 Strategic report
Operating review
Winning Teams Across the Group we employ over 50000 people.
It is our Winning Teams that make everyday experiences special for our customers so they come back time and time again and thats why investing in our people is so important to us.
Our promise to our Winning Teams Across our brands we have embedded promises to our people that underpin the Whitbread vision.
This helps us attract and retain our employees and highlights what we stand for as an organisation.
We know our team members make the single biggest difference by helping our guests have a great nights sleep in Premier Inn by serving up great memories in our restaurants and by being passionate about making people smile and determined to impact the world in Costa.
We want to make sure that all of our team members feel valued recognised and have the opportunity and support to reach their full potential.
That is why in our restaurants we are committed to making sure our teams feel they are the main ingredient in our recipe for success why we strongly believe that our hotel teams make Premier Inn a place made by them and why we encourage our Costa teams to bring their unique blend to all that they do.
Shaping your future and ours is our commitment to our hotel teams at hub by Premier Inn and reflects the innovation and tech savvy experience these hotels offer.
Our promise to our Winning Teams was highlighted through Whitbread being recognised as a Top Employer for the seventh year running by the Top Employers Institute and as one of the Best Big Companies to work for ranking eighth in the prestigious annual Sunday Times listing of best companies.
We are very proud of these achievements as not only do they strengthen our promise to our Winning Teams but they help us attract and retain our employees and showcase our values to our customers.
Our approach We recruit reward train and develop our team members to build highly engaged teams who deliver a great experience to our customers.
We offer jobs and an industryleading apprenticeship programme to grow talented leaders and we provide exciting international career prospects.
Costa
Over
75% engagement score Premier Inn
80% engagement score
Over
77% engagement score Strategic report Premier Inn Premier Inn is a place made by you with opportunities to grow develop and achieve your dreams too.
A place where you belong where your future will unfold Examples of our employer brand propositions
Passionate about making people smile and determined to impact the world around you.
Together well craft your talent with the perfect blend of opportunity and inspiration hub by Premier Inn Shaping your future and ours.
Connected and always on the pulse your passion for interaction will give our guests a new kind of hotel experience 78% of our employees feel engaged are proud to say they work for Whitbread and are motivated to go above and beyond 8th in the Sunday Times Best Big Companies to work for 81% of team members said that they feel enabled and are in the right roles for their skill set
Connectedandalwaysonthepulse yourpassionforinteractionwillgive ourguestsanewkindofhotel experience Listening to our Winning Teams We understand that giving our people a voice is critical to ensuring that we are giving them the support they need and desire.
Our 2016 Your Say survey which used a tested measure of engagement and enablement was completed by over 39000 people which is 83% of eligible employees.
In Costa we have seen a small decrease in engagement from last year which we believe is due to organisational changes and a tougher trading environment.
To drive higher levels of engagement over the next 12 months we will be focusing on our communications strategy to ensure we build our teams understanding of our five year plan and the progress achieved against this.
In addition we will be focusing on our store managers capability through a store manager development programme.
Overall Whitbread maintained its engagement score of 78% which despite positioning us favourably against external comparisons did not quite meet our 79% target and highlights further opportunities to improve.
The results still pay fantastic testament to our commitment to improve overall working conditions and create Winning Teams but we recognise that there is more to do.
Following feedback from our 2016 survey we know that we need to focus on enablement across our support centre.
As a result we have built robust action plans to improve working environments technology and explore more collaborative ways of working both within the support centre and across our brands.
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 25 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 26 Strategic report Operating review continued Winning Teams continued Retaining our Winning Teams We recognise and understand the importance of retaining our teams and team retention has replaced team turnover as a key performance indicator for 201718.
We are delighted to say our efforts to challenge ourselves to outperform relative to our industry in improving retention have continued.
We have continued to build on the positive momentum from last year and introduced further initiatives to engage motivate and retain our teams.
We are proud that each of our brands operates robust and tailored Pay for Progression schemes that give team members the chance to develop their skills and progress through fair and transparent pay rates.
We strongly believe that such initiatives are encouraging team members to stay and develop their careers with Whitbread and as a result we have seen increases in the number of our employees who have more than 12 months service.
It is important however that we remain proactive in our approach in order to maintain our momentum.
Developing our Winning Teams We know that our teams are more engaged when they have access to career opportunities and they feel more enabled when they are given the chance to learn and develop.
At Whitbread we are committed to developing our employees and actively seek to create opportunities to strengthen our teams.
Over the last year we have launched exciting development programmes across the Group.
In Costa a number of training and development programmes were developed with the aim of enhancing line manager capability across the globe.
We continued to develop and roll out Talent Camp which focused on enhancing support centre line managers understanding of recruitment and developing potential.
Over 100 of Costas line managers successfully completed Talent Camp.
Costa also focused on maintaining essential coffee and core skills training to ensure we continue to meet our customers expectations and remain the UKs favourite coffee shop chain.
In Premier Inn we have launched a new crossfunctional senior management leadership programme targeted at strengthening our pipeline to senior leadership roles.
This programme is enabling us to attract retain and develop exceptional talent across our commercial functions.
In Premier Inn operations we have updated a suite of leadership development programmes and have continued to build a coaching culture through upskilling multisite managers and providing one to one coaching and peer to peer learning.
In our Restaurants we are continuing core development activity by giving teams the opportunity to progress their careers using an online skills matrix and through our Progressing Into management development programmes.
We have also focused on skillbased training for kitchen managers and chefs at one of our three food and beverage academies.
Training and development snapshots ELearning courses completed Over 763000 Classroom based training courses delivered Nearly 9000 Total course completions Over 772000 Rewarding and recognising our Winning Teams Rewarding and recognising our Winning Teams continued to be a key focus throughout 201617.
In addition to running central incentives we have worked hard to implement specific initiatives that are tailored to suit and engage our different brands and teams to create relevant and meaningful total reward packages.
Throughout Premier Inn and Restaurants continued emphasis was placed on encouraging our managers to recognise their teams through our My Rewards platform and local recognition.
To support this over 1 million was uploaded to the My Rewards platform to be awarded to our Premier Inn and Restaurants team members.
During
201617 over 70% of team members registered on the platform received an award.
However we need to work even harder to ensure that a greater number of our team members are recognised as the local recognition of our Winning Teams is at the heart of our engagement strategy.
Across Premier Inn we also continued to celebrate teams who achieved an All Green WINcard by rewarding an additional weeks salary when all key performance indicators are met.
In Restaurants we have built on the momentum of last years Kitchens of Excellence event and continued to provide kitchen teams with a dedicated scorecard to help them achieve excellence in their sites.
The number of kitchens meeting this standard improved significantly this year and these were rewarded on a quarterly basis through My Rewards.
The very best kitchen teams were also selected to compete to represent their brand at the highly regarded Kitchens of Excellence final.
In Costa the existing team member reward platform was broadened to create an employee benefits portal Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 27 to provide access to information on all employee benefits.
UK based employees can now benefit from discounted gym membership across a number of the UKs leading gym companies.
Costa celebrated its 11th Barista of the Year competition culminating in a twoday global final which was an opportunity to celebrate and recognise the pride passion and personality of those at the very heart of our business as individuals competed to be crowned the global Costa Champion of Champions.
Work placements and apprenticeships for our Winning Teams Whitbread created WISE Whitbread Investing in Skills and Employment in 2012 to create employment opportunities and support peoples entry into employment and onto apprenticeships by connecting with the education system.
WISE is a structured and quality assured programme with bold targets that educates engages and employs people who are often from difficult backgrounds supporting them into the world of work through Work experience placements and school visits for 1118 year olds.
Employment placements  for people of all ages who are not in education employment or training.
Apprenticeships and functional skills  for team members who want to gain nationally recognised qualifications.
Whitbreads commitment to apprenticeships was recognised through being Highly Commended at the 2016 National Apprenticeship
The achievements of our WISE programme have helped create accessible local community work routes through community partnerships that support young people.
17% of WISE apprentices have progressed to management and we are proud to say that 25% of our hotel managers were previous apprentices.
We are committed to the ongoing support and development of our WISE programme to improve the wellbeing selfesteem confidence and employability of people not previously in education employment or training.
During 201617 across Whitbread WISE successfully achieved Over 800 Apprentices in learning Over 400 Work placements Almost 300 Work experiences Building on the success of WISE in Premier Inn during 201617 Costa launched its own WISE programme.
Since launch over 200 adult work placements have been completed with each graduate receiving a Level 1 Introduction into Hospitality qualification credible work experience with Costa a reference and interview experience.
To demonstrate the impact of this programme almost 100 graduates of the scheme were recruited into the business during the year representing a 46% conversion into employment.
201617 was a great year for the WISE team in Costa and they are proud to have attracted almost 200 apprentices nationally with many more in the pipeline to graduate.
The apprenticeship provides a credible alternative to education as well as an attractive career with Costa.
In addition to the suite of apprenticeships offered in Premier Inn work has been completed for Costa to launch its advanced level apprenticeship next year.
This has been designed to nurture all the necessary skills to become an assistant manager.
Plans are also in place to introduce the higher level apprenticeship geared at developing the skills required to grow into a Costa store manager.
I love the job I do and winning this competition has really made me strive to do better and teach others.
Giorgio Ventisei Costa Barista of the Year 2016 Barista of the Year Barista of the Year is integral to Costa coffee is at the heart of our business and baristas are at the heart of our operations  inspiring our customers to love great coffee every day of the year.
The search for our 11th Costa Barista of the Year began in June through a series of store heats all around the world.
After months of heats that grew in difficulty at each stage nine finalists were crowned business unit champions and invited to our annual final  designed to crown the very best barista in the Costa world.
Giorgio Ventisei claimed our revered trophy and was crowned Champion of Champions 2016.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 28 Strategic report Operating review continued Winning Teams continued Diversity and inclusion in our Winning Teams Across all of Whitbread we promote respect and value differences to create an inclusive environment.
There are no barriers to entry and no limits to ambition.
Our ability to grow as an organisation depends on our ability to attract develop and retain diverse teams as we believe that a diverse organisation encourages better innovation and decision making.
As an equal opportunities employer not only do we value grow and celebrate people who have diverse perspectives whatever their age gender sexuality ethnicity disability or religious belief we believe it gives us greater connectivity with our customers and a commercial advantage.
Across Whitbread promoting diversity respect and inclusion is a local line management accountability as well as a corporate activity.
Over 201617 we have been successful not only through Groupled activity but also through local initiatives and through employees personal passion.
Flexible working We have explored ways to increase flexible working to allow roles to be accessible to a broader range of employees.
In Costa parttime working was integrated into the role of the area manager to suit flexible working needs.
Gender balance Focus has continued on the promotion of gender balance particularly at senior levels and in functions where there has been a gender imbalance.
Efforts have been made to ensure we provide gender balanced shortlists in recruitment and that our succession pools include a strong mix ensuring we provide quality stretching opportunities for individuals to grow their careers.
Learning difficulties and disabilities In early 2017 we opened the Premier Inn training centre within Derwen College for young people with learning difficulties and disabilities.
The training centre is fitted out to the specifications of a Premier Inn hotel and allows students to develop their skills in housekeeping and reception.
The training centre aims to build students confidence and selfesteem providing opportunity to gain work experience and move into paid employment with Premier Inn.
GLOW
Momentum of the GLOW Gay and Lesbian Out at Whitbread network has been further leveraged through internal social channels to boost team engagement and enhance community activity.
We are proud to have celebrated a member of our Costa leadership team being recognised in the OUTstanding and Financial Times Leading LGBT Ally Executives list.
In further support of the LGBT community we invited worldclass barista Mason Salisbury to train UK Costa baristas to make Rainbow Flat Whites in selected stores.
The Rainbow Flat Whites were a huge success and were served in four cities over the summer aligned with Pride events.
Ethnicity
We have focused on improving the level of data capture on ethnicity within our recruitment processes in order to strengthen insight on our workforce demographics.
We need to place further focus on ethnic diversity in order to ensure that we are a truly diverse and inclusive organisation.
Over the course of the next 12 months and beyond we will continue our commitment to create and develop a diverse and inclusive working environment where everyone has the opportunity to reach their full potential.
We want to create an inclusive culture where everyone feels that they can bring their whole self to work as the energy and desire of our teams play a key role in our future success.
Graduate schemes We have continued to operate our award winning graduate schemes across both operations and support centre attracting over 2000 applications to our schemes that commence in autumn 2017.
Our operational graduate schemes are designed for commercially focused graduates offering exposure to various roles and operational areas.
Not only have these schemes helped develop our internal talent pipeline but the training on offer equips our graduates with a deep understanding of how our businesses work from the ground up.
These schemes have also provided our graduates with the skills and attributes needed to successfully lead a Winning Team within one of our Costa stores or Premier Inn hotels.
Our functional programmes cover HR finance IS marketing property and procurement.
The experience has helped our graduates to develop their skills build a network of contacts and gain exposure in a range of areas The WISE programme Paige Flynn left school anxious about her future with low self esteem and confidence fast forward to today and Paige stars in the Governments Get in Go far apprenticeship campaign with the ambition to one day run her own hotel.
The WISE programme enabled Paige to experience Premier Inn before enrolling on our Advanced Apprenticeship in Hospitality Management earning while learning at work.
Paige valued the structured programme support system of regular reviews and feedback about her performance at Leeds Premier Inn.
Paige demonstrates the opportunities to develop and progress within Whitbread and she is also now a great ambassador for the Governments Get in Go far apprenticeship campaign helping others to understand how integral apprenticeships are to business and personal growth.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 29 and roles across all of our brands.
Our graduates have acquired functionspecific experience technical training and support for the professional qualifications they wish to work towards.
Our international Winning Teams Our Costa International markets have continued to focus on acting upon feedback from our employees through our annual Your Say survey specifically paying attention to growing capability and creating attractive reward packages for team members.
In Costa Poland focus is centred on developing internal talent pipelines introducing efficiency driven pay benefits for baristas and development of leadership skills.
Costa has continued to invest in building international experience through moving talent and has created a dedicated business development team located in South East Asia.
Significant focus has also been placed on working with our partners on social initiatives that are important for our customers as well as building capability within barista and store manager populations.
Our graduate schemes across both operations and support centre attracted over 2000 applications to our schemes commencing in autumn 2017 Costa China continued to grow capability within stores and over 500 store employees graduated from Learning Journey programmes.
These employees now form the internal talent pipeline for future leadership roles within our store teams.
Costa China also invested in advanced level coffee knowledge training for the Hot House team members to build their knowledge skills and confidence around coffee.
The new and exciting Hot House store format enabled formulisation and trial of a new incentive scheme that allows store team members to share in extra profit that the store generates.
Following the successful opening of our first Premier Inn site in Germany our team is still new but growing.
Increasing
Since September we have offered internships and permanent employment through this partnership.
We are focused on ensuring our teams are happy and engaged and we are proud to have already achieved positive feedback in our annual Your Say engagement and enablement survey.
A successful year 201617 has been a successful year with continued focus on creating an environment where our Winning Teams can flourish.
There is still further opportunity and we have strong plans in place to continue this momentum through 201718 and beyond.
Costa China grew capability within stores and over 500 store employees graduated from Learning Journey programmes 98bpm 92bpm Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 30 When we get together to shop we want to escape to a central city location.
We need a cost effective solution that we can rely on to be clean and ensure us a good nights sleep.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 30
Connectedandalwaysonthepulse yourpassionforinteractionwillgive ourguestsanewkindofhotel experience Strategic report hub by Premier Inn is our exciting new hotel brand specially designed to fit perfectly into cosmopolitan city centres and appeal to savvy travellers looking for great value stylish design and the latest technology from a hotel at the heart of the action.
With four hotels in London one in Edinburgh and a further 11 in the pipeline hub takes the stress out of travel.
Guests can book checkin online and personalise their room before arrival all via the hub app leaving them free to relax and unwind or hit the shops Bringing customers brands they love when only retail therapy will do Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 2016% 4.55 89% Total hub by Premier Inn hotels Hotels in the pipeline Occupancy TripAdvisor score Guests rate hub excellent or very good
Connectedandalwaysonthepulse yourpassionforinteractionwillgive ourguestsanewkindofhotel experience Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 32 Strategic report Operating review continued Customer Heartbeat Another award winning year In the past year our leading brands Premier Inn and Costa have cemented their positions as the UKs favourite hotel chain and coffee shop chain respectively.
For the seventh year in a row Costa was voted the Nations Favourite Coffee Shop Brand by Allegra.
Premier Inn was named the UKs Top Rated Hotel Chain for a second consecutive year in the Which Hotel Chain Survey and for the first time picked up the award for Travel Brand of the Year in the 2016 Which Awards.
These accolades are especially significant as they are voted for by Which members and the general public and Premier Inn was recognised for providing a first class experience at very competitive prices.
Premier Inn also featured heavily in the TripAdvisor Travellers Choice Awards and the Premier Inn London Bank took the No.
1 slot for Best Family Hotel in the UK.
621 hotels received a TripAdvisor Certificate of Excellence Award.
Our individual brand guest satisfaction surveys provide us with a valuable tool to find out what is important to our customers and how we can improve upon their experience.
These surveys show that our teams are already doing a great job serving our customers with nine out of ten Premier Inn guests saying they will definitely consider staying again and 87% of Costa customers saying they are likely to revisit but of course we recognise there is always more we can do to deliver even better experiences for our customers as evidenced by the targets that we set ourselves.
We use YouGov Brand Index and Brand Preference trackers to monitor our progress against competitors and you can see on the next page how Premier Inn and Costa continue to hold the leading position in their respective markets.
Our approach Our 50000 team members provide outstanding experiences to our millions of customers.
We make sure we listen to what our customers want and use this insight to enhance our customer propositions to build satisfaction and loyalty.
We offer customers the greatest choice of locations We invest in our sites to maintain their quality We design our coffee shops restaurants and hotels to create a warm and welcoming experience for our customers We innovate to meet customer needs and expectations We offer customers a great choice of high quality food and drink We use digital technology to enhance the customer experience Premier Inn and Restaurants 5.5 million customers 2 years voted UKs top rated hotel chain by Which out of ten Premier Inn guests say they will definitely consider staying again 63% of customers in our restaurants score us nine or ten out of ten 90% of all hotels received a TripAdvisor Certificate of Excellence
23 million customers 7 years voted the Nations Favourite Coffee Shop Brand 87% of customers say they are likely to revisit 50% net recommend 56% drink quality scores Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 33 With over 3500 Costa stores around the world and 762 Premier Inns in the UK alone we are able to be everywhere our customers need and want us to be.
To ensure our products and services meet customers increasingly high expectations we invest significantly in maintaining the quality of our stores hotels and restaurants.
In 201617 we refurbished 4450 Premier Inn rooms whilst in our Restaurants business we converted three Table Table sites to Beefeater and all our Taybarns sites to Brewers
In Costa we have been rolling out a reimaging programme with 169 stores getting a new look in the year.
Our Drive Thru stores are proving very popular with customers and we opened 16 sites in the year and now have 52 around the UK.
Following a successful 13 store trial the Costa Pronto format will be rolled out more widely in 201718.
Costa Pronto stores are specially designed to meet the increasing demand for on the go coffee with specially designed counters to enable our baristas to improve the speed of service and avoid lengthy customer queues.
As shown on TV 201617 has been an exciting year for Premier Inn and Costa as they both launched brand new TV advertising campaigns.
Costas biggest ever campaign went live in October during the first X Factor Live show and celebrated the promise of never a dull cup showcasing Costas reputation for delivering quality handcrafted baristamade coffee.
170 baristas got the opportunity to take part in the humorous advert as members of an enthusiastic audience watching a highly unorthodox motivational speaker.
September 2016 saw the launch of Premier Inns bold new multichannel advertising campaign A Great Place to Start with the first in a series of four TV commercials.
The campaign featured different storylines showing how Premier Inn provided a great start to the day for their guests whether thats a family celebrating Great Aunt Mabels birthday or a group of ladies getting ready for a night out.
China is an important market for Costa where we currently have over 400 stores.
We are trialling an innovative new store format in five Shanghai stores involving a completely new store design and food and drink offer.
The stylish new interior gives more focus to the counter and food display which includes freshly made sandwiches and the use of natural woods and soft fabrics and lighting help to create a warm welcoming environment.
The new food range includes freshly made sandwiches and premium desserts whilst Costas coffee credentials are brought to the fore with new brewing methods such as single origin hand pouring coffee and Old Paradise Street blends.
Initial customer feedback has been promising with over 80% saying they would be likely to return and we plan to roll the design out to more stores in the year ahead.
Great
Aunt Mabel Premier Inns new TV advertising campaign Source 2008  2014 YouGov Q.
If there were a Costa Coffee Starbucks and Caff Nero next door to each other which one would be your FIRST choice to visit 20152017 TNS One Costa Tracker Market Monitor 2000 Nat Rep respondents per quarter Source Allegra Project Cafe 2017
Holiday Inn
Holiday Inn Express
AirBnb
Travelodge
Value score Quality score UKs favourite coffee shop  7th year in a row Brand Preference Costa is the UKs favourite The only brand to deliver on quality and value
BrandIndex
Costa
Starbucks
N e ro Premier Inn is the only brand to deliver on both quality and value securing wider market appeal Note Scores are net i. positive % minus negative %.
YouGov
BrandIndex 52week rolling average 28th February 2017 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 34 Strategic report Operating review continued Innovating our coffee Since being founded by brothers Bruno and Sergio Costa in 1971 Costa has been at the forefront of Britains growing love affair with coffee and we are on a mission to inspire the world to love great coffee.
Britain is now undoubtedly a nation of coffee lovers but at Costa we believe there is much more to do to bring new premium coffee experiences to customers.
As part of Costas commitment to create exciting coffee experiences for customers our never a dull cup campaign promoted the delights of a Cortado and Flat White and was supported by nationwide coffee masterclasses.
In October we opened a new concept store in Wandsworth in London promising to deliver new coffee and food experiences in a stylish environment.
The concept store responds to evolving appetite for fresh ways to enjoy coffee and a flavoursome new range of coffee beans and brews is on offer including three slow drip single origin blends from Sumatra Kenya and Colombia all 100% Arabica beans.
Also available is a cold brew coffee which is steeped for 20 hours and served over ice to create a delicious and refreshing drink.
An enhanced food menu is also available at the Wandsworth store featuring delicious additions such as avocado on toast macarons and an antipasti sharing plate. barista.
They come in three refreshing flavours from a mix of pineapple melon passionfruit apple kiwi strawberries and grapes and contain one of your five a day.
Our stores in White City London and Milton Keynes are exploring how to deliver an enhanced food offer to customers displaying products in a new counter display with some products prepared fresh on site.
Costa Poland is also addressing consumer trends for healthy fresh food with the opening of its new concept store at the Chopin Airport in Warsaw.
The store has a number of dishes suitable for vegetarians and vegans and serves a wide range of savoury food including freshly made baguettes French pastries and cookies that are all baked in the store.
Innovating our food offer in Costa Increasing customer demand for an enhanced food offer with greater choice of lighter fresher and healthier options is driving our food development.
We are doing this through a mix of reformulating existing products and the introduction of new items including healthy wraps and salads as well as a trial of Costas Its All Good range in selected stores.
Costa celebrated a taste of summer in its new cold drinks range with the launch of SuperDay Smoothies made from 100% real fresh fruit that the Customer Heartbeat continued 100% Arabica beans single origin blends from Sumatra Kenya and Colombia 1 of your 5 a day Costa launched its new Super Day Smoothie last summer 100% Arabica beans single origin blends from Sumatra Kenya and Colombia
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 35 Innovating in Premier Inn and Restaurants hub by Premier Inn is a new generation of smartly designed hotels perfect for people who want to be in the heart of the city at an affordable price.
With five hub hotels now open across London and Edinburgh technology features heavily throughout the hotels cleverly crafted compact rooms.
To celebrate the opening of the Brick Lane hub in June and to showcase its connectivity credentials the launch event featured rapper Tinchy Stryder who challenged himself to create a track using inspiration from the digital surroundings of the hotel and the vibrant areas of Brick Lane all produced from his hotel room.
In March 2016 Whitbread launched its first ever Bar  Block steakhouse restaurant in the centre of Birmingham followed by two more openings in Londons Kings Cross and Whiteley shopping centre in Fareham.
Like
Beefeater Bar  Block has quality steak at its core and offers a distinctive Butchers Block which offers a range of rotating unique special cuts all hand cut to order.
An informal allday dining destination Bar  Block has been specifically designed to thrive in high street and city centre locations alongside a Premier Inn.
The stylish and contemporary interiors make a feature of the large open kitchen and central bar serving innovative cocktails and a specially curated wine list.
For our Beefeater guests we have introduced some exciting new dishes and drinks that complement the stylish new interiors with great dishes like Smokehouse style Duo of Beef our Craft Guild of Chefs award winning Crispy Tabasco Chicken Burger and a new range of premium milkshakes and cocktails.
In Brewers Fayre we have launched new menu categories and dishes in partnership with beverage brands such as the Jack Daniels category which offers a special Jack Daniels burger ribs and Beef and Doom Bar pie.
A new range of cask ales is also proving popular with customers.
We are encouraging new guests to experience our restaurants with promotional partnerships and new communication channels.
To address consumer trends for healthier fresher food as well as supporting Government goals to improve the nations health we have developed a nutrition strategy focused on four key pillars.
These are to provide customers with greater choice of healthier lighter dishes to ensure transparency of nutritional information to enable customers to make an informed choice to reformulate those dishes that are high in saturated fats salt and added sugar and to ensure that our advertising especially to children is responsible and that we are promoting healthier dishes.
Examples of this strategy in action include greater choice of healthier foods in our spring 2017 menus better access to nutritional information and enhanced childrens menus with more healthy dishes to choose from and reformulation of top selling favourites such as spaghetti bolognese with reduced levels of salt and sugar.
We are committed to doing more to improve the nutritional content of our menus and playing our role in improving the nations health.
Butchers
Block
Steak is the hero at our new allday dining restaurant brand Bar  Block 5 hubs a new generation of smartly designed hotels perfect for people who want to be in the heart of the city at an affordable price Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 36 Strategic report Operating review continued Customer Heartbeat continued Delighting customers with digital services Our products and services are increasingly delivered digitally.
Whether that is searching for the hotel closest to where you need to be booking a hotel room from your mobile phone or preordering your cup of coffee so it is ready to collect.
Customers have high expectations of how digital technology will make their day to day lives easier and at Whitbread we are investing significantly in building core expertise in our inhouse digital teams to ensure we continually delight customers with innovative new products and services.
At Premier Inn over 80%site and in 201617 we made some exciting new developments to our digital and mobile offer including the launch of a new mobile site.
The new site has been designed to make the customer search and booking journey as easy and enjoyable as possible to boost conversion rates.
In the year we also launched a new German website www. remierinn.
Beefeater website in line with the new Beefeater brand proposition.
New German website We launched a new German website www. remierinn.
36 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 site Volume of reservations by channel Indirect channels Premier Inn other Premier Inn digital Including reservations from GDS and agents of 7% Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 37 Building customer love through loyalty Our customers enjoy added value through being a member of our brand loyalty programmes.
Costa
Coffee Club now has over five million active members and enjoyed significant increase in usage in the year driven primarily by a new datadriven retention programme.
Over 20% of registered Costa Coffee Club customers now transact using the Costa Coffee Club app and over the year the digital team has made a number of improvements including simplification of the registration process which has led to a 15% increase year on year in people actively using the app.
The team is also working on lots of new and exciting features to deliver an even more engaging app experience to Costa Coffee Club holders in the year ahead.
Across our restaurant brands loyalty programmes we now have 1.9 million card holders up 12% in the year.
Loyalty card members spend around 7  11% more with us than noncard holders and 41% of active members have redeemed their vouchers over the course of the year enjoying the benefits that membership provides.
For Premier Inn corporate customers who want to book directly we have developed our Business Booker tool.
It has its own website where customers can manage their account and enjoy added value services including preferential commercial terms and smart reporting.
Current corporate sales customers have been moved onto this platform and it will be made widely available to the UK SME market in 2017.
The Costa digital team has been working on an exciting new app feature that allows customers to preorder their coffee and come to collect it in store.
When a customer arrives in store their coffee is ready and waiting for them on the Costa Collect counter with no need to queue.
Costa Pay and Collect has been trialled in ten London stores and has received positive customer feedback along with key learnings that we will use to enhance the app and create a great instore experience for customers and baristas.
The new enhanced service will be piloted in 201718 with plans to roll out more widely across the estate towards the end of the year.
Across our brands we continue to grow our social media presence and enjoy high levels of engagement in the content that we post.
Costa has 1.5 million Facebook fans and c.224000 Twitter followers and 211000 Instagram followers whilst Premier Inn has 202000 likes on Facebook up 21% in the year and 68000 Twitter fans.
Our
Restaurants brands are also increasing their social media channels with over 680000 fans across its Facebook Twitter and Instagram channels.
Social media presence 1.5 million Costa Facebook fans Premier Inn likes on Facebook up 21% in the year Costa Twitter followers Premier Inn Twitter followers 40% of sales involve a Costa Coffee Club card Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 38 Bringing customers brands they love when they want t o enjoy a family meal together With over 400 restaurants up and down the UK our Brewers Fayre Beefeater and Table Table brands are a popular choice for families.
With almost all of our restaurants located next door to a Premier Inn families can make the most of the famous Premier Inn breakfast as children under 16 get to eat for free For lunch and dinner we offer a great childrens menu with a wide range of delicious and healthy options for children to enjoy along with funfilled activity packs to keep them entertained whilst the variety of great food and drink to choose from on our main menus means we can keep the parents happy too Strategic report
Premier Inns Members in loyalty schemes Fans across our restaurants social media channels New Bar  Block restaurants open Strategic report We rarely have dinner out as a family.
Its hectic and everyone has different tastes.
I need somewhere that makes everyone happy so that I can sit back and enjoy it too.
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 39 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 40 Strategic report Operating review continued Profitable Growth Profitable Growth During 201617 Premier Inn and Costa delivered organic expansion combined with like for like sales growth resulting in a Group total sales increase of 8.2% to 3.1 billion.
Group underlying profit before tax which rose by 6.2% to 565.2 million and profit for the year increased 7.4% to 415.9 million.
Whitbread is highly cash generative with cash generated from operations of 860.1 million which supports our dividend and capital investment programme.
Our total cash capital investment for 201617 was 609.8 million as we maintained our market leading position through reinvestment in our estate and by delivering organic growth.
Our continual focus on returns and disciplined financial management enabled us to deliver a good return on capital of 15.2% 201516 15.3%.
Operational review and progress on strategic priorities In April 2016 we outlined our three strategic priorities to deliver longterm sustainable growth and shareholder value.
Since then we have made positive progress across all three areas.
Grow and innovate in our core UK businesses Focus on our strengths to grow internationally and Build capability and infrastructure to support longterm growth.
Details on our progress are provided on the following pages.
Our approach We invest in high returning profitable sites We innovate with new formats to provide further growth opportunities We are growing in selected international markets Our Premier Inn and Restaurants joint site model provides efficiency and creates incremental returns Costa uses a number of ownership models including equity stores franchise and joint venture Premier Inn and Restaurants Underlying operating profit was up 7.4% to 468.0 million 9.0% Premier Inn grew total sales by 9.0% and like for like sales by 2.3% 7.2% Number of rooms available increased by 7.2% with 3816 new UK rooms opened in the year 80.2% Total occupancy remained high as we finished the year at 80.2% Restaurants grew total sales by 1.2% and opened eight net new sites
Underlying operating profit was up 5.3% to 158.0 million net new stores worldwide 10.7% Total sales growth of 10.7% 2.0% UK like for like sales growth of 2.0% net new Costa Express machines installed 248 internationally Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 41 Strategic Priority 1 Grow and innovate in our core UK businesses In 201617 we opened 25 net new hotels taking our total number of hotels in the UK to 762 over 200 more than our nearest competitor.
During this period Premier Inn UK has grown total sales by 8.9% and total rooms available by 9.3% whilst retaining high occupancy.
Our
Quality and value for money We focus on delivering a consistent quality product across our network through our systematic refurbishment programme and by the end of the year over 80% of our estate were our most recent designs c.14% more than two years ago.
We prioritise high occupancy and value for money to build longterm customer loyalty and this approach has resulted in Premier Inn growing its occupancy to 80.2% and enabled us to achieve consistently high scores for both quality and value from YouGov.
Automated Trading Engine In June this year we launched our new Automatic Trading Engine ATE to build on our value for money credentials as well as optimising our rate occupancy and new hotel maturity going forward.
We are very much in the 1218 month test and learn phase.
However we expect ATE to drive our total sales growth as we focus on further occupancy growth optimising rate to match the demand and accelerating the maturity of our new rooms.
Direct distribution Our focus on providing our guests with the best digital booking platform has been vital to our success.
We have grown our direct digital distribution from 77% in 201314 to 88% in 201617 driving incremental revenue and reducing our reliance on third party distribution.
Not only does direct distribution provide our lowest cost booking channel it also enables a direct relationship with our customers helping to build loyalty over time.
Our total direct distribution now stands at a record 94%.
The London Opportunity Our share of the London hotel market remains relatively low at c.8% providing a substantial growth opportunity.
Over the last three years we have increased our rooms available by 49.4% compared with 12.5% for the Midscale and Economy market and grown accommodation sales by 43.7% compared with 21.4% respectively as we continue to win market share.
Our
London sites mature rapidly with new hotels reaching occupancy of c.80% in their first year whilst at the same time maintaining the total London estates occupancy at over 85%.
Our compact city centre hotel concept hub by Premier Inn has been a great success giving us access to profitable city centre locations with high property costs delivering a good return on capital whilst offering customers great value high quality rooms in great locations.
The UK is our largest market and we will continue to invest in our people our brands and our systems to capture the significant growth opportunities available in both coffee and branded budget hotels.
In the UK hotel market the independent sector which accounts for c.50% of the market is in decline while the budget branded sector is benefitting from continued growth reflecting customers desire for quality and value for money.
The coffee sector has a high growth forecast benefitting from a global consumer lifestyle trend demand for quality coffee and habitual purchase behaviours.
Premier Inn UK As the UKs number one hotel company our business model is clearly well placed to capture the shift to value brands with our compelling proposition loyal guests direct distribution model and focus on operational excellence.
Our network strength gives customers the greatest choice of locations and we offer the best value for money which results in our high occupancy across the estate and 94% of our guest bookings direct with Premier Inn.
Our market leading occupancy and direct distribution means our growth continues to be at high returns with our committed UK pipeline expected to achieve similar returns to the c.13% achieved today.
Network strength Premier Inn is the leading hotel brand in the UK with 68081 UK hotel rooms and some 9000 rooms opened during the last two years.
Our committed hotel room pipeline is strong and stands at c.14500 rooms and we are well on track to achieve our 2020 milestone of c.85000 UK rooms with line of sight to 100000 rooms.
89% of guests rate hub an excellent or very good experience Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 42 Strategic report Operating review continued Profitable Growth continued We now have four hub hotels open in London and one in Edinburgh with a committed pipeline of 11 hotels over the next three years.
Customer feedback on the proposition has been excellent with 4.55 TripAdvisor score across all sites and 89% of guests rating hub an excellent or very good experience.
Furthermore occupancy has been c.85% for our hub sites in London which are expected to deliver returns in line with our existing Premier Inn estate at maturity.
UK Regions Over the last three years we have increased our rooms available by 22.0% and grown accommodation sales by 38.3% compared with growth in the Midscale and Economy sector of 6.7% and 30.5% respectively as we continue to win market share.
Our new hotels continue to perform well maturing fast and becoming profitable with occupancy of c.75% in the first year reaching full maturity in 34 years.
We continued to achieve high occupancy in the total regional estate of c.80%.
Further growth with good returns Our UK committed pipeline has grown to 14500 rooms of which c.5900 are in London and c.8600 are in the regions.
Moreover our extension programme has been driving incremental like for like sales growth and good returns and constitutes c.20% of our committed pipeline outside of London.
Food and beverage offering for Premier Inn customers Our joint site restaurants continue to play an important role in serving Premier Inn guests and delivering higher RevPAR and returns.
Restaurants grew total sales by 1.2% with a marginal reduction in like for like sales of 0.3% albeit we continued to perform ahead of our competitor set.
We continue to focus on our guests and our teams with high customer satisfaction scores and a significant reduction in team turnover achieved with the help of investment initiatives such as our new labour scheduling tool.
We continue to make good progress in rejuvenating our restaurant brands converting a further 53 restaurants to our modern Orange Cow Beefeater concept and are on track to complete the remaining conversions in the first half of 201718.
Our new contemporary city centre restaurant format Bar  Block is trading well and receiving very high customer satisfaction scores.
We now have one open in London one in Birmingham and one in Fareham with five planned to open during 201718.
Costa
In Costa we offer the largest network of coffee shops in the UK and with our strong brand we are in a great position to capitalise on future market growth opportunities growing from 2218 stores today to over 3000 stores in the mediumterm.
Costa has been named as the UKs favourite coffee shop chain for the seventh year in a row underpinned by our relentless focus on quality coffee and on achieving high customer satisfaction scores.
Costa  Investing for future growth A giant step forward
Innovate coffee and food invest in store proposition amplify the brand and improve digital capability Unlock potential China Focus on major cities step change brand awareness and develop a compelling proposition Deeper more profitable Rest of world Scale successful franchise model by focusing on quality markets with the right partners Double up Express Continue to innovate and differentiate offer to stay ahead of competition
Inspiring the world to love great coffee
The worlds most loved coffee brand Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 43 UK Retail Costa UK Retail continues its track record of delivery with UK retail system sales growing by 10.5% 169 net new stores and like for like sales in UK equity stores increasing by 2.0%.
Investing to drive like for like growth The market and competitive landscape continue to evolve with more foodled operators now offering coffee and while convenience and coffee quality remain the top decision criteria customers are becoming more demanding in the way their priorities are met.
At Costa we are focused on meeting this challenge and serving the best quality coffee and fresher food via more tailored store designs with a complementary digital experience.
During the year we invested in new MerryChef ovens and microwaves across the estate which will facilitate the rollout of new hot food ranges during 201718 starting with the launch of our new better breakfast offering during the first half.
We also recently extended our coffee range through new initiatives in the Cortado family and will build on this innovation with the launch of cold brew and new single origin blends during this year.
Investing in the brand and digital capability We continue to invest in our digital capability and our new till system will be installed during 201718 enabling faster service and new functionality to provide the platform for further Pay and Collect trials towards the end of this year and a wider rollout thereafter.
To increase our engagement with our c.5.2 million active Costa Coffee Club members we are enhancing our app to enable a better customer experience and more targeted offers as well as gaining a much richer source of customer data habits and insight.
The newlook app will be released in the first half of 201718.
Pipeline weighted towards high performing channels Future growth will also be underpinned through diversification of our channels and formats as we recognise that customer requirements differ by location.
For example our Pronto format is optimised to sell our hand crafted coffee quickly in high footfall locations such as travel hubs at peak times taking advantage of the volume opportunity presented.
Drive Thrus are also delivering very high sales volumes and returns and together with travel channels are our fastest growing category and will become a greater proportion of our estate going forward.
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 43 We now see a future growth potential of over 3000 UK stores High sales volumes Drive Thrus are delivering very high sales volumes and returns Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 44 Strategic report Operating review continued Profitable Growth continued Profitable Growth continued Premier Inn Germany Our first German hotel opened in Frankfurt in February 2016 and the feedback has been excellent with the hotel constantly ranked between first and third on TripAdvisor out of c.270 hotels in Frankfurt.
We have a committed pipeline of five more hotels and will have opened six to eight by 2020 with a capital commitment of 60100 million per annum over the next few years.
The aim is to accelerate our rollout and we continue to look for further opportunities to grow more quickly.
Premier Inn International Our six hotels in the Middle East continue to perform well in a challenging market and we will maintain our profitable joint venture here with two further hotels in the pipeline.
Our
Asia is on plan with a view to exiting the market over the next twelve months.
Costa EMEI Internationally we continue to build on our strengths and look to broaden our footprint in quality markets that have the opportunity for scale.
In Poland we have 131 stores achieving strong single digit like for like sales growth driven Strategic Priority 2 Focus on our strengths to grow internationally using successful initiatives including fresher food innovative drink ranges and new store formats.
We reached profitability in 201617 and see potential to significantly increase the number of stores in this market.
We also have 259 Costa Express machines in Poland which are performing well.
We continue to see strong growth in our profitable franchise business with a total of 731 stores across 23 countries.
Our franchise business has grown rapidly over a number of years through our successful business model of great partnerships efficient logistics and a focus on localisation and customer demographics.
Going forward we will select target markets with the highest potential for us to grow profitably and win market share.
In France we have decided to pursue a franchise only strategy resulting in the recent closure of our five equity stores.
Costa Asia China is a large market with a burgeoning middle class and the propensity to drink coffee is on the rise.
This presents an exciting opportunity for Costa to become the clear number two in the market.
We have built a solid foundation from which to grow but will take a more strategic approach as we narrow our focus across ten top tier cities to build scale and a brand presence.
We will also exit or turnaround poor performing stores to improve the overall profitability of our estate.
We will enhance our brand awareness through digital media build our coffee credentials and create the meeting place of choice for our target customer through improved store formats.
During the year we opened 63 gross new stores and exited 37 stores in
In addition we have introduced five newlook concept stores with an improved customer proposition and although early days results have been promising and we aim to add additional new concept stores over the course of 201718.
The success of these stores so far gives us greater confidence in our ability to build scale successfully in this growing market and look for opportunities to accelerate our strategy.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 45 This year we installed 1585 net new machines bringing our total to 6801 including international Strategic Priority 3 Build capability and infrastructure to support longterm growth Costa Express Costa Express is an exciting global growth engine for Costa and we see potential to double the size of this part of the business.
This year we installed 1585 net new machines bringing our total to 6801 including 740 internationally.
As well as renewing our key UK customer contract we also embarked on our entry into a number of new markets with plans to roll out in 201718.
We are upgrading our machines with new management systems which will enhance our scalability and allow us to monitor and control the machines and their content remotely.
This will be important to the success of our international rollout.
We are upgrading the customer screens to bring the best quality experience and benefit our partners by enabling options such as site specific advertising.
In November we announced c. rates.
Through this we will become a leaner and more agile business sustaining good margins as we grow.
During the year we have made good progress against these initiatives with the renegotiation and consolidation of key supplier contracts and the implementation of new labour management tools across Costa and Restaurants to facilitate better scheduling and communications with team members.
We have also completed the insourcing of our digital teams and will shortly commence the rollout of new tills across Costa.
As part of our plan to build a better infrastructure in March we opened our new state of the art Roastery to drive innovation and efficiency facilitating Costas global growth for the next 20 years.
This 38 million investment will increase roasting capacity from 11000 tonnes to 45000 tonnes a year and use fully automated systems to achieve increased productivity and sustainability.
During the year we continued to strengthen our capabilities to support longterm growth.
In the senior executive team this included the promotion of Simon Jones to Managing Director of Premier Inn and Restaurants and the appointment of Dominic Paul to Managing Director of Costa.
Mark Anderson Managing Director of Property and Premier Inn International has been promoted to the Executive Committee reflecting the importance of his new role.
We have created a new Group Transformation Director role to support our journey to become a more efficient company and we recently announced that we have hired Nigel Jones to take up this role later this year.
With our focus on our winning teams we were also proud to be voted eighth in the Sunday Times Best Big Companies to work for.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 46 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 46 My job can take me all over the UK and given the choice Ill always stay in a Premier Inn because you know the room will be clean the bed will be comfortable and they put on a great breakfast.
Strategic report Strategic report Premier Inn holds a place in the nations heart as the UKs favourite hotel chain and its easy to understand why.
With a network of over 750 hotels around the country there is always a Premier Inn close by to where you need or want to be and our brilliant team members will always welcome you with a smile and make sure youre well looked after.
Ensuring our guests get a good nights sleep is our number one priority and our famous Premier Inn breakfast will set you up for the day ahead whether youre off to work or off on hols Bringing customers brands they love when they need t o be ready for action Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 47 1.9bn 762 c.14500 80.2% 94% Total Premier Inn and Restaurants sales in 201617 up 6.6% Number of UK Premier Inns Committed pipeline rooms Total occupancy Bookings direct with Premier Inn Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 48 Strategic report Force for Good Working together to make a better future At Whitbread we are building a long term sustainable business.
How we do things is just as important as what we do.
People are at the heart of our business whether it be the way we look after our colleagues how we protect the environment or how we support the communities in which we operate.
We have a responsibility to act as a Force for Good for all our stakeholders and we take this responsibility seriously.
We break our sustainability programme into three pillars Team and community Customer wellbeing and Energy and environment.
Each pillar has its own individual goals and targets set.
Whitbread is a great place to work and we are committed to ensuring that our 50000 employees have the opportunities they need to succeed in whatever they do.
We have over 800 apprentices in learning.
Our WISE programme focuses on getting young people into training whether or not they are in education training or employment and we invest significant sums each year in our various schemes.
Further information is provided in our operating review found on pages 24 to 29.
Highlights
Team and community
Hospital Charity raised for the Costa Foundation
Customer wellbeing 15% less added sugar in our Costa Ice range 100% of our whole shell eggs will be cage free by 2020 restaurants  the largest chain in the UK to serve MSC certified fish 100% of Costa coffee is Rainforest Alliance certified Energy and environment new LED lights installed across 100 Premier Inn sites tonnes of CO e per annum saved through energy efficiency projects installed in 201617 Costa stores participating in a nationwide cup recycling scheme Costa stores nationwide recycling coffee grounds Chris Vaughan General Counsel Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 49 Our pillars 1 Team and community Great Ormond Street Hospital Charity During 201617 the partnership between Premier Inn and Restaurants and Great Ormond Street Hospital Charity has continued to achieve outstanding results.
Through building on the momentum of the last four years we have raised over 2.8 million for the charity in 201617.
Premier Inn and Restaurants had committed to raising 7.5 million in five years towards a new Premier Inn Clinical Building.
We were delighted in November 2016 to announce that the fundraising total had been achieved one year earlier than anticipated.
The fundraising targets set have been embraced by our team members customers and suppliers across the country.
Costa Foundation During the year the Costa Foundation has completed 11 new school projects.
It has also funded projects to expand six established Costa Foundation schools in Guatemala and Uganda.
The total amount raised in 201617 was 1.8 million.
The Costa Foundation has been active since 2007.
During the last ten years 72 different school projects have been completed in nine coffeeproducing countries around the world and provided over 30000 places for children to access a safe and quality education.
The Costa Foundation has inspired thousands of Costa employees to make a difference through their daily work.
2016 saw the tenth Costa Foundation Three Peaks Challenge fundraising event.
Since 2007 hundreds of the wider Costa team have risen to the gruelling challenge of climbing the highest mountains in Scotland Wales and England in one continuous journey to raise money for the Foundation.
We also ran our first collaborative partnership with Allegras Project Waterfall as part of the UK Coffee
Costa raised over 81000 which was used to support water projects delivered by the Costa Foundation on behalf of Project Waterfall.
This included new water harvesting tanks supporting the increased growth in student enrolment at ten Costa Foundation high schools in Uganda.
Costa community programme The Costa community programme has gone from strength to strength with the aim of empowering our team members to make an active contribution to their local communities.
In 2016 over 12000 hours were volunteered by team members across Costa to good causes where they live and work.
With 28 million customers welcomed every month we must ensure that they are buying products and services they can trust and that we provide a great choice of food and drink which includes healthier options.
Animal welfare is important to us which is why we recently committed to achieving cage free status on all whole shell eggs by 2020 and all ingredient eggs by 2025.
We also announced a target in Costa to reduce added sugar in drinks by 25% by 2020.
But we know there is more to do.
During the year our teams have continued to passionately support charitable and local causes.
To date we have raised over 8 million for Great Ormond Street Hospital Charity and over 11 million for the Costa
This includes over 250000 raised from the annual Three Peaks Challenge and I was delighted to take part in the 2016 event myself.
Our innovative work to build sustainable buildings continues and as a result we won the prestigious Asda Environmental Leadership Award at the BITC Responsible Business Awards.
This year we also participated in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the first time scoring best in class in Governance Philanthropy and Ecoefficiency.
We have been identified in their Sustainability Yearbook as leaders in our sector.
Chris Vaughan General Counsel 24 April 2017 We have raised 2.8 million for Great Ormond Street Hospital Charity in 201617 school projects completed in nine countries Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 50 Strategic report 50 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 Our reformulation programme to reduce salt sugar and saturated fat without compromising the quality and taste of our food has progressed well during the year and we have made significant reductions in the amount of sugar in our starters desserts and sauce accompaniments.
Sugar reduction has also been a key priority for Costa and we are committed to reducing added sugar across our beverage range by 25% by 2020.
Significant reductions have been made in many of our drinks range.
These include 15% less added sugar in our Costa Ice and 41% in a medio Chai Latte.
Our Costa food range also includes products which are less than 250 kcals per portion including healthier options such as fruit pots and whole and dried fruit.
In addition we have been working to a target of reducing salt in our sandwiches by 5% by the end of 2017.
Responsible sourcing We have published our first modern slavery report this year.
The full report can be found at www. hitbread. across our global supply chain.
With a vast and varied supply chain we understood the first step to tackling these issues was to understand where our most significant risks lie.
Working in partnership with leading UK human trafficking charity Stop The Traffik we undertook a heat mapping exercise to identify which suppliers and which parts of our global supply chain are most at risk of modern slavery taking place.
The process we followed involved This year we established a partnership with the Police Community Clubs of Great Britain to run our first Costa Reading Week whereby hundreds of our store teams donated educational books on environmental issues to local schools.
Book club events were hosted in store to encourage parents and carers to spend one to one time reading with their children.
Costa also supported Keep Britain Tidys KBT Clean for the Queen Campaign Britains largest ever litter pick event as part of our commitment to work towards tackling the issue of litter.
This was the second year that Costa has acted as a principal retail sponsor for KBTs national antilitter campaigns.
Over 600 of our stores took part in the event.
In recognition of the hard work and commitment that our teams have delivered to their communities the Costa Community Programme received Gold in the Corporate Engagement Awards and a Highly Commended in the Corporate Comms Awards.
We continue to work on enabling our teams to make an active contribution to their communities across Whitbread.
Team and community continued Force for Good continued Our pillars 2 Customer wellbeing We have continued to recognise the ongoing concern that childhood obesity presents to our society.
We are committed to working in partnership with the UK Government and industry partners to ensure progress continues on this important issue.
We are actively working to reformulate dishes where possible review our portion sizes and provide choice and transparency.
We have a strategy in place to do this but recognise there is more to do.
With over 600 restaurants and over 2200 coffee shops in the UK we believe that our scale enables us to make a significant and positive contribution in driving change through our work on the reformulation of the food and drink that we serve introducing credible healthier choices and providing clear meaningful and easily accessible information for our customers.
We have already taken action and during the year have continued to make good progress.
To date the majority of dishes on our restaurants childrens menus provide children with one of their five a day requirement and we offer more fruit options in desserts.
A review was undertaken of the drinks offered to children and this has led to the removal of all added sugar drinks.
Our childrens food and drink offering has been positively received by the Soil Association in its Out to Lunch survey where Beefeater and Brewers Fayre were recognised for improvements to the quality and nutrition of the food offered.
We continue to work with the Soil Association so that we can build on this achievement.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 51 an analysis of supplier tiers down to commodity level based on a risk rating at source and chain geographies.
We are now working through the results to develop a response for each supplier identified as a higher risk following the Ethical Trading Initiatives human rights due diligence framework.
Product
We have made good progress towards ensuring the products that we buy are sustainable.
In relation to our critical commodities Coffee  100% of our coffee is Rainforest Alliance certified Fish  All of the fish that we now buy directly is sustainably sourced.
This year we are very proud to have achieved the Chain of Custody Marine Stewardship Council MSC certification.
This makes us the largest restaurant chain in the UK to serve MSC certified fish demonstrating to our customers that the fish they are served has been caught in a sustainable and responsible way.
Eggs  In September 2016 we announced our commitment to go cage free on whole shell eggs across Costa and Premier Inn and Restaurants by 2020 and ingredient eggs by 2025.
We are already taking significant steps in meeting that target.
We also have plans and targets in place in relation to cotton meat palm oil and timber.
Our pillars 3 Energy and environment
This year we are pleased to have achieved our 2020 carbon reduction target.
We will be working to reset our environmental targets early in 201718 continuing our commitment to reduce our environmental impact.
UK electricity generation has become more efficient in 201617 reducing emissions per kWh generated.
This improvement and our continued investment in efficiency has enabled us to reduce our emissions beyond our 15% 2020 target.
During the year we continued our programme of annual capital investment to reduce our energy consumption.
We opened a further hub by Premier Inn site in 201617 as part of our strategy for sustainable development in urban environments.
These developments have incorporated the environmental initiatives and lessons from the success of our first hub by Premier Inn site in 2015 which achieved a BREEAM Outstanding rating and we will continue this work as we accelerate the roll out of the format in 201718.
Investing in efficiency and renewable energy We have continued to invest in renewable energy generation in our new Premier Inns.
We now have solar photo voltaic generation capacity on over 90 hotels.
In addition as of April 2017 all of the electricity we buy for our UK operations will be 100% renewable.
On 13 March 2017 Costa opened its new 38 million Roastery in Basildon.
As well as quadrupling Costas roasting capacity and being one of the largest roasteries in Europe it is also one of the worlds most sustainable.
Onsite
In tandem with the rainwater harvesting system this will also generate hot water for the building.
Already achieving a BREEAM Outstanding to latest standards during its design stage assessment the Roastery was shortlisted for the 2017 BREEAM Awards and is aiming to receive a further Outstanding certification at the final stage assessment.
Recycling and resource management We are committed to minimising our environmental footprint from bean to cup and in February 2017 Costa launched a nationwide recycling scheme across over 2000 stores in order to recover and guarantee the recycling of its iconic takeaway cups.
In addition to this Costa is funding research with the University of Sheffield to further understand the barriers to cup recycling.
We are also supporting consumerfacing campaigns to raise awareness of cup recyclability.
Moving from recycling cups to coffee grounds Costa has also partnered with awardwinning clean technology company biobean to recycle coffee grounds into low carbon fuel sources.
Over 800 stores nationwide are now recycling an estimated 3000 tonnes of coffee grounds a year.
Awards
During the year we won the Environmental Leadership Award from Business in the Community.
The award recognises the pioneering sustainability efforts of both Premier Inn and Costa for tackling climate change and saving energy through two trailblazing environmental projects  the Costa EcoPod in Telford and the hub by Premier Inn St.
Martins Lane hotel.
Both projects demonstrate that sustainable buildings and efficient new space are at the core of our environmental strategy.
249kW A 249kW solar PV system will provide power for the Roastery Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 52 With over 6000 Costa Express machines in garages and motorway service stations up and down the UKs roads motorists never have to drive too far before they get to the next stop to pick up a cup of quality coffee on the go.
Made with fresh milk and Costas Mocha Italia blend a cup of coffee from a Costa Express machine is the next best thing to a handcrafted barista made coffee.
Its the perfect pick me up if youve got a long drive ahead or just want to break up the journey.
Bringing customers brands they love when they need t o break up the journey Strategic report 6Number of UK Costa Express machines Number of international Costa Express machines Number of countries with Costa Express Number of drink combinations available from a machine Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 52 When I have to make a long journey and need a good quality coffee to look forward to when I stop.
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 53 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 54 Strategic report
Premier Inn and Restaurants revenue rose to 1907.9 million up 6.6%.
Within this Premier Inn achieved total sales growth of 9.0% to 1349.1 million and grew its market share through new hotel openings and good like for like sales growth in the UK.
Premier Inns new UK hotels contributed 6.4% to sales growth and like for like sales grew 2.3%.
Like for like sales growth was driven by the good performance of hotels in catchments where we did not add capacity and by our strong returning hotel extension programme.
Our hotel extensions as previously indicated together with new hotels diluted our like for like RevPAR by c.2.0% resulting in a decline of 0.6%.
In 201718 we expect new hotels to contribute around 56% to total sales growth and extensions to contribute net c.1.0% to like for like sales growth.
Restaurants total sales grew by 1.2% with like for like sales down 0.3%.
Eight net new restaurants were opened during the year.
Costas revenue grew by 10.7% to 1201.7 million.
Costas UK sales grew to 1054.0 million up 10.0% with equity like for like sales increasing by 2.0% and 184 net new coffee shops opened during the year.
International sales grew to 147.7 million up 16.3% 7.1% in constant currency with 71 net new stores.
Costa
Express delivered a strong performance with 1585 net coffee machines installed taking the total to 6801 of which 740 are overseas.
In 201718 we expect our Costa initiatives to drive positive like for like sales growth with the investments we are making in the first half delivering benefits in the second half.
We do however expect the consumer environment to be tougher than last year.
Group Finance Directors review
52 weeks to 2 March 2017 53 weeks to 3 March 2016
53 week comparative %
52 week comparative % Like for like growth % Premier Inn and Restaurants 1907.9 1822.0 4.7 6.6 1.5 Costa 1201.7 1103.2 8.9 10.7 2.0 Less intersegment 3.6 3.4 Revenue 3106.0 2921.8 6.3 8.2 1.6 Whitbread has continued its good financial performance with total revenue up 8.2% to 3106.0 million driven by strong organic growth combined with good like for like sales growth of 1.6% albeit below our stretching internal target.
Underlying profit before tax was up 6.2% to 565.2 million with cash generated from operations of 860.1 million and underlying basic earnings per share up 6.0%.
Profit before tax was 515.4 million 201516 487.7 million.
A good financial performance Nicholas Cadbury Group Finance Director Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 55
52 weeks to 2 March 2017 53 weeks to 3 March 2016
53 week comparative %
52 week comparative % Premier Inn and Restaurants  UK Ireland and Germany 471.5 451.5 4.4 7.0 Premier Inn International 3.5 4.6 23.9 23.9 Premier Inn and Restaurants 468.0 446.9 4.7 7.4 Costa  International 3.7 2.5 Profit from operations 626.0 600.4 4.3 6.8 Central costs 33.6 31.6 6.3 7.0 Underlying operating profit 592.4 568.8 4.1 6.8 Net finance costs 27.2 22.5 20.9 22.5 Underlying profit before tax 565.2 546.3 3.5 6.2 Nonunderlying operating costs 39.7 40.7 Nonunderlying finance costs 10.1 17.9 Profit before tax 515.4 487.7 5.7 Underlying taxation 119.1 116.1 Nonunderlying tax items 19.6 15.7 Profit for the year 415.9 387.3 7.4 Profit before tax was 515.4 million up 5.7% and after taxation statutory profit for the year was 415.9 million up 7.4% on last year.
Premier Inn and Restaurants profits grew to 468.0 million up 7.4% with UK profits of 471.5 million up 7.0%.
Within this rent costs increased by 15.8% to 139.8 million reflecting the high level of leasehold openings across the last two years.
Our depreciation and amortisation charge increased by 19.3% to 144.3 million as we continued to invest in enhancing our hotels and restaurants and upgrading our systems.
In line with previous guidance margins held steady at 24.5% compared to 201516 benefitting from like for like sales growth and our cost efficiency programme that offset inflation and our increased investments.
International hotel losses reduced to 3.5 million 201516 loss of 4.6 million.
In July last year we announced that Premier Inn will focus its international strategy on continuing to grow its businesses in Germany and the Middle East and will commence a phased withdrawal from its operations in India and South East Asia.
The associated costs of withdrawal are detailed in the nonunderlying items section.
Costas profits increased 5.3% to 158.0 million with good growth in our UK retail business and continued strong growth from Costa Express.
Costas margins were down 0.8% pts year on year on a 53 week basis to 13.1% due to the National Living Wage investments in refurbishments and IT and increased investment in brand marketing.
This was slightly better than previous guidance due to investment rephased into 201718.
Costa International made a profit of 3.7 million 201516 2.5 million with a good performance in our international franchise business and in Poland.
Looking forward our sectors continue to face a number of cost headwinds from the National Living Wage business rates commodity price inflation and foreign exchange rates.
We are incurring additional rent from the sale and leaseback transactions we successfully completed last year and are planning to carry out this year.
We are also investing in line with our strategy of improving our customer proposition and building digital and IT capabilities and infrastructures that will enable the delivery of longterm sustainable growth.
Over time these costs will be partially offset as we benefit from the cost efficiency programme announced in November 2016 which plans to deliver c.
150 million of savings over five years the investments we are making our dynamic pricing model and through the scale benefits of our organic growth.
In 201718 we expect margins in Costa to reduce by around 1.2% pts which is in line with previous guidance including the rephasing of investments from 201617.
In Premier Inn and Restaurants we expect margins to reduce between 0% to 0.2% pts again in line with previous guidance.
Nonunderlying items Nonunderlying items including tax related adjustments amounted to a charge of 30.2 million 201516 42.9 million.
This includes a 30.0 million charge in respect of Premier Inn Internationals withdrawal from India and South East Asia comprising impairment of assets the costs of exiting contracts and the closure of regional offices.
Also included in nonunderlying items are oneoff restructuring costs of 36.1 million relating to reorganisation costs in the UK as part of our cost efficiency programme and a charge in respect of the strategic review and resulting restructuring of Costas international operations in France and China.
The restructuring in China is ongoing and there are expected to be further closure costs in the next financial year.
In addition an impairment charge of 7.5 million was recognised relating principally to underperforming stores.
These charges are partially offset by a net gain of 19.3 million on the disposal of property plant and equipment and property reversions a significant part of which relate to our strategy to carry out moderate sale and leaseback transactions a net gain of 11.8 million on the disposal of our investment in associate a hotel in Edinburgh and a 5.3 million refund on the settlement of a historic VAT claim.
Nonunderlying items also include amortisation of acquired intangible assets 2.5 million and the IAS 19 pension finance charge 9.4 million.
Full details are set out in note 6 to the financial statements.
Our policy on underlying performance measures that defines what items may be classified as nonunderlying is set out in note 2.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 56 Strategic report Group Finance Directors review continued Net finance costs The underlying net finance cost for the year was higher than last year at 27.2 million 201516 22.5 million due to an increase in average net debt as a result of our continued capital investments detailed below.
In 201718 we expect underlying interest to increase to around 32 million as a result of the incremental cost of the recent US private placement loan notes.
The effective interest rate on average borrowings decreased from 4.7% to 3.8%.
Total net finance costs including nonunderlying finance costs were 37.3 million 201516 40.4 million including the IAS19 pension finance charge of 9.4 million 201516 17.2 million.
Taxation
Underlying tax for the year amounted to 119.1 million at an effective tax rate of 21.1% 201516 21.3%.
The statutory tax expense for the year was 99.5 million 201516 100.4 million.
Further details are set out in note 9 to the financial statements.
Earnings per share Underlying basic earnings per share for the year were 246.48 pence up 6.0% on last year and underlying diluted earnings per share for the year were 245.95 pence up 6.5% on last year.
Full details are set out in note 10 to the financial statements.
Dividend
The Groups dividend policy is to grow the dividend broadly in line with earnings across the cycle.
The recommended final dividend is 65.90 pence an increase on last year of 6.5% making the total dividend for the year 95.80 pence a growth of 6.0%.
With the final dividend we will offer our shareholders the option to participate in a dividend reinvestment plan.
Further details are set out in note 11 to the financial statements.
Cash flow and net debt Cash generated from operations was strong at 860.1 million an increase of 10.0% on last year.
Cash capital expenditure in total was 609.8 million 201516 724.9 million with further details set out below whilst on an accruals basis the Groups capital expenditure was 615.8 million 201516 751.8 million.
Capital expenditure is split between expansionary which includes the acquisition and development of properties and product improvement and maintenance.
Premier Inn and Restaurants cash capital expenditure was 485.5 million 201516 622.3 million with expansionary expenditure of 337.6 million 201516 455.2 million as we opened 4763 gross new rooms and continued to invest in our hotel room pipeline including freehold property purchases.
We maintained our gross UK pipeline at c.14500 rooms including c.5900 in London.
Our freehold pipeline is now c.34% of the total pipeline compared to 52% at the end of 201516.
Expansionary cash expenditure includes 69.6 million acquisition of freehold properties which includes 28.3 million on expansion in Germany and 268.0 million on freehold and leasehold hotel and hotel extension construction.
Nonexpansionary product improvement and maintenance cash capital expenditure in Premier Inn and Restaurants was 147.9 million 201516 167.1 million.
This was a decrease on the previous year due to the successful rollout of lower cost full room refurbishments reactive maintenance efficiencies and savings as we annualised the rollout of airconditioning units and new beds across the estate last year.
Costas cash capital expenditure was 124.3 million 201516 102.6 million with the increase from last year principally due to the construction of our new Roastery and a higher number of Costa Express machines.
Expansionary cash capital was 65.8 million as we opened 255 net new coffee shops and installed 1585 net new Costa Express machines.
Costas nonexpansionary product improvement and maintenance expenditure was 58.5 million 201516 47.7 million with the increase driven by investment in the new Roastery to create more capacity for future growth.
The principal movements in net debt are as follows Cash generated from operations 860.1 782.2 Product improvement and maintenance capital Operating cash flow after maintenance capital 653.7 567.4 Interest 34.6 25.0 Pensions 90.3 84.3 Dividends 167.1 155.1 Other 58.7 34.2 Cash flow before expansionary capital 216.2 183.7 Expansionary capital Proceeds from sale and leaseback 186.2 Proceeds from cash disposals 20.8 0.2 Net cashflow 19.8 326.6 Net debt brought forward 909.8 583.2 Net debt carried forward 890.0 909.8 Total cash capital expenditure 609.8 724.9 Earnings per share 52 weeks to 2 March 2017 pence 53 weeks to 3 March 2016 pence Change % 53 week comparative Change % 52 week comparative Underlying basic 246.48 238.65 3.3% 6.0% Underlying diluted 245.95 236.82 3.9% 6.5% Statutory basic 231.39 215.66 7.3% Statutory diluted 230.89 214.00 7.9% Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 57 In addition to capital expenditure our future leasehold commitments increased by 242.0m to 3138.7 million with Premier Inn and Restaurants at 2681.3 million 201516 2567.6 million and Costa at 430.9 million 201516 282.0 million.
Net proceeds of 186.2 million were received from the successful sale and leaseback of our hub hotel in Kings Cross our hub hotel in Tothill Street Westminster and our Premier Inn hotel in West Smithfield Farringdon.
Proceeds from cash disposals of 20.8 million include 14.1 million for the disposal of our investment in associate.
In 201718 we expect our gross cash capital expenditure to be between 650 million and 700 million and around 500600 million net of the proceeds of around 100150 million from sale and leaseback transactions.
Premier Inn and Restaurants spend is expected to be c.
500550 million with around 4200 room openings.
Premier
Inn and Restaurants nonexpansionary product improvement and maintenance investment will be maintained as we continue to improve our customer experience and competitive edge and continue to improve our digital and systems capabilities.
Costa cash capital expenditure is expected to be a similar level to 201617 at around 140 million with around 60% being expansionary capital which will include larger stores such as Drive Thrus and the remainder comprising refurbishments systems product improvement and innovation.
Costa is planning to open a similar level of coffee shops and to install c.1250 Costa Express machines.
Pension payments totalled 90.3 million in line with the schedule of contributions agreed at the last triennial review in March 2014.
Dividend payments amounted to 167.1 million 201516 155.1 million with the 6.0% increase in the full year dividend of 95.80 pence consistent with the Groups basic underlying earnings per share growth of 6.0%.
Corporation tax paid in the year was 86.8 million 201516 85.1 million.
Other cash items of 58.7 million 201516 34.2 million include payments of 22.3 million principally relating to last years provision for onerous leases on historically disposed businesses 7.1 million for the acquisition of our interest in Healthy Retail Ltd trading as Pure and foreign exchange movements on net debt.
We maintained our adjusted net debt to EBITDAR ratio see financial status and funding with net debt as at 2 March 2017 of 890.0 million 201516 909.8 million.
Return on capital Return on capital is a prime focus for
In the year the Groups return on capital of 15.2% 201516 15.3% continued to deliver a good premium to our cost of capital.
Costa continued to deliver excellent returns at 45.4% but were down 4.5% pts on last year after increasing for six consecutive years principally due to the higher capital spend on the new
Premier Inn and Restaurants returns were up 0.1% pt at 13.0% 201516 year end 12.9%.
Excluding the investment in freehold developments under construction totalling more than 200 million returns in Premier Inn and Restaurants would have been 1.6% pts higher at 14.6%.
Pension
As at 2 March 2017 there was an IAS19 pension deficit of 425.1 million 201516 288.1 million.
The main movements during the year were the reduction in the discount rate from 3.70% to 2.60% driven by the ongoing volatility in corporate bond yields partly offset by the payment of the cash contribution of 90.3 million.
The recovery plan schedule of Company contributions is 80 million per annum for 2017 to 2021 and 2.6 million in 2022.
The payments will be accelerated by up to 5 million per year where increases in ordinary dividends exceed RPI.
The
Company also makes payments of c.
910 million per year into the pension fund through the Scottish Partnership arrangements.
Financial status and funding Whitbread aims to maintain its financial position and capital structure consistent with retaining its investment grade debt status.
To this end we work within a financial framework aimed at keeping net debt to EBITDAR pension and lease adjusted not greater than 3.5 times.
The net debt to EBITDAR for 201617 was 3.2 times providing us with comfortable headroom.
Our majority freehold hotel estate also provides us with significant capital flexibility with the pace of freehold acquisition and construction and hotel extensions within our control.
Freehold hotel properties compared to leasehold also reduce profit volatility and provide Whitbread with a flexible source of capital funding through sale and leaseback transactions.
The Group has sufficient facilities to finance our short and mediumterm requirements with total committed facilities of c.
1.9 billion compared to net debt as at 2 March 2017 of 890.0 million.
Committed debt facilities include US Private Placement loans of 258 million at the hedged rate a 450 million bond with a coupon of 3.375% which matures in October 2025 and a syndicated bank revolving credit facility RCF of 950 million.
During the year the maturity of the RCF facility was extended to September 2021 with the option of a further one year extension potentially taking the facility to September 2022.
On 1 March 2017 the Group successfully secured a further 200 million US Private Placement loan notes in pounds sterling.
These loan notes were issued in two series with a ten year maturity fixed at c.2.6%.
The proceeds will be drawn during the year in May and August.
Nicholas Cadbury Group Finance Director 24 April 2017 Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 58 Strategic report Principal risks and uncertainties Understanding and responding to risks
Risk management
Risk arises from the operations of and strategic decisions taken by every business.
It is not something that can be avoided but should be harnessed in pursuit of business objectives.
The Board has ultimate responsibility for risk management throughout the Group and determines the nature and extent of the risks Whitbread is willing to take to achieve its objectives to determine its risk appetite.
Risk is managed proactively by the Executive
Certain responsibilities such as overseeing the systems of risk management and internal control have been delegated to the Audit Committee which completes an annual review of the effectiveness of these processes.
The structure and governance of the risk management process at Whitbread is shown on page 59 and during the year a robust bottomup assessment of risks was completed.
Both the Premier Inn and Restaurants and the Costa businesses complete an annual review of the risks to the achievement of their strategic goals whilst also taking into account the key operational risks which are updated regularly.
A topdown risk assessment is also completed to capture the Boards views on the principal risks facing Whitbread considering risk appetite.
Actions required to manage these risks are monitored and reviewed on a regular basis.
The principal risks identified together with a summary of key mitigations are summarised on pages 60 and 61.
Risks and uncertainties The Directors have reconsidered the principal risks and uncertainties of the Group and added two new risks reflecting the risks around the extensive programme of change we have embarked upon and business interruption risks for services managed by third parties.
The risk of a wider macroeconomic effect as a result of the UK leaving the EU including foreign exchange and interest rate fluctuations is addressed by the Groups existing economic climate risk.
Going forward we will closely monitor and evaluate any potential areas of risk.
Viability statement The Corporate Governance Code requires that the directors have considered the viability of the Group over an appropriate period of time selected by them in this case a threeyear period.
In making this assessment the directors took into account the current financial and operational positions of the Group and the potential impact of the risks and uncertainties as outlined on pages 60 and 61.
The business planning process reviewed by the Board as part of the annual strategic planning process is over a fiveyear timeline with the Board acknowledging that there is significantly more certainty over the first three years of the plan in light of fluctuations in the global economy the entry of new competitors and customer preferences.
Therefore the directors have determined a threeyear period is an appropriate period over which to provide its viability statement.
In making the viability statement the Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group including those that would threaten the business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
Scenario modelling and sensitivity analysis was applied to forecasted cash flows to model the potential effects should the principal risks actually occur and consideration was given to the availability and likely effectiveness of mitigating actions that could be taken to avoid or reduce the impact or occurrence of the identified risk.
In particular it should be noted that the Group is currently spending a substantial part of its cash from operations on discretionary growth capital c.30% on average which allows the Group considerable flexibility to manage cash flows and would provide significant mitigation if required.
Based upon this assessment the directors confirm that they have reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and to meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear assessment period.
Understanding and responding to risks in our operations means we can make informed decisions that enhance our capacity to build value.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 59 Group risk framework Risk management reporting and escalation Governance strategy oversight and communications
Accountable for strategic risk management including the assessment of risk appetite and ensuring a sound system of internal control and risk management is in place Audit Committee Oversight and challenge of the effectiveness of risk management and mitigating controls Executive Committee Review challenge and approval of Group risks Internal Audit Coordination and analysis Accountable for risk management in the respective business and risk submissions to the Executive Committee
Functions
Costa
Premier Inn and
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 60 Strategic report Principal risks and uncertainties continued Principal Risks Risks Key mitigations Change Cyber and data security Cyber and data security remains a key risk as it could reduce the effectiveness of our systems or result in a loss of data.
This in turn could result in loss of income andor reputational damage.
We have a series of IT security controls in place including uptodate antivirus software across the estate networksystem monitoring and regular penetration testing to identify vulnerabilities.
A continuous security improvement programme is in place improving security and data controls.
Specifically during the year we have strengthened our perimeter protection with improved firewall and denial of service protection and have moved significant systems to new more secure data centres.
IT Infrastructure IT infrastructure is unable to adequately support our business growth objectives.
Although improvements have been made in our infrastructure.
A strong IT leadership team is in place together with Group governance structures to help prioritise coordinate and deliver our business plans and the IT investment in an efficient way so as to minimise disruption.
We are also significantly increasing our investment in the upgrade of our systems infrastructure increasing the capacity resilience and stability of our core systems and our digital proposition.
Innovation and brand strength A longterm decline in the customer perception of our brands would impact our ability to grow and achieve appropriate levels of return.
To ensure we maintain and improve the strength of our brands we continually complete market research and monitor opinion with focus groups and net guest scores to ensure we maintain the right levels of investment and innovation in our customer offerings.
We are also increasing the rate and level of investment in the refurbishments of our Premier Inn and Costa stores to help improve our net promoter scores.
Change
Our ability to execute the unprecedented volume of change is recognised as a new risk this year.
We have embarked on an extensive programme of change to replace our legacy systems and infrastructure upgrade our digital capability and improve our customer propositions enabling Whitbread to deliver its growth plans over the coming years.
To help ensure the successful delivery of these change projects we have significantly enhanced our internal project delivery expertise and capability and put in place a robust assurance management framework coupled with regular reporting to the Executive Committee for all major projects.
New
Economic Climate Uncertainvolatile economic climate results in GDP decline fall in RevPAR and inflation impacting growth plans.
There is a rigorous business planning process in place which considers many scenarios with responses to these.
We also have strong site selection teams with wellestablished processes in place based on market and economic fundamentals both at a macro and micro level.
These are supported by sensitivity analysis and a robust investment appraisal process to help deliver good levels of return.
We have also embarked on an efficiency programme that aims to deliver 150 million of savings over five years.
Engagement and retention Failure to maintain staff engagement and retention in a tightening labour market.
The success of our businesses would not be possible without the passion and commitment of our teams.
Team engagement is fundamental.
We monitor this closely through our annual engagement survey Your Say the results of which are reviewed by the Executive Committee and the Board with trends analysed and appropriate actions reviewed and agreed.
Team turnover is also a key component of our WINcard and Annual Incentive Scheme.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 61 Risks Key mitigations Change
The risk of a pandemic or terrorism on the safety and security of our customers staff and the consequent impact on trading.
The safety and security of our customers employees and suppliers is of utmost importance.
Failure to prevent or respond to a major safety or security incident could adversely impact our operations and financial performance.
We invest site level training to help identify hostile reconnaissance activities and to ensure we have an appropriate response should such events take place.
The executive team also hold regular crisis management exercises to ensure we are prepared for such events.
Talent and succession Insufficient leadership capability and succession in place to deliver growth ambitions.
Talent and succession planning takes place regularly to ensure top talent is identified and succession plans exist for key roles.
Talent gaps are addressed through recruitment training and development to grow our management capability.
The Group offers key employees appropriate levels of reward and recognition in order to retain them.
Food safety and hygiene The preparation or storage of food andor supply chain failure results in food poisoning and reputational damage.
The health and wellbeing of our customers is fundamental to our business.
We have stringent food safety and sourcing policies with traceability and testing requirements in place in respect of meat and other products.
Independent food safety audits are also completed regularly at our hotels restaurants and coffee shops and the results are closely monitored.
We also invest considerable resources in employee training in the storage handling and preparation of food.
Health and safety Health and safety risk death or serious injury as a result of Company negligence.
The safety of our guests and employees is of paramount importance.
NSF an independent company carries out health and safety audits on every site and we have a programme of fire safety training for our employees.
Health and safety is a measure on the WINcard and acts as a gateway for incentive payments.
Regular health and safety updates are provided to the Executive Committee and the Board.
Third party arrangements Business interruption as a result of the withdrawal of services support or reputational damage as result of supplier practices is recognised as a new risk this year.
Whitbread has a number of key supplier relationships that help ensure the efficient delivery of our multisite and support centre operations.
The failure or withdrawal of services from one or more of these suppliers may result in some business interruption.
To ensure against this we continually review our suppliers and business continuity arrangements.
We expect our suppliers practices to be in line with our values and standards.
Suppliers are thoroughly vetted before we enter into any arrangements to ensure they are reputable and then monitored though our supplier management arrangements.
New
Key to change in the risk level Higher Level Lower New New risk The strategic report on pages 4 to 61 was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Chris Vaughan General Counsel on 24 April 2017.
Strategic report Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 62
Corporate governance I am pleased to present the Boards annual report on corporate governance which confirms that the Company has fully complied with the UK Corporate Governance Code throughout the year.
The Board is committed to ensuring that corporate governance is an integral part of our organisation.
It is key to how we interact with our investors employees suppliers and other stakeholders.
UK Corporate Governance Code The Board has reviewed the Companys performance against the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and has concluded that the Company complied with the Code throughout the 201617 financial year.
A copy of the Code is available from www. rc.
2016 Corporate Governance Code which applies to the Company with effect from the 201718 financial year.
I am pleased to confirm that we already comply with these new provisions.
Board membership The Board welcomed David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer as independent nonexecutive directors during the year.
Since the end of the financial year we have also welcomed Adam Crozier as an independent nonexecutive director.
Each of these individuals brings skills and experience to aid the Boards discussions.
Further details of the appointment of the new nonexecutive directors is provided in the Nomination Committee report on pages 75 to 77.
As announced during the year Wendy Becker retired from her position as a nonexecutive director of the Board in December 2016 following her nine year tenure.
I would like to thank Wendy for her contribution and commitment to the Board and we wish her well for the future.
Also as previously announced Stephen Williams will retire from the Board following the conclusion of the Companys 2017 AGM.
We are grateful to Stephen for remaining on the Board to ensure an orderly transition of the leadership of the Remuneration
Shareholder engagement The 201617 financial year has been one of significant engagement with our shareholders.
We held a Capital Market Day in November 2016 which was attended by our major shareholders at which executives presented details of our strategy.
We have twice consulted investors in connection with the Companys remuneration policy and further details of these consultations are provided in the remuneration report on pages 78 to 98.
I would like to thank all those investors that have taken the time to engage with us whether by responding to the consultations attending the Capital Market Day or meeting with Company representatives throughout the year.
Your input is much appreciated.
I also very much enjoyed meeting a number of our shareholders at our AGM last year and I look forward to doing so again at this years AGM on Wednesday 21 June 2017.
Richard Baker
24 April 2017 Richard Baker
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 63 Leadership and the Board of Directors The Board of Directors There are 11 members of the Board including the Chairman Chief Executive and Senior Independent Director.
The composition of the Board is shown in the chart to the right.
Biographical details of each of the directors can be found on pages 64 and 65.
We believe that it is vital for the Board to include a diverse range of skills backgrounds and experiences to enable a broad evaluation of all matters considered and to contribute to a positive culture of mutual respect and constructive challenge.
The mix of skills and experience represented on the Board is outlined to the right.
Board experience Number of directors Composition of the board
Executive directors Independent nonexecutive directors Age of the board Retail sector 7 Travel and hospitality sector Marketing 6 Legal 3 Financial 6 International 11 Commercial property 5 Technology and digital 7 Human resources 8 Board responsibilities The Board is responsible for the longterm success of the Company and ensures that there are effective controls in place which enable risk to be assessed and managed.
All Board members have responsibility for strategy performance risk and people.
The Chairman and Chief Executive have clearly defined roles which are separate and distinct.
The specific duties and division of responsibilities between the Chairman and Chief Executive have been agreed by the Board and are set out below together with information on the roles of the Senior Independent Director the executive directors and the nonexecutive directors.
Chairman
Leadership of the Board and setting its agenda including approval of the Groups strategy business plans annual budget and key areas of business importance.
Maintaining appropriate contact with major shareholders and ensuring that Board members understand their views concerning the Company.
Ensuring a culture of openness and debate around the Board table.
Leading the annual evaluation of the Board the committees and individual directors.
Ensuring through the General Counsel that the members of the Board receive accurate timely and clear information.
Chief Executive Optimising the performance of the Company.
Daytoday operation of the business.
Ensuring effective communication with shareholders and employees.
The creation of shareholder value by delivering profitable growth and a good return on capital.
Ensuring the Company has a strong team of highcalibre executives and putting in place appropriate management succession and development plans.
Leading and motivating a large workforce of people.
Senior Independent Director The Senior Independent Director provides a sounding board for the Chairman and supports him in the delivery of his objectives.
The Senior Independent Director is available to shareholders if they have concerns which the normal channels have failed to resolve or which would be inappropriate to raise with the Chairman or the executive team.
He also leads the annual evaluation of the Chairman on behalf of the other directors.
The Senior Independent Director can be contacted directly or through the General Counsel.
Executive directors The executive directors are responsible for the daytoday running of the business and for implementing the operational and strategic plans of the Company.
Nonexecutive directors The nonexecutive directors play a key role in constructively challenging and scrutinising the performance of the management of the Company and helping to develop proposals on strategy.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 64
Board of Directors A strong leadership team Richard Baker
Date of appointment to the Board September 2009 Date of appointment as Chairman September 2014 Age 54
Richard previously served as Chairman of Virgin Active Group Chief Executive of Alliance Boots Group plc and Chief Operating Officer of Asda Group plc.
External appointments Aimia Inc.
Adviser
DFS Furniture plc Chairman British Retail Consortium Chairman Advent International Plc Operating Partner Lawn Tennis Association Nonexecutive director AELTC Grounds plc Nonexecutive director Committee membership Nomination Committee Chairman Remuneration Committee Alison Brittain Chief Executive Date of appointment to the Board September 2015 Age 52
Alison joined Whitbread from Lloyds Banking Group where she was Group Director of the Retail Division with responsibility for the Lloyds Halifax and Bank of Scotland retail branch networks remote and intermediary channels and products along with the Retail Business Banking and the wealth businesses.
Prior to joining Lloyds Bank Alison was Executive Director for Retail Distribution and Board Director at Santander UK PLC.
She previously held senior roles at Barclays Bank.
External appointments Marks and Spencer Group plc Nonexecutive director Princes Trust Council Trustee Nicholas Cadbury Group Finance Director Date of appointment to the Board November 2012 Age 51
Nicholas joined Whitbread in November 2012 as Group Finance Director.
He previously worked at Dixons Retail PLC in a variety of management roles including Chief Financial Officer from 2008 to 2011.
Nicholas also held the position of Chief Financial Officer of Premier Farnell PLC which he joined in 2011.
Nicholas originally qualified as an accountant with Price Waterhouse.
External appointments Land Securities Group PLC Nonexecutive director Louise Smalley Group HR Director Date of appointment to the Board November 2012 Age 49
Louise joined Whitbread in 1995 and has held the position of Group HR Director since 2007.
During her time at Whitbread Louise has held a variety of HR roles across the Whitbread businesses including HR Director of David Lloyd Leisure and Whitbread Hotels and Restaurants.
She previously worked in the oil industry with BP and Esso Petroleum.
External appointments DS Smith Plc Nonexecutive director Sir Ian Cheshire Senior Independent Director Date of appointment to the Board February 2011 Age 57
Sir Ian was Group Chief Executive of Kingfisher plc until the end of January 2015 and was also a former Chair of the British Retail Consortium.
External appointments Debenhams plc Chairman Government lead nonexecutive director Business in the Community Trustee Director Menhaden Capital PLC Chairman Cambridge Programme for Sustainability Leadership Chairman of Advisory Board The Prince of Wales Charitable Foundation Trustee Maisons du Monde Nonexecutive
Barclays UK Chairmandesignate Committee membership Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 65 David Atkins Independent nonexecutive director Date of appointment to the Board January 2017 Age 51
David is Chief Executive of Hammerson plc former Chairman of the European Public Real Estate Association EPRA and past president of Revo formerly BCSC.
External appointments Hammerson plc Chief Executive Revo Member of the advisory panel European Public Real Estate Association Executive board member British Council of Shopping Centres
British Property Federation Committee Member Reading Real Estate Foundation Director and Trustee Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee Adam Crozier Independent nonexecutive director Date of appointment to the Board April 2017 Age 53
Adam is Chief Executive of ITV plc which he joined in 2010.
Prior to that Adam was former Joint Chief Executive of Saatchi and Saatchi Chief Executive of the Football Association and then Royal Mail Group.
External appointments ITV plc Chief Executive Creative Diversity Network Ltd Director Committee membership Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Chris Kennedy Independent nonexecutive director Date of appointment to the Board March 2016 Age 53
Chris is Chief Financial Officer of ARM Holdings plc which he joined in September 2015.
He will step down from that position on 30 April 2017.
Prior to that Chris was Group Finance Director of easyJet plc for five years having previously spent 17 years in a variety of senior roles at EMI.
External appointments ARM Holdings plc Chief Financial Officer The EMI Group Archive Trust Trustee Committee membership Audit Committee Chairman Nomination Committee Deanna Oppenheimer Independent nonexecutive director Date of appointment to the Board January 2017 Age 59
Deanna spent over 25 years in a number of senior roles in banking at both Barclays Bank PLC and Washington Mutal Inc.
External appointments CameoWorks Founder and Chief Executive WorldPay Group PLC Nonexecutive director Tesco PLC Senior Independent Director AXA SA Nonexecutive director Joshua Green Corp.
Nonexecutive director University of Puget Sound Trustee Committee membership Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Chair Stephen Williams Independent nonexecutive director Date of appointment to the Board April 2008 Age 69
Stephen retired as General Counsel and Chief Legal Officer of Unilever during 2010 having originally joined in that position in 1986.
Prior to that Stephen spent 11 years at Imperial Chemical Industries plc.
From 1995 to 2004 he was a nonexecutive director of Bunzl plc and from 2004 to 2010 he was Senior Independent Director of Arriva plc.
External appointments Croda International Plc Nonexecutive director Eversheds LLP Nonexecutive director Spencer Stuart LLP Senior Adviser Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Trust Vice Chairman of the Trust Board De La Warr Pavilion Trust Chairman Amicus Curiae Limited Director Leverhulme Trust Board member Committee membership Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Susan Taylor Martin Independent nonexecutive director Date of appointment to the Board January 2012 Age 53
Susan has held a number of roles at Thomson Reuters including President Thomson Reuters Media President of Global Investment Focus Accounts and Managing Director of Legal in the UK and Ireland.
Prior to this she was Global Head Corporate Strategy for Reuters which she joined in 1993.
External appointments Thomson Reuters President Legal Thomson Reuters Foundation Trustee Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 66
Senior management The Executive Committee meets on a monthly basis and is chaired by Alison
It has authority to manage the daytoday operations of the Groups businesses with the exception of those matters reserved for the Board within the financial limits set by the Board.
The Committees responsibilities include formulation of strategy for recommendation to the Board management of performance in accordance with strategy and budgets talent and succession
risk management
Board approval is not required cost efficiency procurement and organisational design and reputation and stakeholder management.
As explained on page 7 the Company undertook a management restructure during the year.
Mark Anderson and Simon Jones joined the Executive Committee in September 2016.
Mark has been with the Company for ten years has led the property function since 2008 and is now Managing Director of Property and Premier Inn
Simon Jones joined Whitbread in 2011 and has led on key initiatives such as network planning pricing and marketing.
Simon is Managing Director of Premier Inn and Restaurants.
Dominic Paul joined Whitbread in June 2016 as Managing Director Costa Coffee and Chris Vaughan has been General Counsel since joining the Company in 2015.
These executives together with the Whitbread PLC executive directors whose biographies can be found on pages 64 and 65 form the Executive Committee.
Mark Anderson Managing Director Property and Premier Inn International Simon Jones Managing Director Premier Inn and Restaurants Chris Vaughan General Counsel Dominic Paul Managing Director Costa Coffee Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 67 Board activities during the year In advance of each Board meeting a set of Board papers including monthly financial and trading report is circulated so that directors have sufficient time to review them and arrive at the meeting fully prepared.
The Board has a rolling forward agenda which sets matters to be considered throughout the year ahead.
Two strategy days are held each year.
In
201617 one considered the longterm strategy and the other considered the fiveyear strategy.
Following these sessions the Board agreed the significant topics to be discussed at its meetings during the year.
The rolling agenda is then updated to ensure that there is a structured approach to the consideration of topics and that recurring issues are evenly spread across the calendar.
The Board gives its attention to each area of the business in turn so that a strong understanding of the entire Company is maintained.
The rolling agenda is regularly reviewed and updated and is circulated as part of the General Counsels report before each meeting.
The agenda for each Board meeting is agreed with the Chairman and the Chief Executive on a monthly basis so that current events and potential future issues can be discussed alongside the regular reports.
Standard items for each meeting are a review of progress on action points reports from the Chief Executive the Group Finance Director the Managing Directors of Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa together with General Counsels report.
The General Counsel keeps minutes of the meetings and produces a list of agreed actions for each meeting.
At the meetings during the year the Board discharged its responsibilities and considered a range of matters as shown in the table at the bottom of this page.
Board processes and topics to be discussed are continually reviewed to ensure that the correct focus is given to the key issues highlighted at the strategy days.
The Chairman meets with the nonexecutive directors without the executives present after Board meetings.
There is a schedule of matters reserved exclusively to the Board all other decisions are delegated to management.
Those matters reserved exclusively to the Board include approval of Group financial statements and the preliminary announcement of half and fullyear results changes relating to the Groups capital structure the annual budget and the Groups business plan approving capital projects acquisitions and disposals valued at over the limit set out in the matters reserved to the Board approval of interim dividends and recommendation of final dividends and establishment of Board committees.
The schedule of matters reserved was reviewed at the February 2017 Board meeting and again in April 2017 and is available on our website site.
Corporate governance continued Board agenda 201617 Standing agenda items
Chief Executives report
Group Finance Directors report Health and safety report quarterly General Counsels report
Acquisition of 49% of Healthy Retail Limited Pure Approval of yearend documentation and final dividend Corporate responsibility activity Information technology update Longterm strategy
Information technology update Leadership and talent Pensions update Sale and leaseback of properties Premier Inn withdrawal from India and South East Asia
201718 budget Appointment of Adam Crozier to the Board Costa China update Premier Inn Germany update Talent and succession planning Update on Premier Inn withdrawal from India and South East Asia
Risk management
Corporate governance review
Appointment of David Atkins to the Board Appointment of Deanna Oppenheimer to the Board Capital Market Day 201617 Interim results and approval of interim dividend
Risk management
Strategy day and fiveyear plan Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 68
Board meetings and attendance The Board generally holds meetings at monthly intervals during the year and on an ad hoc basis as and when required.
Ten meetings were held during the year and attendance at meetings by the directors is set out below.
Members of the executive team attended Board and committee meetings as appropriate.
Insurance cover The Company has appropriate directors and officers liability insurance in place.
In addition to this the Company provides an indemnity for directors against the costs of defending certain legal proceedings and generating claims over and above those covered by insurance.
These are reviewed periodically.
Board and Committee It is believed that the Board and its committees have the appropriate balance of skills experience diversity independence and knowledge of the Company to enable them to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
The
Board has a majority of independent nonexecutive directors.
After assessing independence against the Code the Board considers all nonexecutive directors to be independent in judgement and character and also considered the Chairman to be independent on appointment.
During the year there has been a number of changes to the Board.
David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer were appointed as nonexecutive directors of the Company on 1 January 2017 with Adam Crozier being appointed as a nonexecutive director since the yearend on 1 April 2017.
Following the completion of her nine year term as a nonexecutive director Wendy Becker resigned from the Board on 31 December 2016.
Finally as previously announced Stephen Williams will step down from the Board following the completion of the 2017 AGM on 21 June 2017.
Details of the appointment procedures can be found in the report of the Nomination Committee on pages 75 to 77.
Corporate governance continued Board meetings and attendance
Audit
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Number of scheduled meetings Richard Baker 1010  33 77 Alison Brittain 1010 Nicholas Cadbury 1010 Christopher Rogers Louise Smalley 1010 David Atkins Wendy Becker Sir Ian Cheshire 1010  33 77 Chris Kennedy Simon Melliss Deanna Oppenheimer Susan Taylor Martin 1010 44 33 Stephen Williams 1010  33 77 Chris Kennedy missed one Board meeting and one Audit Committee meeting both of which were held in the same week due to a commitment made prior to his appointment as a director.
2 Christopher Rogers stepped down from the Board on 19 April 2016.
3 Simon Melliss stepped down from the Board on 30 September 2016.
4 Wendy Becker stepped down from the Board on 31 December 2016.
5 David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer were appointed as directors on 1 January 2017.
Board Performance evaluation An evaluation of the Board its committees individual directors and the Chairman is carried out each year.
An externally facilitated Board evaluation was carried out in 201516.
The next externally facilitated Board evaluation will be conducted during the financial year ending 28 February 2019.
The 201516 evaluation identified opportunities for improvement in the following areas further clarity on the international strategies of both Premier Inn and as well as at Board level.
The issues identified in 201516 in relation to strategy did not reemerge suggesting that the actions taken to address those points were effective.
Year 3 Year ended 201718 Internal review Year 1 Year ended 201516 Externally facilitated review Year 2 Year ended 201617 Internal review Board and Committee Review Cycle Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 69
During the year all directors including the nonexecutive directors committed significant time to the Company in accordance with the requirements specified in their service contracts and letters of appointment.
On behalf of the Board the Nomination Committee has reviewed the extent of other interests of the nonexecutive directors.
The Board is satisfied the Chairman and each of the nonexecutive directors commit sufficient time to their duties and fulfil their obligations to the Company.
During the year particular consideration was given by the Board to the appointment of Sir Ian Cheshire to the Board of Barclays Bank PLC and it was agreed that Sir Ian continued to commit significant and appropriate time to his role as the Senior Independent director of the Company.
No executive director has taken on more than one nonexecutive directorship in a FTSE 100 company.
Induction process On appointment all directors receive a full and formal induction that is tailored to their specific needs.
David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer joined the Board on 1 January 2017 as nonexecutive directors.
As part of their induction each non executive director met with the Chief Executive Group Finance Director and the members of the Executive
We ensure that each new member of the Board has the opportunity to visit Premier Inn and Restaurant together with Costa sites.
Training and development Directors attend external training events to update their skills and knowledge.
Training was undertaken by Board members during the year on a range of issues including antibribery data protection cyber security and travel security.
Investor relations and market updates were also presented to the Board together with regular updates from each of the brands are made to the
In addition Slaughter and May provided directors with training on the new Market Abuse Regulation.
Deep dive sessions were also held on certain issues such as Costa China.
Some Board meetings were held at Premier Inn hotels and restaurants in order to give the Board the opportunity to gain a deeper understanding of the business.
All directors have access to independent professional advice at the Companys expense.
Directors serving on the Board and committees confirmed that they were satisfied that they received sufficient resources to enable them to undertake their duties effectively.
Each director has access to the General Counsel for advice on governance.
The General Counsel prepares a monthly report that includes updates on secretariat and legal matters along with governance compliance and insurance.
This report is presented and discussed at each Board meeting.
Conflicts of interest Directors are required to disclose any conflicts of interest immediately as and when they arise throughout the year.
In addition a formal process is undertaken in January each year when all directors confirm to the Board details of their external interests including any other directorships which they hold.
These are assessed by the Board to determine whether the directors ability to act in the best interests of the Company could be compromised.
If there are no such potential or actual conflicts the external interests are authorised by the Board.
All authorisations are for a period of 12 months.
No director is counted as part of a quorum in respect of the authorisation of his or her own conflict.
It is recognised that all organisations are potential customers of Whitbread and in view of this the Board has authorised all directors current external directorships.
201617 Internal Evaluation In 201617 the Board conducted the annual evaluation of its performance and that of its three main committees by using an online evaluation tool.
Each director completed a questionnaire and the General Counsel collated and presented the responses of the evaluation for consideration by the Board.
The outcome of the evaluation was such that the directors considered that the Board is operating effectively and has been able to develop clear objectives of its future strategy.
Identified areas Although no significant concerns were raised some opportunities for improvement were identified.
These included to provide opportunities for the nonexecutive directors to spend more time in the business outside of the formal Board meeting cycle to increase the level of Board awareness of customer perceptions and developments in the markets in which we operate whilst ensuring that the Companys performance is adequately monitored against its peers and to further increase focus on key risks and mitigation plans.
Whilst progress has been made on risk management the latest evaluation shows that further action is required to address this point.
Individual directors The Chairman has onetoone meetings with all directors to discuss their performance and to identify whether they continue to contribute effectively to the Board and demonstrate commitment to the role.
Chairman
The Senior Independent Director meets with the nonexecutive directors without the Chairman present to discuss the performance of the Chairman.
The Senior Independent Director also speaks with the executive directors to gain their views before discussing the results with the Chairman.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 70
Shareholder relations In accordance with the Code the Board recognises that it has responsibility for ensuring that a satisfactory dialogue with shareholders takes place and any major shareholders issues and concerns are communicated to the Board through the Chairman.
In addition to the regular contact with shareholders during the year we undertook two shareholder consultations in respect of the proposed new remuneration policy and proposed changes to LTIP targets.
The opportunity to discuss the new policy with a number of our shareholders was appreciated and the feedback provided was constructive and helpful.
Further details of the new remuneration policy can be found in the remuneration report on pages 78 to 98.
The Company communicates with both the institutional and private shareholders through the following means Interaction with all shareholders The Companys website site where information and news is regularly updated.
The Annual Report which sets out details of the Companys strategy business model and performance over the past financial year and plans for future growth.
The AGM where all shareholders can vote on the resolutions proposed and to put questions to the Board and executive team.
Presentations of fullyear and interim results to analysts and shareholders that are also available on the Companys website.
Interaction with institutional shareholders The Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Director of Investor Relations hold meetings with institutional investors following the fullyear and interim results.
The Chairman meets with institutional shareholders on request.
The Board receives updates on the views of major shareholders from the Companys brokers.
Consultations were held with our major shareholders on changes to the Companys remuneration policy and to LTIP targets.
Interaction with private shareholders Live webcast presentations of the fullyear and interim results.
Electronic communications with shareholders including use of the online share portal.
The Annual General Meeting The AGM provides all shareholders with the opportunity to communicate directly with the Board which encourages their participation at the meeting.
In accordance with the Code the Notice of AGM and related papers are sent to shareholders at least 20 working days before the meeting.
The Company proposes a separate resolution on each substantially separate issue including a specific resolution to approve the Report and Accounts.
For each resolution proxy appointment forms provide shareholders with the option to vote in advance of the AGM if they are unable to attend in person.
All valid proxy votes received for the AGM are properly recorded and counted by Whitbreads registrars.
As in previous years all voting by shareholders at this years AGM will be by poll using electronic handsets.
The voting results including proxy votes received will be displayed on a screen at the end of the meeting.
In addition the audited poll results will be disclosed on the Companys website following the meeting and announced through the regulatory news service.
Share capital The information that is required by DTR 7.2.6 relating to the share capital of the Company can be found within the directors report on pages 99 to 102.
Statement of the directors in respect of the Annual Report and Accounts As required by the Code the directors confirm their responsibility for preparing the Annual Report and Accounts and consider that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Further detail on how this conclusion was reached can be found in the report of the Audit Committee on page 74.
Statements by the auditor in respect of its reporting responsibilities Statements by the auditor about its reporting responsibilities can be found in the auditors report on pages 104 to 108.
Going concern The directors going concern statement can be found in the directors report on page 102.
Viability statement The viability statement can be found on page 58.
Business model and strategy Information on the Groups business model and the strategy for delivering the objectives of the Company can be found on pages 4 to 61.
Board committees The Board is supported by three committees the Audit Committee the Nomination Committee and the Remuneration Committee.
Their terms of reference are reviewed regularly and updated in line with best practice.
They are available in full on the Companys website.
A detailed report from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee is set out on pages 75 to 78.
Reports for the Audit and Nomination Committees can be found on pages 73 to 77.
Corporate governance continued Capital Market Day We hosted a Capital Market Day in November 2016 to address the longer term outlook for the business.
The Chief Executive Group Finance Director and senior executives across the Group presented to both institutional shareholders and analysts followed by a question and answer session.
A live webcast together with the presentation materials continues to be accessible on the Companys website  site Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 71 Risk analysis The Board identifies the principal risks of the Company on a regular basis and throughout the year it reviews the actions in place to mitigate the risks together with assurance and monitoring activity.
The analysis covers business and operational risks health and safety financial market operational and reputational risks which the Company may face as well as specific areas identified in the business plan and budget process.
Each of the businesses also carries out its own risk analysis together with the Director of Internal Audit and this is reviewed regularly by the Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa executive committees.
All major capital and revenue projects together with significant change programmes include the consideration of the risks involved and an appropriate action plan.
Controls
The Company reviews and confirms its level of compliance with the Code on an annual basis.
The matters reserved to the Board require that major projects and programmes must have specific Board approval.
Limits of delegation and authority are prescribed to ensure that the appropriate approvals are obtained if Board authority is not required to ensure appropriate segregation of tasks.
Group financial policies controls and procedures are in place and are regularly reviewed and updated.
The Whitbread Code of Conduct setting out required levels of ethics and behaviour is communicated to employees and training is provided with a whistleblowing system made available.
The Code of Conduct makes reference to specific policies and procedures which have to be followed.
Employees are required to undertake tailored training on risk areas including IS security data protection and antibribery.
Management is responsible for ensuring the appropriate maintenance of financial records and processes that ensure that financial information is relevant reliable in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and is distributed both internally and externally in a timely manner.
A review of the financial statements is completed by management to ensure that the financial position and results of the Group are appropriately reflected.
All financial information published by the Group is subject to the approval of the Audit Committee and the Board.
An annual review of internal controls is undertaken by the Board with the assistance of the Audit Committee.
Assurance
The Audit Committee approves the audit programme which ensures that the significant areas of risk identified are independently reviewed within at least a threeyear period.
The programme and the results of the audits are regularly assessed during the year.
The Audit Committee reviews the major findings from both internal and external audits.
Internal audits are carried out under the control of the Director of Internal Audit.
The reports are reviewed by the Audit Committee and on a monthly basis by the Executive Committee to ensure that the actions required to address issues identified are implemented.
The Director of Internal Audit reports annually to the Audit Committee on the effectiveness of operational and financial controls across the Group.
Deloitte LLP the Companys external auditor reviews and reports on the significant issues identified in its audit report.
An internal control evaluation process is overseen by the management team which assesses the level of compliance with the controls policies and processes and the results are reviewed and tested on a sample basis by the internal audit team.
Post completion reviews of major projects and investments are carried out and reported on to the Board.
Accountability and internal control Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for the Groups systems of internal control and risk management and for reviewing their effectiveness.
These systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate risk of failure to achieve business objectives.
They can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board has established an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the Groups principal risks.
This process was in place throughout the 201617 financial year and up to the date of this report.
The process is reviewed by the Board and accords with the internal control guidance for directors in the Code.
A report of the principal risks together with the viability statement can be found on pages 58 to 61.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 72
During the year we have welcomed David Atkins as a member of the Audit Committee.
David is currently Chief Executive of Hammerson plc and his appointment ensures that the Audit Committee continues to have the competencies relevant to the industry in which the Company operates.
As part of his Committee induction David Atkins attended meetings with the Chairman of the Audit Committee Group Finance Director the General Counsel and the Managing Directors of Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa.
The Committee meets at least four times a year and will hold additional meetings as and when required.
Meetings are attended by members of the Committee and by invitation the Chairman of the Board the Chief Executive the Group Finance Director the Director of Internal Audit the Group Financial Controller the General Counsel and other relevant people from the business when appropriate.
The external auditor Deloitte LLP is also invited to meetings.
Composition of the Committee All members of the Committee are independent nonexecutive directors as required by the Committees terms of reference and have been selected to be members of the Committee based on their individual financial and commercial experience.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code the Board considers that I have recent and relevant financial experience through my current role as Chief Financial Officer of ARM Holdings plc.
I will step down from this position on 30 April 2017.
As part of the annual review of the Companys compliance with the Code the skills and experience of the Committee have been evaluated.
Further in accordance with the 2016 Corporate Governance Code applying to the Company with effect from its 2017 Chris Kennedy Chairman Audit Committee Audit Committee report As Chairman of the Audit Committee I am pleased to present the Audit Committee report for the year ended 2 March 2017.
The report provides an overview of the work that the Audit Committee has undertaken during the year and the issues that have been considered.
Membership of the Audit Committee and meeting attendance Name of director Meetings attended and eligible to attend Chris Kennedy Chairman 34 David Atkins Wendy Becker Susan Taylor Martin 44 Simon Melliss 1 Chris Kennedy missed one Committee meeting due to a commitment made prior to his appointment as a director.
2 Simon Melliss and Wendy Becker stepped down from the Committee on 30 September 2016 and 31 December 2016 respectively.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 73 financial year the Board has agreed that the Committee as a whole has the competencies relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
Responsibilities of the Committee The Board has delegated specific responsibilities to the Committee in accordance with the Code.
The key responsibilities of the Audit Committee are to monitor and review the integrity of the Groups financial results and the financial reporting process monitor the statutory audit of the annual and consolidated accounts monitor the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls and risk management systems review and monitor the independence of the statutory auditor in particular the provision of additional services approve the internal audit plan and monitor and review the effectiveness of the Groups internal audit function and have primary responsibility for the recommendations to the Board in relation to the external auditor.
Further details on the Committees responsibilities are in the Committees terms of reference on the Groups website site Main activities during the year In 201617 the Audit Committees work included internal controls risk management internal audit external audit and financial reporting.
The specific details of the matters discussed included the quality and integrity of accounting policies and practices the clarity of the disclosures and compliance with financial reporting standards and relevant financial and governance reporting requirements material areas in which significant judgements have been applied or where there has been discussion with the external auditor whether the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy the regulatory announcements of the results a going concern assessment a longterm view of the Groups going concern basis a review of the Speaking Out reports submitted in accordance with the Groups whistleblowing policy a review of the Committees effectiveness and terms of reference and a review of the Group Finance systems upgrade programme.
To aid its review the Committee considers reports from the Group Finance Director the Group Tax Director the Director of Internal Audit the General Counsel and also reports from Deloitte LLP as the external auditor on the outcomes of their halfyear review and annual audit.
The Committee looks for constructive challenge from Deloitte as external auditor.
The key areas of judgement and estimation considered by the Committee in relation to the 201617 accounts were Defined benefit pension The Committee reviewed considered and exercised judgement on the assumptions used to calculate the pension scheme assets and liabilities under IAS 19 to satisfy itself that appropriate consideration and balance had been given to all macroeconomic factors.
The principal assumptions used and the sensitivities around them were considered and the consistency in approach from 201516 to 201617 was assessed concluding with the same estimates as reached by management.
Impairment
A full asset impairment review is undertaken every year and the Committee is provided with information on how the impairment values have been derived.
Areas of judgement around the calculation of the discount rate used the growth rates applied the sensitivities of the judgements and the impairments booked are discussed and challenged.
The impairment values presented by management were noted and agreed by the Committee.
Nonunderlying items Consideration was given to the appropriateness of disclosure for all of the items classified as nonunderlying.
This included the nature of the items and whether they met the criteria as defined by the accounting policy.
In addition the Committee was provided with details around the restructuring provisions created within nonunderlying and in particular around the exit of the hotel operations in South East Asia.
Regular updates have been provided in relation to the progress of the exit and the level of provisioning has been challenged accordingly to ensure that it is sufficient to meet the potential obligations.
Taxation
The method of calculating the Groups tax expense and liability and the provisioning for potential tax liabilities were considered.
Assumptions are made around the assets which qualify for capital allowances determined ultimately via the aid of a thirdparty expert the level of disallowable expenses provisions for uncertain exposures or recoveries the extent of rolled over gains indexation thereon and the tax base into which they have been rolled.
All have an impact on both deferred and current tax.
These were reviewed and challenged with the judgements being noted and agreed.
The Committee also reviewed the judgements exercised on tax provisioning as part of its annual review of key provisions.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 74
Fair balanced and understandable In order to confirm to the Board that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable there has been a thorough verification and approval process using the Committees knowledge of the Group as outlined below the Annual Report is drafted by the appropriate senior management with overall coordination by the Secretariat team to ensure consistency comprehensive reviews of the drafts of the Report and Accounts are undertaken by management the Executive Committee and me as the Audit Committee Chairman a final draft is reviewed by the Audit Committee prior to consideration by a committee of the Board and formal approval of the Annual Report and Accounts is given by a committee of the Board.
Based upon this review the Committee determined that the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable.
Internal control and risk management The Audit Committee monitors the systems of risk management and internal control.
In addition the Committee completes an annual review of the effectiveness of these systems in March assessing the risk management framework and policy managements risk assessment and review process and the monitoring and reporting of risk.
This review is completed in conjunction with an internal control effectiveness review from Internal Audit and Group Finance and considers all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
The system and processes were considered to be robust and no significant weaknesses were noted.
A robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company was carried out considering risk appetite and each risk was assessed and the level of assurance required was determined.
Further details of the principal risks identified and agreed by the Company can be found on pages 60 and 61.
Speaking Out facility In accordance with the Code the Committee has continued to review the Companys whistleblowing function known as Speaking Out.
The system is operated by two external thirdparty providers Hospitality Action in the UK and Navex Global internationally and allows employees to report anonymously and in confidence.
During the year the Committee reviewed the relaunch of the policy processes and reporting structure for Speaking Out and agreed that appropriate arrangements are in place for proportionate and independent investigations.
The Committee receives regular reports from the General Counsel on the operation of this function.
Internal audit The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the scope extent and effectiveness of the Companys internal audit function.
Regular presentations and updates were given to the Committee by the Director of Internal Audit and private discussions were held with the Director of Internal Audit as and when necessary.
External auditor On behalf of the Board the Committee overseas the relationship with the external auditor.
Deloitte was reappointed as auditor of the Company at the 2016 AGM following a tender process undertaken in 2015.
The effectiveness of the external audit process is dependent on appropriate audit risk identification at the start of the audit cycle.
We received from Deloitte a detailed audit plan identifying their assessment of these key risks.
These risks were reviewed and they together with the work done by the auditor were challenged to test managements assumptions and estimates around these areas as well as other areas reported upon.
The effectiveness of the audit process was assessed in addressing these matters through the reporting we received from Deloitte at both the halfyear and yearend.
In addition feedback was sought from management on the effectiveness of the audit process and targeted and tailored questionnaires were completed.
The points raised were taken into account in this years yearend process.
As part of our review process the Committee will be assessing the work of the yearend audit once finalised and formal discussions of the effectiveness review will take place at the Audit Committee meeting in July 2017.
Audit tender Deloitte was appointed as the Groups auditor in 2015.
The Committee confirms compliance with the provisions of the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 as published by the UK Competition and Markets
The Group intends to put the external audit out to tender every 10 years in the future.
Auditor independence To safeguard the objectivity and independence of the external auditor the Committees terms of reference set out the nonaudit services that are permitted in certain circumstances and those not permitted at all.
This prevents the auditor being able to provide certain services such as internal audits.
For certain specified audit and auditrelated services the Group can employ the external auditor without reference to the Audit Committee subject to a specified fee limit.
For the services permitted in certain circumstances agreement must be sought from me as Chairman of the Committee where fees are less than the limit specified or with full Audit Committee approval where fees are anticipated to be greater.
A tender process would be held where appropriate.
Deloitte are engaged to provide independent assurance over the systems transformation programme governance and deep dive reviews in to the high risk stages of the project as permitted by the policy on nonaudit services.
This was approved by the Audit Committee.
Independence is maintained as they are not designing the system or its controls but reviewing and reporting to assist the wider programme governance required for a successful golive.
Following a review of the services provided by our external auditor Deloitte LLP and taking into consideration the ratio of nonaudit to audit fees of 0.25 we can confirm that it continues to be independent.
Chris Kennedy Chairman Audit Committee 24 April 2017 Audit Committee report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 75 Nomination Committee report Succession planning is key to a successful Board and the Committee was pleased to recommend the appointments of David Atkins Deanna Oppenheimer and Adam Crozier to the Board.
David and Deanna joined the Board on 1 January 2017 .
Adam Crozier joined the Board on 1 April 2017 .
The Committee meets at least twice a year and will hold additional meetings as and when required.
Meetings are attended by members of the Committee and by invitation the Chief Executive the Group Finance Director the Group HR Director and the General Counsel.
Composition of the Committee All members of the Committee are nonexecutive directors.
During the year the membership of the Committee was reviewed and all nonexecutive directors have now joined the Committee.
Role of the Committee The role of the Nomination Committee is to review the Board composition and identify and nominate directors who could add value to the Boards performance.
The Committee is also responsible for succession planning evaluating the directors on an annual basis and striving for a balance of skills knowledge independence experience and diverse representation.
Richard Baker
Nomination Committee Membership of the Nomination Committee and meeting attendance Name of director Meetings attended and eligible to attend Richard Baker Chairman 33 David Atkins Wendy Becker Sir Ian Cheshire 33 Simon Melliss Deanna Oppenheimer Stephen Williams 33 1 David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer joined the Committee on 1 January 2017.
2 Simon Melliss and Wendy Becker stepped down from the Committee on 30 September 2016 and 31 December 2016 respectively.
I am pleased to present the Nomination Committee report that provides an overview of the work that has been undertaken by the Committee during the year.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 76
Responsibilities of the Committee The Committee has specific responsibilities on behalf of the Board and these are detailed below to regularly review the structure size and composition of the Board to include the balance of skills knowledge independence experience and diversity and to make recommendations to the Board in respect of any changes to consider succession planning for the Board and to determine the skills and experience required for future Board appointments to identify and nominate for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies as and when they arise to evaluate the balance of skills knowledge experience and diversity required prior to making an appointment to the Board and on the basis of this evaluation to prepare a role description outlining the capabilities required for a particular appointment to keep the leadership needs of the Company under review both executive and nonexecutive with a view to ensuring the continued ability of the Company to effectively compete keep up to date and fully informed about strategic issues and commercial changes affecting the Company and the market in which it operates to ensure that on appointment to the Board nonexecutive directors receive a formal letter of appointment setting out the time commitment in respect of the role to annually review the time required from nonexecutive directors and to ensure that a performance evaluation is undertaken to determine if nonexecutive directors are spending sufficient time to fulfil their duties for the appointment of a Chairman to prepare a job description including the time commitment expected.
Board evaluation that relate to the composition of the Board.
The full terms of reference are available on the Companys website site Main activities during the year In 201617 the Committees main activities have included the appointment and on boarding of three new independent nonexecutive directors a review of the Board size structure and composition with a view to ensuring the continued ability of the organisation to compete effectively in the marketplace a review of the talent and succession planning for the Board taking into account the challenges and opportunities facing the business the reelection of directors at the AGM and the terms of reference and effectiveness.
The Committee is responsible for ensuring that Board and committee membership is progressively refreshed and that there is no undue reliance on any one individual.
This is reviewed at the annual meeting in February.
Board appointments and diversity Appointments to the Board are based on merit against objective criteria.
Diversity and equality have always been core values at Whitbread.
The
Board believes that diversity is of utmost importance ensuring the effectiveness of the Board and the Company and its continued success.
Whitbread appoints members of the Board on the basis of performance and the ability to continually contribute to the Board on the grounds of the knowledge skills and experience required.
We are committed to an active policy of equal opportunities and embraced diversity at all levels.
The appointment of new directors The Committee annually evaluates the balance of skills experience independence and knowledge on the Board preparing a description of the role and capabilities required for a particular appointment and consider a matrix of skills and competencies of the Board.
Stephen Williams Susan T aylor Martin Louise Smalley Deanna Oppenheimer Chris Kennedy Adam Crozier Sir Ian Cheshire Nicholas Cadbury Alison Brittain Richard Baker David Atkins Length of tenure of directors as at 2 March 2017 Nomination Committee report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 77 We use external search consultants to engage and identify a number of candidates ensuring equal representation aligned with the role and capabilities required for the appointment.
Selected candidates meet with the Committee and further interviews take place before an appointment is made.
Board changes during the year Following a review of the composition of the Board it was determined that the Committee should appoint three new nonexecutive directors.
Zygos was appointed by the Board as the adviser to the Committee in the search for external candidates.
Zygos has no other connections to the Company.
When appointing new directors the Committee reviewed a matrix of Board skills and considered which skills were required taking into account the strategic development of the Company.
Following this a detailed specification was prepared for each nonexecutive role and a preliminary list of candidates was prepared for consideration.
Following the interview and assessment process Deanna Oppenheimer and David Atkins were appointed as nonexecutive directors joining the Board on 1 January 2017.
Deanna has a strong background in mass consumer retail and her experience of having worked with a broad range of leading edge digital businesses will add significant value to the Whitbread
Deanna also replaced Stephen Williams as Chair of the Remuneration Committee from 1 March 2017.
As the CEO of a major UK business with interests across a number of European markets David also has significant experience in the European retail property sector that will provide the Whitbread Board with invaluable insights as we continue to expand both in the UK and overseas.
The Committee followed the same process for the appointment of Adam Crozier as a nonexecutive director joining the Board on 1 April 2017.
Adam has a strong background in business transformations brands communication and marketing.
His expertise will be of great value to the Board as we continue to expand the Premier Inn and Costa brands.
Our approach to the annual reelection of directors As required by the Code all directors will be subject to reelection at the next AGM.
As part of my individual performance review of each nonexecutive director I reviewed their contribution and time commitment to the Company.
All directors are proposed for reappointment at this years AGM.
Details setting out why each director is deemed to be suitable for reappointment will be included with the AGM papers circulated to all shareholders.
As mentioned Stephen Williams will be stepping down from the Board in June 2017 after serving nine years as a nonexecutive director.
Richard Baker Chairman Nomination Committee 24 April 2017 Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 78
Remuneration report
I am delighted to have joined the Whitbread Board at the beginning of 2017 and to have succeeded Stephen Williams as Chair of the Remuneration Committee on 1 March 2017.
201617 was a busy year for the Committee.
Deanna Oppenheimer Chair Remuneration Committee Our philosophy The updated remuneration policy reflects our philosophy that executives should be paid fairly that they should be incentivised to achieve outstanding results rewarded for doing so and that targets should be stretching enough so as to avoid large payouts for mediocre performance.
The Committee is very aware of the significant attention on executive remuneration and of our responsibilities to all Whitbreads stakeholders.
We are also aware of the need for Whitbread to be competitive in the employment market so that the Company is able to attract and retain highcalibre executives with appropriate experience.
I believe that we have the right balance and this is demonstrated by the fact that rewards under the Annual Incentive Scheme this year are slightly less than 50% of maximum when Whitbread has once again achieved a good performance with underlying profit before tax increasing by 6.2% to 565.2 million.
Shareholder engagement The Committee has consulted with Whitbreads major investors along with Glass Lewis ISS and the Investment Association twice this year.
The first consultation was in relation to the revised structure of the Companys remuneration policy and the second was in connection with changes to the LTIP performance conditions.
These consultations have been very helpful to us as we have formulated both policy and targets for the future and I would like to thank all those who responded to the consultations for their time and input.
Following feedback as mentioned above we have decided to improve the disclosure in relation to the targets particularly in relation to the Annual Incentive Plan.
We have also taken the opportunity to extend the circumstances in which clawback and
The remuneration policy which was approved by shareholders in 2014 is reaching the end of its threeyear life.
Coupled with Alison Brittain announcing the three strategic priorities for the Group this time last year the time was right for a detailed review of Whitbreads remuneration policy.
I would like to thank Stephen for his work chairing the Committee over the last three years and for the support he has provided to me as I take on the role.
Stephen has kindly agreed to remain on the Board and the Remuneration Committee until the AGM and both he and I will be available to answer shareholders questions on remuneration at the meeting.
This will provide us with a sixmonth period during which we will both be members of the Committee.
I fully support the outcome of the policy review and while much of the work on the new policy took place before I joined Whitbread I attended the Committee meetings since January at which the feedback from our shareholders was carefully considered and the updated policy agreed.
Having completed our consultation with our major investors we will be putting the updated policy to shareholders for approval at the AGM in June 2017.
The new policy is an evolution of the existing policy and we have only made changes where we believe they are essential in the context of the strategic priorities of the business.
Our philosophy is to align remuneration directly with the Companys strategy and its business plans.
Importantly there will be no changes to maximum award levels or holding periods and both malus and clawback clauses will continue to apply to both incentive schemes.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 79 malus conditions would apply to include a situation where material damage is done to the Companys reputation.
More details on these consultations can be found in the sections below.
Greater transparency As I mentioned above during the recent consultations a number of our shareholders stressed the importance of good disclosure and transparency.
As a result of the feedback we received we have decided that wherever possible we will disclose the incentivised targets.
Last year for the first time we retrospectively disclosed our profit target and committed to disclose the 201516 target in this report.
This disclosure can be found on page 88.
As a result of the shareholder feedback we have given some thought to how we can improve the transparency of our targets still further and have now decided to disclose our 201617 profit target in addition to 201516 target.
This can also be found on page 88.
We have also included a new table in the section of the report on key performance indicators on pages 16 to 19 which brings greater clarity to the targets set for incentivised measures.
Updated policy During the past year the Committees activities have been dominated by a detailed review of Whitbreads remuneration policy.
The review started at the beginning of 2016 and shortly afterwards Alison Brittain set out her three strategic priorities for the Group to grow and innovate in the UK to focus on Whitbreads strengths to grow internationally and to build the capability and platform to support future growth.
See pages 8 to 13 for more information on Whitbreads strategy.
The Committee set out to propose a policy which is designed to align remuneration structures directly with strategy while retaining the key measures which shareholders have indicated are most critical to them.
With this in mind the Committee agreed certain changes to the incentive schemes in order to align them more closely to the longerterm strategy taking account of the business context in which we are operating and to simplify their operation.
In particular we identified that the Annual Incentive Scheme was weighted too heavily towards inyear profit and that the LTIP performance measures were overly complex.
During the latter part of 2016 Stephen Williams wrote to our 20 largest shareholders as well as a number of proxy advisers in order to get their views on the proposed changes to the remuneration policy.
Respondents were generally pleased with the simplification of the LTIP and accepted the rationale for the realignment of the Annual Incentive Scheme to include greater focus on the longerterm strategy.
The changes that we propose to the existing scheme structures are as follows Annual Incentive Scheme The Annual Incentive Scheme will be rebalanced such that executives are focused as much on driving the longerterm strategic aims as they are on inyear profit.
This is particularly important for Whitbread as the Company invests significant capital into maintaining the strength of its brands.
It is proposed that 50% of the annual incentive be payable based on inyear profit with the remaining 50% split equally between financially orientated objective and measurable individual strategic objectives linked to Whitbreads measurable longterm goals and objectively determined WINcard measures to include team retention and customer measures which are all critical leading indicators of the future financial performance of the Group.
We received a number of questions during the consultation with shareholders about the kind of strategic measures which we will adopt for the executive directors.
Shareholders were keen to make sure that the targets were clear and tangible and closely linked to the delivery of profit in the business.
The
Remuneration Committee agrees that the targets must be tangible stretching and objectively measurable and aligned with the threepoint strategy for the Group referred to earlier.
A table showing these changes is set out below using Alison Brittains strategic objectives as an example.
Information
We do not propose to make any changes to the quantum of awards and clawback and malus clauses will continue to apply.
We propose that 50% of all shortterm incentives will be deferred in shares which are released after a threeyear period the deferral amount currently varies depending on the measure and in recent years has been around the 50% mark.
Long Term Incentive Plan We plan to simplify the scheme by removing the matrix relationship between the two LTIP measures and moving to two equally weighted and independently measured components of EPS and ROCE.
Again we do not propose that there be any increase in the maximum level of award.
The awards will still be subject to a twoyear postvesting holding period and clawback and malus clauses will continue to apply.
Whitbread is investing substantial sums of capital in its business to provide strong future growth.
ROCE remains a critical measure of performance for shareholders and no changes to the ROCE ranges which will remain at 13% to 18% are proposed.
Annual Incentive Scheme  performance targets Objective Target Proportion of maximum opportunity Annual profit growth Underlying profit before tax 50% Individual strategic objectives UK growth Growth in Premier Inn rooms Costa stores Costa Express machines and Group like for like sales 25% International growth Growth in German hotel pipeline and Costa China Cost efficiency Achieve the inyear efficiency plan WINcard measures Team retention 25% Customer heartbeat 1 The individual strategic objectives shown in the table are those of Alison Brittain.
The objectives set for the other executive directors can be found on page 97.
The annual profit growth target and the WINcard measures are consistent for all three executive directors.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 80
Measure
Team retention Health and safety gateway
Annual Incentive Scheme
Premier Inn brand health Restaurants net recommend Costa net recommend Health and safety gateway
Annual Incentive Scheme
Underlying basic EPS Return on capital Underlying profit before tax Brand expansion Like for like sales
LTIP
Annual Incentive Scheme
Delivery of inyear efficiency plan
Annual Incentive Scheme This report The policy report which follows this statement sets out details of the remuneration structure which shareholders will be asked to approve at the 2017 AGM.
The annual report on remuneration explains what directors were paid in 201617 including the awards under the incentive schemes and also gives some detail on how our policy will be implemented in 201718 in the event that it is approved by shareholders.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on the Board and the Remuneration Committee and to meeting shareholders at the AGM in June.
Deanna Oppenheimer Chair Remuneration Committee 24 April 2017 In relation to the EPS measure the current range in the policy is RPI  4% at threshold to RPI  10% at maximum payout.
As articulated earlier in the Annual Report Whitbread has benefitted from a period of sustained growth in the last five years.
While the Group plans to continue growing for the long term as outlined in detail to shareholders at the Capital Market Day in November 2016 current investment is required to deliver longterm growth and the Committee has reflected those financial plans in setting the LTIP targets.
In addition as we move into a period of more economic uncertainty the Committee believes that having RPI as part of the calculation will introduce undue volatility into the measure and could result in extreme upside or downside impact on payouts which bear no correlation to the underlying performance of the business.
For these reasons we believe now is the right time to move away from using RPI as part of the EPS measure.
Having carefully considered the business plans of the Group and current consensus estimates we propose to leave the range at 4% to 10% EPS growth.
For more information on the background to this proposal please see the Chairmans statement on page 5 the strategy section on pages 8 to 13 and the Group Finance Directors review on page 55.
Set out below is a table which summarises the proposed new structure of the LTIP performance conditions LTIP Measure Target Range
EPS growth 4% to 10% CAGR 50% Return on
Employed
13% to 18% 50% We have also removed the ability to provide an additional joining award of up to 200% of salary on recruitment and limited any awards to those needed to compensate a joiner for the loss of awards from the previous employer.
Other remuneration No changes have been made to the policy approved in 2014 in relation to the base salary pension or benefits of executive directors.
The statements below the remuneration policy report and the annual report on remuneration form the directors remuneration report which was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Deanna Oppenheimer on 24 April 2017.
Winning
Teams
Customer
Heartbeat
Profitable
Growth
Everyday
Efficiency
Linkage between strategy and incentives Remuneration report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 81 For executives our approach continues to be designed so as to align with the business strategy and the achievement of planned business goals support the creation of sustainable longterm shareholder value provide an appropriate balance between remuneration elements that attract retain and motivate the highest calibre of executive talent and encourage a highperformance culture by ensuring performance related remuneration constitutes a substantial proportion of the remuneration package and by linking maximum payout opportunity to outstanding results.
The policy table below provides more detail on each key element of remuneration including the maximum potential value of each element a brief summary of how it works and details of any performance metrics.
Remuneration policy report Future policy table Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum potential value Performance metrics
Base salaries are set to be sufficient to attract and retain the calibre of executive talent needed to support the longterm interests of the business.
Salaries are reviewed annually taking account of the salary review across the group of companies.
Annual salary increases would normally be in line with the average increases for employees in other appropriate parts of the Group.
On occasion increases may be larger where the Committee considers this to be necessary.
Circumstances where this may apply include growth into a role to reflect a change in scope of role and responsibilities where market conditions indicate a level of undercompetitiveness and the Committee judges that there is a risk in relation to attracting or retaining executives.
Where the Committee exercises its discretion to award increases above the average for other employees it will do so in accordance with policies applying across the Group and the resulting salary will not exceed the competitive market range.
None
Benefits  Benefits are intended to be competitive in the market so as to assist the recruitment and retention of executives.
Executive directors are entitled to benefits relating to car healthcarepersonal insurances.
In exceptional circumstances such as the relocation of a director or for a new hire additional benefits may be provided in the form of a relocation allowance and benefits including tax equalisation reimbursement of expenses for temporary accommodation travel and legal financial assistance.
In 201617 the benefits received by the executive directors amounted to between 2.8% and 5.4% of salary.
We do not anticipate that the maximum payable would exceed 10% of salary.
However the Committee may provide benefits above this level in certain situations where it deems it necessary.
This may include for example the appointment of a director based overseas or a significant increase in the cost of the benefits.
None
Introduction
This report outlines the Companys remuneration policy which shareholders will be asked to approve at the 2017
Subject to shareholder approval the policy will be effective from the date of the 2017 AGM and is intended to apply for three years.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 82
Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum potential value Performance metrics
Incentive
Scheme
To provide a direct link between annual performance and reward.
To incentivise the achievement of outstanding results across appropriate key stakeholder measures.
To align with the longterm interests of shareholders and help participants build a significant stake in the business over time by awarding a material part of the annual incentive in deferred equity.
Targets for measures set at the beginning of the financial year.
Cash awards paid following the end of the financial year.
Deferred shares awarded following the end of the financial year and under normal circumstances released three years after the date of award.
Malus provisions apply to unvested deferred shares and clawback provisions apply to cash awards in the event of a material misstatement of results.
167% of base salary up to 50% of maximum paid in cash and up to 50% of maximum paid in deferred shares.
Awards are payable based on three weighted areas covering underlying profit performance individual strategic objectives and performance against selected team and customer related measures from the WINcard the Groups balanced scorecard.
Performance measures under each area are determined annually and the Committee retains the discretion to adjust the weighting of the areas annually based on prevailing business needs.
However the underlying profit performance will represent no less than 50% of total award at any time.
Other measures will be objective and when possible externally benchmarked leading indicators of future financial performance.
Normally around 25% of the maximum incentive is paid for threshold performance with around 50% paid for on target performance and the full incentive payment being paid for delivering stretch performance.
These vesting levels may vary from year to year.
For 201718 the weighting of the annual incentive award will be based on 50% underlying profit performance 25% on individual strategic objectives and 25% Customer HeartbeatWinning Teams measures from the WINcard.
Long Term
Plan
To align the interests of senior executives closely with sustainable longterm shareholder value creation.
To focus rewards on both the sustained delivery of absolute longterm earnings growth and the efficient use of capital over the long term.
To retain and motivate executives over the performance period of the awards and beyond.
Awards made annually in shares.
Awards vest after three years subject to performance conditions.
Twoyear holding period postvesting.
Dividend equivalents may be provided on vested shares during a holding period.
Subject to clawback and malus provisions.
Annual awards to a maximum of 200% of base salary.
Vesting is based on equally weighted and independently measured 3year EPS and ROCE performance.
For threshold performance 20% of the award will vest for maximum performance 100% of the award will vest.
The Committee retains the discretion to introduce additional measures or adjust the weighting of performance measures in the future based on prevailing business needs.
Any material changes will be discussed with shareholders in advance.
Sharesave
Scheme
To encourage longterm shareholding in the Company Annual invitation to all employees including the executive directors Option price calculated by reference to the market price discounted by 20% on the invitation date.
Options granted over a three andor fiveyear period.
Consistent with prevailing HMRC limits currently savings limited to 500 per month.
None
Pension  Pension benefits are provided in order to offer a market competitive remuneration package that is sufficient to attract and retain executive talent.
Executive directors are entitled to participate in the Companys pension scheme or other pension arrangements relevant to their location if based overseas.
Defined contribution scheme.
Can elect for cash in lieu of pension contributions.
If cash is taken the amount is reduced by the value of the employers national insurance liability.
27.5% of base salary up to 25% for new joiners.
None
Remuneration policy report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 83 Illustration of application of remuneration policy The graphs below show how the remuneration policy will be applied in 201718 with details of expected remuneration levels for each director for below threshold performance for ontarget performance and for maximum performance.
Executive directors  potential value of 201718 package Performance measures With the exception of base salary benefits pension and participation in the Sharesave scheme all other elements of the remuneration packages of the executive directors are linked to performance.
Annual Incentive Scheme The Annual Incentive Scheme has been designed to incentivise outstanding performance across a number of key stakeholder measures and it rewards approximately 90 executives with both a cash payment and an award of deferred shares.
The scheme operates over a fouryear period as follows performance in the first year is measured against the three performance areas to determine the level of awards measures are set by the Remuneration Committee so that ontarget performance is challenging at the end of the first year cash payments are made and any deferred shares are awarded as appropriate there is a threeyear deferral period for the deferred shares before they vest to the executive and malus provisions apply to the deferred share awards in the event of a material misstatement of results with clawback provisions applying to cash awards.
There are three types of measure used to determine the level of awards under the scheme.
There is a profit measure a number of WINcard measures or other stakeholder measures as may be deemed appropriate by the Committee and some personal strategic objectives.
The strategic individual objectives will be quantitative measures linked to individual responsibilities in the context of our strategic objectives and will be reviewed in advance by the Committee.
Targets are set taking into account the business plan and the link between targets and the Groups strategy can be seen on page 80.
Below threshold On target
Nicholas Cadbury Ontarget performance assumes ontarget prot a good performance on individual strategic objectives green WINcard scores and threshold vesting under the LTIP.
Maximum performance assumes maximum prot stretch performance on individual strategic objectives excel WINcard scores and maximum LTIP vesting.
In both cases for simplicity no share price growth is assumed.
Taxable benets are not included.
Below threshold
On target On target
Maximum
Alison Brittain Louise Smalley Fixed elements
Pension
Variable elements
Deferred shares Cash incentive payment 7% Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 84
Long Term Incentive Plan For the LTIP the performance conditions will be structured as follows 50% of maximum awards are dependent on EPS growth over the threeyear performance period 50% of maximum awards are dependent on ROCE performance achieved in the final year of the performance period awards will be subject to clawback and malus provisions applying in circumstances such as a material misstatement of results and a twoyear postvesting holding period will apply.
These performance conditions were selected because the Committee believes that they closely align the LTIP with the strategic aims of the Group to grow its leading brands whilst delivering returns in excess of the cost of capital in order to create significant shareholder value.
The performance targets for awards to be made in future years will be determined by the Remuneration Committee at the time each award is made taking account of available information at that time including internal budget forecasts external expectations and market practice and the need to ensure that targets remain motivational.
Changes to the remuneration policy in 201617 With the exception of the changes to the Annual Incentive Scheme and the LTIP which are outlined on pages 79 and 80 and will form part of the policy to be put to shareholders for approval at the AGM in June no significant changes to the remuneration policy have been made during the year.
Other minor changes have been made in order to provide greater clarity and to improve the operation of the policy.
Service contracts and external appointments The key terms of the executive directors service contracts are as follows notice period  six months by the director and 12 months by the
12 months in any threeyear period or for a maximum of nine consecutive months and noncompete  for six months after leaving.
The dates of the executive directors service contracts which can be found on the Companys website siteglobal downloadcentrecorporate governance.
Alison Brittain 21 May 2015 Nicholas Cadbury 3 September 2012 Louise Smalley 25 October 2012 The executive directors are entitled to retain fees from external directorships.
Policy on payment for loss of office Base salary and contractual benefits All of the executive directors have a rolling service contract with a 12month notice period from the Company.
The
Company may make a payment in lieu of notice to include up to 12 monthly payments of base salary and the cash equivalent of pension contributions.
The Company may either allow for contractual benefits to continue during this time or at its sole discretion pay the value of those benefits on a monthly basis.
Neither notice nor payment in lieu of notice would be given if a director left by reason of gross misconduct.
A director is under a contractual duty to mitigate his or her position by actively seeking an alternative remunerated position and the Company will make a corresponding reduction in any payment made for loss of office.
Where a payment in lieu of notice is not applicable the payment of salary and contractual benefits would cease on the individuals leaving date.
The Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with a directors cessation of office or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any fees for outplacement assistance andor the directors legal andor professional advice fees in connection with his cessation of office or employment.
Annual Incentive Scheme If a director leaves the Company for a permitted reason under the rules of the scheme or if the Committee decides to apply good leaver status in accordance with the discretion outlined on page 86 of this report the default position would be that deferred shares would vest on the date of leaving and a prorated cash award would be made for the incentive year.
No new deferred shares would be awarded and the director would receive a prorated cash payment in lieu of the deferred shares.
Notwithstanding the above the Committee has the discretion to make a deferred shares award for the incentive year with such award due to vest at the same time as the awards made to continuing employees for that year.
If a director leaves the Company for any other reason 25% of an outstanding award of deferred shares would vest if the leaving date was between one and two years from the date of grant and 50% of an outstanding award would vest if the leaving date was between two and three years from the date of grant.
Any other unvested deferred shares would lapse on the date of leaving.
The director would receive no cash incentive payment for the financial year in which they leave and no deferred shares would be awarded.
In the event that a director was to leave the Company by reason of gross misconduct or in circumstances in which the reputation of the Company is materially damaged the malus provisions may be applied in which case no deferred shares would vest.
Long Term Incentive Plan If a director leaves the Company for a permitted reason under the rules of the plan or if the Committee decides to apply good leaver status in accordance with the discretion outlined on page 86 of this report the default position would be that any unvested LTIP awards would be prorated for time served.
Performance would be tested at the end of the standard threeyear performance period and the prorated awards would vest at the same time as for continuing employees.
No LTIP award would be made in the final year of employment if the Company was aware that the director would be leaving at the point that awards are made.
If a director leaves the Company for any other reason any unvested LTIP awards would lapse at the date of leaving.
Vested but unexercised LTIP awards including those subject to a holding period would be exercisable for the latter of six months from the date of leaving or six months from the end of the holding period.
In the event that a director was to leave the Company by reason of gross misconduct or in circumstances in which the reputation of the Company is materially damaged the clawback and or malus provisions may be applied.
Remuneration policy report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 85 Approach to remuneration on recruitment Our approach to recruitment is that remuneration should be set in line with the policy table on pages 81 and 82.
Whilst we would not seek to vary this approach there may be circumstances in which it is necessary to do so.
On the appointment of a new executive director base salary levels will be set taking into account a range of factors including experience and expertise internal salaries market levels and cost.
If an individual is appointed on a base salary below the market positioning contingent on individual performance the Committee retains the discretion to realign base salary over the onetothree years following appointment which may result in a higher than normal rate of annualised increase with any such increase aligned to internal policies.
If
Other elements of annual remuneration will be set in line with the policy set out in the policy table.
As such variable remuneration will be capped at 167% of salary under the Annual Incentive Scheme and an award of up to 200% of salary under the Long Term Incentive
The following exceptions will apply in the event that an internal appointment is made the Committee retains the discretion to continue with existing remuneration provisions relating to pension and benefits as deemed necessary and appropriate to secure an appointment the Committee retains the discretion to make additional payments linked to relocation and the Committee may also make an additional award of cash or shares on appointment of a new director in order to compensate for the forfeiture of an award from a previous employer.
Such awards would be on a comparable basis taking account of performance the proportion of the performance period remaining and the type of award.
The Committee will normally set appropriate performance conditions and vesting would generally be over a similar timeframe to awards forfeited.
The
Committee would take into account the strategy at Whitbread and may also require the appointee to purchase shares in Whitbread to a preagreed level prior to vesting.
Service contracts will be entered into on terms similar to those for the existing executive directors summarised in our service contract policy section.
However if necessary the Committee would authorise the payment of a relocation allowance and repatriation as well as other associated international mobility terms or agree terms appropriate to the local market for a director based overseas.
With respect to the appointment of a new Chairman or nonexecutive director the approach will be consistent with that currently adopted.
Variable pay will not be considered and as such no maximum applies.
With respect to nonexecutive directors fees will be consistent with policy at the time of appointment.
If necessary to secure the appointment of a new Chairman not based in the UK payments relating to relocation andor housing could be considered.
A timely announcement with respect to any director appointment will be made to the regulatory news services and posted on Whitbreads website.
Comparison of executive remuneration policy with wider employee population This section of the report describes each element of the executive remuneration package and explains the extent to which those elements are made available to the wider employee population.
The Committee consulted with employees in relevant roles when developing the directors remuneration policy.
Base salary All employees including the executive directors receive an annual review of base salary.
Under normal circumstances the annual increase in salary for an executive director will be in the same range as the increase for employees across the Group.
Benefits
Approximately 1000 employees across the Group are entitled to a company car or cash in lieu of a company car.
The scheme is structured so that the level of the allowance is on a sliding scale with employees on higher grades receiving a larger allowance.
The executive directors are no longer entitled to a company car under this scheme but are entitled to receive cash in lieu of a car.
Approximately 2600 employees are entitled to participate in the Groups private healthcare scheme with 1100 of these including the executive directors entitled to family cover.
In addition a small number of senior executives including the executive directors are entitled to annual health screening.
All employees receive discounts on Company products but the directors have waived their right to this benefit.
Employees including the executive directors have access to subsidised restaurants within the Companys offices in Dunstable and Luton and to free Costa coffee within the Companys offices.
Whitbreads Sharesave scheme is a standard HMRC approved SAYE scheme.
It is offered to all UK employees including the executive directors on equal terms.
The Company has shareholder approval to extend its share schemes overseas and the Remuneration Committee retains the discretion to establish a Sharesave scheme outside of the UK in the future.
Annual Incentive Scheme Approximately 6250 employees are eligible to receive an annual incentive payment linked to the achievement of profit and WINcard targets.
The majority of participants are entitled to earn a maximum annual incentive payment of 10% of salary paid in cash.
As employees progress into more senior roles the maximum payment that can be achieved rises to 40%.
Approximately
90 executives including the executive directors are entitled to participate in the Annual Incentive Scheme with maximum payouts split between cash and deferred shares ranging from 60% to 167%.
Approximately 200 employees including the executive directors are given individual strategic objectives in addition to the profit and WINcard targets mentioned above.
Long Term Incentive Plan Approximately 50 executives including the executive directors participate in the LTIP.
This scheme is not available to the wider employee population although the Sharesave scheme provides employees with a form of longterm incentive.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 86
Pension
Like all employees the executive directors are entitled to participate in the Companys pension scheme.
The scheme is a defined contribution scheme.
The levels of contribution from the Company vary depending on the job grade of the individual with employees at the entry level able to choose a 5% contribution level of which 2% is paid by the employee and 3% by the Company.
Contribution level choices rise with seniority.
Approximately 45 executives receive between 15% and 20% of basic salary from the Company which can be allocated to pension or taken as cash.
Employees who do not choose to participate may be automatically enrolled with contributions in line with the automatic enrolment regulations.
The policy on pension contributions for executive directors is that there is an upper limit for Company contributions of 27.5% of salary.
In 2013 the upper limit for new joiners was reduced to 25%.
This contribution can be allocated to pension or taken as cash.
Consideration of shareholder views We contacted our twenty largest investors as well as Glass Lewis ISS and the Investment Association in October 2016 to consult on proposed changes to our remuneration policy.
A further consultation was carried out in February 2017 in relation to the proposed LTIP targets for the 2017 awards.
The responses received to both consultations were broadly positive and supportive and as a result no changes were made to the original proposals although as a result of shareholders feedback we have improved our disclosure of targets.
Legacy matters The Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and or payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i before 17 June 2014 the date the Companys first shareholderapproved directors remuneration policy came into effect ii before the policy set out above came into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholder approved directors remuneration policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
Remuneration Committee discretion The Remuneration Committee retains the discretion to apply good leaver terms to leavers in respect of both the Annual Incentive Scheme and the
In exercising its discretion the Committee must consider the individual circumstances in the particular case and must not exercise its discretion in a way which would be discriminatory on grounds of sex race age or any other protected characteristic within the meaning of Section 4 of the Equality Act 2010.
The Committee must also so far as it is able to do so exercise its discretion in a way which is consistent as between individuals who are in the same position.
Under the rules of the Annual Incentive Scheme if good leaver terms apply any deferred share awards vest in full on the date of leaving and may be exercised within six months.
Under the rules of the LTIP the award would vest subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions at the end of the performance period.
The number of shares vesting would be on a prorata basis taking account of the proportion of the performance period that the individual had been employed within the Group.
The vested award would be exercisable for a period of six months from the date on which the award is declared to be vested.
On occasions where the Committee exercises this discretion the participant would be expected to continue to meet the shareholding requirement until the award vests and failure to do so would result in the lapsing of the award.
No
LTIP grants will be made within the last 12 months of employment to any employee who has requested and been granted good leaver status.
In addition the Remuneration Committee has a number of discretions relating to the appointment of new directors as outlined on page 85.
In exceptional circumstances the Remuneration Committee has the discretion to amend the profit range normally between 95% and 110% of target as well as the split between the awards based on profit measures individual strategic objectives and other stakeholder measures and the split between awards paid in cash and deferred shares for a new incentive year under the Annual Incentive Scheme.
The Committee sets the performance targets for the LTIP and the Annual Incentive Scheme on an annual basis.
The Committee may change a performance target from time to time in the event that it considers it fair and reasonable to do so.
Any change to an existing performance target must not have the effect in the opinion of the Committee of making the target materially easier or materially more difficult to achieve than it was when the award was initially granted.
The Chairman and nonexecutive directors fees Although the fees paid to the nonexecutive directors are not a matter for the Remuneration Committee details are provided in this report in order to comply with regulations.
The Chairman receives an annual fee and the nonexecutive directors receive a base fee with additional fees for acting as the Senior Independent Director or for chairing or being a member of the Audit or Remuneration Committees.
The fees are reviewed every two years by the executive directors taking into account a range of factors including the time commitment required of the directors the responsibilities of the role and the fees paid by other similar companies.
The Chairman and nonexecutive directors are entitled to claim all reasonable expenses and the Company may settle any tax incurred but do not receive any other fees or remuneration in connection with their roles at Whitbread.
Neither the Chairman nor any of the nonexecutive directors has a service contract.
Nonexecutive directors have letters of appointment setting out their duties and the time commitment expected of them.
Appointments are for an initial term of three years after which they are reviewed and their appointment can be terminated by either party on threemonths written notice.
Nonexecutive directors have no entitlement to compensation on termination.
All directors submit themselves for reelection annually.
The letters of appointment are available for shareholders to view at the Companys registered office.
Remuneration policy report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 87 Key duties Full terms of reference are available on the Companys website and a summary of the key duties is set out below.
Remuneration Committee  key duties Set the broad policy for the remuneration of the Chairman and the executive directors.
Within the terms of the agreed policy to determine the total individual remuneration package including incentive payments share awards and other benefits of the Chairman and each executive director.
Monitor the structure and level of remuneration of Executive Committee members.
Approve the design of and determine the targets for incentive schemes.
Approve awards to be made to executive directors and other senior executives under incentive schemes.
Ensure that contractual terms on termination and any payments made are fair to the individual and the Company that failure is not rewarded and that the duty to mitigate loss is fully recognised.
Remuneration Committee  advisers Internal advisers Chris Vaughan  General Counsel Ruth Hutchison  Group Reward Director External advisers Willis Towers Watson one of the founding members of the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct was appointed remuneration consultant by the Committee following a rigorous tender process and adheres to this code in its dealings with the Committee.
Separate parts of Willis Towers Watson provide investment advice and actuarial services in relation to the pension fund and insurance broking services to the Group.
Fees paid to Willis Towers Watson in respect of advice received by the Committee amounted to 149000.
These fees were charged on a time and material basis.
The Committee is satisfied that the advice received is independent and objective.
Remuneration Committee agenda  201617 Approval of Annual Incentive Scheme and targets for 201617.
Approval of awards of cash and deferred shares to executive directors under the Annual Incentive Scheme.
Executive directors salary review.
Approval of 2016 LTIP awards.
Confirmation of the performance conditions for the 2016 LTIP awards.
Confirmation of the vesting percentages for the LTIP award made in 2013 and vesting in 2016.
Approval of the 2016 remuneration report.
Approval of updated terms of reference.
Review of remuneration policy.
Shareholder consultations on revised policy and LTIP targets.
Annual report on remuneration Remuneration Committee  membership Name of director Meetings attended and eligible to attend Deanna Oppenheimer Chair 22 Richard Baker 77 Wendy Becker Sir Ian Cheshire 77 Stephen Williams 77 1 Deanna Oppenheimer joined the Committee on 1 January 2017.
2 Wendy Becker stepped down from the Committee on 31 December 2016.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 88
Annual report on remuneration continued Single total figure of remuneration audited information  executive directors Basic salary Benefits Annual Incentive Scheme LTIP Pension Total
Alison Brittain 792 329 22 1tel 198 82 2509 635 Nicholas Cadbury 532 490 22 2tel774 117 112 1487 1717 Christopher Rogers Louise Smalley 355 344 19 1tel284 The values of the vesting LTIP awards for 201516 have been restated to reflect the actual prices at the date of exercise.
These prices are disclosed on page 92.
2 Fees for part of the year Details of each of the elements included in the table above are as follows Base salary Annual salary increases across the Group are effective from 1 May each year.
The base salary numbers shown in the table therefore include two months pay based on the directors salary from 1 May 2015 and ten months pay based on the directors salary from 1 May 2016.
Christopher Rogers basic salary is shown up to his leaving date.
Alison Brittains basic salary for 201516 was from the date of her appointment in September 2015.
Benefits
The benefits received by each executive director include family private healthcare and a cash allowance in lieu of a company car.
Annual Incentive Scheme The Annual Incentive Scheme payments shown above include both a cash payment to be made in May 2017 and deferred shares to be issued in April 2017.
The awards were calculated as described below.
Awards based on profit measure The profit target for 201617 was 562.5 million and the result was 565.2 million which was 100.5% of target.
The profit range was between 95% of target at threshold and 110% of target at maximum.
Director % of salary in cash % of salary in deferred shares Total % of salary Alison Brittain 21.5 40.0 61.5 Nicholas Cadbury 21.5 40.0 61.5 Christopher Rogers Louise Smalley 21.5 40.0 61.5 1 Christopher Rogers had a 201617 profit target made up of a mixture of Group and Costa profit 20% Group 80% Costa which resulted in a lower payout than that for the other executive directors.
The Costa target was 161.7 million.
The profit target for the 201516 financial year was 563.2 million and the result was 557.1 million which was 98.9% of target.
The profit range was between 95% of target at threshold and 110% of target at maximum.
The profit target for 201516 excluded the cost of Premier Inn Germany which was in its first year of start up.
The result was also adjusted for a change in the asset life of freehold property which was not considered when the target was initially set.
The profit target for Christopher Rogers was a mixture of Group and Costa profit 40% Group 60% Costa.
The Costa target was 154.3 million.
Awards based on WINcard and leadership succession measures The WINcard targets in 201617 were appropriate to the directors role and consisted of Group targets some of which were a combination of the Costa and Premier Inn and Restaurants measures.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 89 The WINcard incentive results are as shown in the table below WINcard measure % of salary Winning Teams Team turnover 4.00 Health and safety na Customer Heartbeat Guest recommend 4.50 Profitable Growth Premier Inn total occupancy 1.50 Brand expansion Like for like sales growth 0.00 Costa total system sales growth 0.75 Force for Good Electricity consumption 3.00
Total 201617 13.75 The health and safety measure acted as a hurdle.
If the health and safety score had been red payouts for the other WINcard measures would have been reduced by 20%.
If the score had been amber a 10% reduction would have applied.
2 The executive directors had a more stretching target of 4250 rooms for Premier Inn rooms growth which was not adjusted when the decision to smooth the phasing of room openings was taken and communicated at the Capital Market Day.
As a result the brand expansion measure was red for the purpose of incentive payments to the executive directors but is amber in the key performance indicators on page 18.
3 These results are those for the current executive directors.
Christopher Rogers had targets relating to Costa.
He received five green scores which were worth a total of 17.5% of salary two amber scores which were worth a total of 3% of salary and one red score.
More information on the actual targets and outcomes for these measures can be found on pages 16 to 19.
Each executive was also entitled to earn a maximum of 5% of salary based on the achievement of personal leadership succession targets.
The results achieved were such that Alison Brittain will receive 5% of salary and each of the other executive directors will receive 3% of salary based on these measures.
As a result the awards to be made based on WINcard and leadership succession measures are as follows
Total % of salary Alison Brittain 15.0 3.8 18.8 Nicholas Cadbury 13.4 3.4 16.8 Christopher Rogers 18.8 4.7 23.5 Louise Smalley 13.4 3.4 16.8 Total awards The split between cash and deferred shares is as follows
Cash award Cash value of deferred shares award
Alison Brittain 290telNicholas Cadbury 188tel1telChristopher Rogers 62tel1telLouise Smalley 124tel1telGovernance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 90
Annual report on remuneration continued The deferred shares will under normal circumstances vest on 1 March 2020 subject to continued employment within the
No further performance conditions apply to these awards.
Malus provisions apply to the deferred share awards in the event for example of a material misstatement of results with clawback provisions applying to the cash awards.
The share price used to calculate the awards was the average closing price of a Whitbread share for the five business days preceding 1 March 2017 i.
3822.2 pence.
The number of deferred shares awarded to each director will be as follows
Number of deferred shares awarded Number of deferred shares awarded Alison Brittain 9104 3074 Nicholas Cadbury 6128 4600 Christopher Rogers 1659 5533 Louise Smalley 4051 3227 Long Term Incentive Plan The amounts shown in the table on page 88 refer to the value of the LTIP awards made in 2014 and vesting in 2017.
The value given for the LTIP awards is based on the average market value over the last quarter of the financial year 3844.4 pence as the awards will not vest until after the date of this report.
The LTIP awards made to executives in 2014 were subject to EPS and ROCE measures on a matrix basis as shown below ROCE 201617 EPS growth above RPI per annum Threshold Sliding scale Maximum 12% 13% 14% 15% 16% 17% 18% 4% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Threshold 4% 0% 19% 19% 20% 22% 24% 25% Sliding scale 6% 0% 37% 37% 40% 44% 50% 50% 8% 0% 56% 56% 61% 66% 71% 75% Maximum 10% 0% 75% 75% 82% 89% 96% 100% The actual EPS growth achieved was RPI plus 9.4% with the 201617 ROCE which is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets being 15.3%.
As a result 76.5% of the shares awarded under the 2014 LTIP will vest.
The awards vesting to the executive directors each of which are subject to a oneyear holding period except for the award vesting to Alison Brittain which is subject to a twoyear holding period are as follows
Number of shares vested 2017 Number of shares vested 2016 Alison Brittain 22334 Nicholas Cadbury 10255 22106 Louise Smalley 6688 14416 Single total figure of remuneration audited information  Chairman and nonexecutive directors Base fee Senior Independent Director fee Fee as Chairman of a Board Committee Fee as a member of a Board Committee Total
Richard Baker 350 350 David Atkins Wendy Becker Sir Ian Cheshire Chris Kennedy Simon Melliss Deanna Oppenheimer Susan Taylor Martin 57 55 Stephen Williams 57 55   20 15   77 70 1 Fees for part year.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 91
The percentage of salary or pension allowance received by the executive directors in pension contributions is shown in the table below.
Director % of salary Alison Brittain 25.0 Nicholas Cadbury 25.0 Christopher Rogers 27.5 Louise Smalley 25.0 Executives are able to elect to receive a monthly amount in cash less an amount equal to the employers national insurance contribution in lieu of the pension contribution.
Christopher Rogers and Alison Brittain elected to receive a cash payment while Nicholas Cadbury and Louise Smalley each receive a pension contribution and a cash supplement representing the balance over and above the annual allowance set by HMRC for pension contributions.
The percentage of salary or pension allowance received by Nicholas Cadbury and Louise Smalley will rise to 27.5% on 1 December 2017 and 1 November 2017 respectively.
This is as a result of grandfathered terms.
Statement of directors shareholding and share interests audited information The Committee believes that the shareholding requirements for executives play an important role in the alignment of the interests of executives and shareholders and help to incentivise executives to deliver sustainable longterm performance.
The Chief Executive is required to build and hold a shareholding at least equal to 200% of salary whilst the other executive directors are expected to reach a holding to the value of 125% of salary and other senior executives 75% of salary.
Until they reach this level executives are expected to retain 100% of vested awards after the deduction of income tax national insurance contributions and dealing fees.
In addition a newly appointed executive director is expected to build a shareholding in the Company in advance of any share awards vesting.
The failure to adhere to these requirements may lead to the executive being excluded from participation in future share scheme awards.
It should be noted that any vested LTIP awards subject to a holding period will not be counted for the purpose of calculating whether an executive has met his or her requirement.
When determining whether a director has met the requirement both the current market price and the price at the point the shares were acquired will be taken into consideration.
All of the executive directors except for Alison Brittain who was appointed in September 2015 have already met the requirement.
Alison has invested in excess of 1 million in the Companys shares from her own resources.
Her first share scheme award is partially vested in April 2017 but is subject to a twoyear holding period.
During 201415 shareholding requirements were introduced for the Chairman and the nonexecutive directors.
They are each required to build a holding to the value of 100% of their annual fee over a threeyear period.
The table below shows the holdings of directors as at 2 March 2017 Counting towards requirement Performance versus requirement Additional awards Number of ordinary shares Value based on purchase price Value based on market price
Awards subject to performance conditions Awards not subject to performance conditions
Richard Baker 1580tel109 174 Executive directors Alison Brittain 20900 102tel101 98950 Nicholas Cadbury 24410 100tel174 40876 Christopher Rogers 51028 196tel52689 32295 Louise Smalley 41236 158tel28016 8802 Nonexecutive directors David Atkins 1Wendy Becker 6100 6tel411 Sir Ian Cheshire 2245 8telChris Kennedy 1500 5telSimon Melliss 3Deanna Oppenheimer 1600 6telSusan Taylor Martin 1Stephen Williams 1134tel319 765 As at date of leaving 1 Includes outstanding LTIP awards for which performance has not yet been tested.
2 Includes unvestedunexercised deferred shares under the Annual Incentive Scheme and unexercised LTIP awards for which the performance targets have already been met.
Deanna Oppenheimer actually holds 3200 ADRs in Whitbread PLC each of which represent 0.5 of a Whitbread ordinary share.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 92
Annual report on remuneration continued There has been no change to the interests in the tables shown on page 91 between the end of the financial year and the date of this report.
The column showing awards not subject to performance conditions does not include the deferred shares issued under the incentive scheme in 2017.
Please see tables below and on the following pages for details of LTIP awards deferred shares and Sharesave options.
Long Term Incentive Plan the Plan audited information Potential share awards held by the executive directors under the Plan at the beginning and end of the year and details of awards vesting during the year and their value are as follows
4 March 2016 Awarded Lapsed Exercised 2 March
Performance period concludes
Date vested award exercised Price at exercise pence
Alison Brittain 29196 010315 020317 5255.0 29196 010315 010318 5255.0 40558 010316 280219 4043.0 Nicholas Cadbury 22743 010313 030316 2554.0 010716 3501.0 774 13406 010314 020317 4487.0 11317 010315 010318 5255.0 16153 010316 280219 4043.0 40876 774 Christopher Rogers 24254 010313 030316 2554.0 15040 010314 020317 4487.0 12696 010315 010318 5255.0 Louise Smalley 14832 010313 030316 2554.0 260516 4279.0 617 8743 010314 020317 4487.0 7940 010315 010318 5255.0 11333 010316 280219 4043.0 Or date of leaving.
2 Alison Brittain received two LTIP awards on joining the Company each to the value of 175% of salary.
The performance conditions for the first of these awards are aligned to the awards made to other executives in 2014 and the second of the awards have performance conditions aligned to the awards made to other executives in 2015.
Although the awards were actually made on 11 December 2015 under the rules of the LTIP the technical date of both awards is 1 March 2015 and the market price at award shown in the table above is therefore the price on 1 March 2015.
The price used to calculate the awards was the average Whitbread share price for the five business days immediately preceding Alisons first day of employment which was 4645.2 pence.
3 Christopher Rogers stepped down from the Board on 19 April 2016 and left the Company on 1 July 2016.
He exercised his 2013 LTIP award over 24254 shares on 3 May 2016 at a price of 3865.0 pence per share.
His 2014 and 2015 LTIP awards lapsed when he left the Company.
He now has no LTIP awards outstanding.
LTIP performance conditions  past awards Performance metrics 2013 award Based on underlying basic EPS growth above RPI per annum of 4% to 10% on a sliding scale with a onethird multiplier based on ROCE in 201516 of 12% to 17.0%.
ROCE also acts as a hurdle and is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets.
2014 award Based on underlying basic EPS growth above RPI per annum of 4% to 10% on a sliding scale with a onethird multiplier based on ROCE in 201617 of 13% to 18.0%.
ROCE also acts as a hurdle and is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets.
2015 award Based on underlying basic EPS growth above RPI per annum of 4% to 10% on a sliding scale with a onethird multiplier based on ROCE in 201718 of 13% to 18.0%.
ROCE also acts as a hurdle and is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets.
2016 award Based on underlying basic EPS growth above RPI per annum of 4% to 10% on a sliding scale with a onethird multiplier based on ROCE in 201819 of 13% to 18.0%.
ROCE also acts as a hurdle and is calculated using an average of the previous 13 months net assets.
LTIP performance conditions  future awards Details of the performance conditions for the awards to be made in 2017 can be found on page 98.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 93 Annual Incentive Scheme the Scheme audited information At 2 March 2017 the directors held the following deferred shares under the Plan
Year of award Balance at 4 March 2016 Awarded Lapsed Exercised Balance at 2 March
Market price at award pence
Market price at vesting pence
Alison Brittain 2016 3074    3074 010320 4043.0 9104 010320 3841.0 3074 9104 Nicholas Cadbury 2013 3672 3672  030316 2554.0 010716 3501.0 129 2014 8246 8246 010317 4487.0 2015 7946 7946 010318 5255.0 2016 4600 4600 010319 4043.0 6128 010320 3841.0 24464 6128 3672 26920 129 Christopher Rogers 2013 14963 14963 030316 2554.0 2014 9028 9028 010317 4487.0 2015 8304 8304 010318 5255.0 2016 5533 5533 010319 4043.0 37828    37828 Louise Smalley 2014 5377 5377 0 010317 4487.0 010317 3814.0 205 2015 5575 5575 010318 5255.0 2016 3227 3227 010319 4043.0 4051 010320 3841.0 14179 4051  5377 12853 205 1 Or at date of leaving.
2 Under the rules of the Scheme awards cannot vest during a close or prohibited period.
The normal release dates for the 2013 awards would have been 1 March 2016.
However as this date was during a prohibited period the 2013 awards actually released on 3 March 2016.
The awards are not subject to performance conditions and will vest in full on the release date subject to the director remaining an employee of Whitbread at that date.
If the director ceases to be an employee of Whitbread prior to the release date by reason of redundancy retirement death injury ill health disability or some other reason considered to be appropriate by the Remuneration Committee the awards will be released in full.
If the director ceases to be an employee of Whitbread for any other reason the proportion of award which vests depends upon the year in which the award was made and the date the director ceases to be an employee.
If the director leaves within the first year after an award is made none of the award vests between the first and second anniversary 25% vests and between the second and third anniversary 50% vests.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 94
Annual report on remuneration continued Share options audited information Executive directors may participate in the Companys Savingsrelated Share Option Scheme the Scheme which is open to all employees on the same terms.
The exercise periods shown below are the normal exercise periods at the date of grant.
Actual exercise periods are subject to change in accordance with the rules of the Scheme if a director ceases to be employed by the Company.
At 3 March 2016 the directors held the following share options under the Scheme with the latest exercise date being July 2021.
Savingsrelated share options have a sixmonth exercise period.
Director
Number of shares Date of grant Exercise price pence Exercise date Last exercise date Alison Brittain 775 02122015 3866.4 01022021 31072021 775 775 at 03032016 Nicholas Cadbury 327 29112013 2746.4 01022017 31072017 256 02122014 3507.2 01022018 31072018 583 583 at 03032016 Louise Smalley 256 02122014 3507.2 01022018 31072018 232 02022015 3866.4 01022019 31072019 488 958 at 03032016 Options exercised audited information The following options were exercised by executive directors under the savingsrelated share option scheme during the year.
Director
Number of shares Exercise price pence Exercise date
Monetary value of gain Louise Smalley 470 1913.6 08082016 3962.0 10 1 Although the exercise is shown as being 8 August 2016 Louise gave instructions to exercise to the administrator prior to the deadline of 31 July 2016 but the process is such that the actual exercises are carried out once every two weeks.
Total shareholder return
March
February
February
February
March
March
March
February
Whitbread plc FTSE
The corresponding chart looks at the value over eight years of 100 invested in Whitbread plc on 26 February 2009 compared on a consistent basis with that of 100 invested in the FTSE 100 index based on 30 trading day average values.
The FTSE 100 has been selected by the Committee as an appropriate comparator group due to Whitbreads position within the FTSE 100.
Source Thomson Reuters Datastream Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 95 Remuneration Committee discretion During the year it was announced that Christopher Rogers would step down from the Board on 19 April 2016 and leave the Company on 1 July 2016.
The Committee exercised its discretion in accordance with the approved policy to apply partial good leaver terms to Christopher.
A disclosure under Section 4032B of the Companies Act 2006 was made on the Companys website and the details are as follows All payments are in line with the Companys stated remuneration policy for a good leaver published in the Annual Report for 201314 and approved by the shareholders at the 2014 AGM.
Salary and benefits Christopher will continue to receive normal salary and benefits as provided under his service agreement up to and including 1 July 2016.
Share awards for past and future performance Directors Incentive Scheme Christopher s deferred shares will vest on their ordinary vesting date being three years from the date of grant.
He was granted 9028 deferred shares in 2014 and 8304 in 2015.
These deferred shares were awarded as a result of performance under incentive schemes in prior years.
He also will be entitled to a cash and deferred share award subject to performance for the 201516 financial year to be agreed by the Remuneration Committee in April 2016 and for the part of the 201617 financial year for which he is employed which will be agreed by the Remuneration Committee in 2017.
Any new deferred shares awarded in 2016 or 2017 will not vest until 2019 or 2020 respectively.
LTIP Unvested awards granted in 2014 and 2015 will lapse.
The Remuneration Committee will determine in April 2016 the level at which the LTIP grant made to Christopher in 2013 24953 shares will vest.
No further grants will be made to Christopher under the LTIP.
Payments to past directors audited information With the exception of regular pension payments and dividends on Whitbread shares and the exercise of share awards as permitted under the rules of the Annual Incentive Scheme the LTIP and the Savingsrelated Share Option Scheme no other payments were made during the year to past directors.
Chief Executives remuneration The Chief Executives remuneration including base salary benefits and annual incentive payment decreased by 6.1% in the year compared with an increase of 5.3% for the Groups employees as a whole.
The following table shows the Chief Executives pay over the last eight years with details of the percentage of maximum paid out under the Annual Incentive Scheme and the LTIP vesting percentage for each year.
Year Chief Executive Single total figure of remuneration % of maximum incentive achieved % of LTIP award vesting 201617 Alison Brittain 2509 49.8 76.5 201516 Alison Brittain 634 38.8 na Andy Harrison 2423 38.8 97.2 Combined 3057 38.8 97.2 201415 Andy Harrison 4554 86.8 100.0 Andy Harrison 6374 82.6 100.0 201213 Andy Harrison 3432 74.9 89.8 201112 Andy Harrison 1444 45.6 na 201011 Andy Harrison 534 94.4 na Alan Parker 2509 94.4 82.4 Combined 3043 94.4 82.4 200910 Alan Parker 2634 100.0 75.9 Fees from external directorships The executive directors are entitled to retain fees from external directorships.
Christopher Rogers is a nonexecutive director of Travis Perkins Plc and retained a fee of 8541 up to the date he stepped down from the Whitbread Board in respect of that directorship.
Louise Smalley is a nonexecutive director of DS Smith Plc and retained a fee of 55233.
Alison Brittain is a nonexecutive director of Marks and Spencer Plc and retained a fee of 70000.
Nicholas Cadbury was appointed as a nonexecutive director of Land Securities Group PLC on 1 January 2017 and retained a fee of 11667.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 96
Annual report on remuneration continued Relative importance of spend on pay The graph below compares the change in total expenditure on employee pay during the year to the changes in profit after tax and dividend payments.
Implementation of remuneration policy in 201617 Base salary The executive directors will each receive a salary increase of 2% which is in the same range as the general increase being given to employees across the Group.
The base salaries of the executive directors with effect from 1 May 2017 will be as follows
Base salary at 1 May 2017 Base salary at 1 May 2016 Alison Brittain 811 795 Nicholas Cadbury 551 540 Louise Smalley 362 357
The benefits received by each executive director will continue to include family private healthcare and a cash allowance in lieu of a company car.
Annual Incentive Scheme As explained earlier in the report some changes have been made to the way in which the Annual Incentive Scheme will operate in 201718.
The overall quantum of awards available to the executive directors has not changed and remains at 167% of salary at the maximum.
To be eligible to receive incentive payments there are gateway requirements relating to both performance and leadership behaviour.
Any incentive payments will be at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee in the event that either profit performance is below 90% of target or the health and safety score is red on the WINcard.
The expectation is that our leaders actions reflect Whitbreads values and code of conduct including our approach to health and safety.
Keeping our team and customers safe is not an incentive lever but a core responsibility that earns the right to earn further incentivised rewards.
In 201718 half of the total incentive available will be based on performance against a Group underlying profit before tax target.
As explained on page 18 this profit target is commercially sensitive and for that reason is not disclosed in advance.
The
Committee intends to disclose the target retrospectively in the 201718 report.
Prot after tax .4% % .6% Dividends Employee costs Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 97 Each executive director will be able to earn up to an additional 25% of the maximum based on WINcard measures.
One measure will be operational team retention and the other will be a combination of Customer Heartbeat measures made up of Premier Inn brand health Costa net recommend and Restaurants net recommend.
Only half of the maximum available in respect of these measures will be available for a green WINcard score with 75% of maximum payout available for achieving a stretch target beyond green and maximum payout requiring a new excel level to be achieved.
Each executive director also has three personal strategic objectives.
They will be eligible to receive up to 25% of the maximum incentive opportunity based on the delivery of these objectives.
Each objective will carry an equal weighting within that and achievement of the approved objective outcomes have been aligned to a payment level that would be recognised as stretch performance.
The objectives are quantifiable and linked to the business plan and future financial performance.
The table below shows a summary of the personal strategic objectives for each of the executive directors together with details on which of the three strategic priorities see pages 8 to 13 each objective is linked to
Priority
Alison Brittain Objective 1 Growth in Premier Inn rooms Costa stores and Costa Express machines and like for like sales growth.
Objective 2 Growth in German hotel pipeline and progress in Costa China.
Objective 3 Achieve the inyear efficiency plan.
Nicholas Cadbury Objective 1 Successful launch of new financial controls framework system.
Objective 2 Delivery of improvements to Whitbreads IT infrastructure.
Objective 3 Achieve the inyear efficiency plan.
Louise Smalley Objective 1 Effective workforce planning for greater macro uncertainty.
Objective 2 Delivery of HR technology transformation.
Objective 3 Achieve the inyear efficiency plan.
Cash awards will be made in May 2018 with deferred equity issued in April 2018 and due to vest on 1 March 2021 with no further performance conditions applying.
Profit performance % of salary
Total
Total
Cash
Deferred shares
Ontarget
Stretch maximum Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 98
Annual report on remuneration continued Long Term Incentive Plan The awards to be made in 2017 will be based on 200% of base salary for Alison Brittain and 125% of base salary for the other executive directors calculated by reference to the average of the closing price of a Whitbread share for the five business days preceding 1 March 2017 i.
3822.2 pence.
They will vest in April 2020 subject to the directors continued employment within the Group and satisfaction of the performance conditions.
The awards will be subject to a twoyear holding period post vesting.
The 2017 awards to the executive directors will be made following the AGM in June 2017.
In the event that the updated policy is approved the awards will be subject to two independently operating performance conditions.
50% of each award will be dependent on the Group ROCE in 201920 with the threshold being 13% and maximum payout at 18% with a sliding scale operating in between.
A further 50% of each award will be linked to an EPS growth target operating on a sliding scale between 4% per annum at threshold to 10% per annum at maximum.
The number of shares awarded under the LTIP to each director will be as follows
Number of shares awarded Value of award Alison Brittain 41599 1590 Nicholas Cadbury 17659 675 Louise Smalley 11675 446 Nonexecutive directors fees The base annual fee for nonexecutive directors is 57000.
The fees for the chairmanship of the Audit Committee and the Remuneration Committee are 20000.
The fee for the Senior Independent Director is 15000 and the fees for membership of the Audit and Remuneration Committees are 5000.
Statement of shareholder voting At the Annual General Meeting in 2016 the advisory resolution to approve the annual report on remuneration was passed.
In total 121702536 votes were cast on the resolution with 116075272 95.38% in favour and 5627264 4.62% against.
There were 1893034 votes withheld.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 99 Directors report Certain information required for disclosure in this Report is provided in other appropriate sections of the Annual Report and Accounts.
These include the corporate governance and remuneration reports and the Group financial statements and Notes to those financial statements and accordingly these are incorporated into the report by reference.
Results and dividends Group underlying profit before tax 565.2m Group profit before tax 515.4m Interim dividend paid on 16 December 2016 29.90p per share
Total dividend for the year 95.80p per share Details on the Groups dividend policy can be found on page 56 in the Group Finance Directors review.
Subject to approval at the AGM the final dividend will be payable on 30 June 2017 to the shareholders on the register at the close of business on 26 May 2017.
Board of Directors The directors at the date of this Report are listed on pages 64 and 65.
There have been a number of director changes throughout the year.
Wendy Becker stepped down from the Board on 31 December 2016.
David Atkins and Deanna Oppenheimer were appointed to the Board on 1 January 2017.
Stephen
Williams served throughout the year but it was announced that he will step down from the Board at the AGM on 21 June 2017.
Adam Crozier was appointed to the Board on 1 April 2017.
Details of the directors service contracts are given in the remuneration report on page 84.
None of the nonexecutive directors have a service contract.
Details of directors training are given in the corporate governance report on page 69.
Powers of directors The business of the Company is managed by the directors who may exercise all the powers of the Company subject to the Companys Articles of Association any relevant legislation and any directions given by the Company by passing a special resolution at a general meeting.
In particular the directors may exercise all the powers of the Company to borrow money issue shares appoint and remove directors and recommend and declare dividends.
Appointment and replacement of directors Directors shall be no less than two and no more than 20 in number.
Directors may be appointed by the Company by ordinary resolution or by the Board of Directors.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all directors will stand for annual reelection at each AGM.
The Company may by special resolution remove any directors before the expiration of hisher term of office.
Directors automatically stop being directors if they give the Company a written notice of resignation at the date such notice expires they give the Company a written notice in which they offer to resign and the other directors decide to accept the offer all of the other directors who must comprise at least three people pass a resolution or sign a written notice requiring the director to resign they are or have been suffering from mental or physical ill health and the directors pass a resolution removing the director from office they have missed directors meetings whether or not an alternate director appointed attends those meetings for a continuous period of six months without permission from the directors and the directors pass a resolution removing the director from office a bankruptcy order is made against them or they make any arrangement or composition with their creditors generally they are prohibited from being a director under any applicable legislation or they cease to be a director under any applicable legislation or are removed from office under the Companys Articles of Association.
Chris Vaughan General Counsel The directors present their Report and Accounts for the year ended 2 March 2017 Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 100
Directors indemnity A qualifying thirdparty indemnity provision as defined in Section 236 1 of the Companies Act 2006 is in force for the benefit of the directors.
Compensation for loss of office There are no agreements between the Company and its directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs as a result of a takeover bid.
Directors share interests Details regarding the share interests of the directors in the share capital of the Company including with respect to options to acquire ordinary shares are set out in the remuneration report on pages 78 to 98.
Share capital Details of the issued share capital can be found in Note 25 to the accounts.
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled to attend and speak at general meetings of the Company to appoint one or more proxies and if they are corporations corporate representatives to attend general meetings and to exercise voting rights.
Holders of ordinary shares may receive a dividend and on a liquidation may share in the assets of the Company.
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled to receive the Companys Annual Report and Accounts.
Subject to meeting certain thresholds holders of ordinary shares may requisition a general meeting of the Company or the proposal of resolutions at AGMs.
Voting rights On a show of hands at a general meeting of the Company every holder of ordinary shares present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote has one vote unless the proxy is appointed by more than one member in which case the proxy has one vote for and one vote against if the proxy has been instructed by one or more members to vote for the resolution and by one or more members to vote against the resolution and on a poll every member present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote has one vote for every ordinary share held.
Voting rights for any ordinary shares held in treasury are suspended.
None of the ordinary shares carry any special rights with regard to control of the
Electronic and paper proxy appointments and voting instructions must be received by the Companys registrars not later than i 48 hours before a meeting or adjourned meeting excluding nonworking days or ii 24 hours before a poll is taken if the poll is not taken on the same day as the meeting or adjourned meeting.
Unless the directors decide otherwise a shareholder cannot attend or vote at any general meeting of the Company or at any separate general meeting of the holders of any class of shares in the Company or upon a poll or exercise any other right conferred by membership in relation to general meetings or polls if he or she has not paid all amounts relating to those shares which are due at the time of the meeting.
Where a shareholder with at least a 0.25% interest in a class of shares has been served with a disclosure notice in relation to a particular holding of shares and has failed to provide the Company with information concerning those shares those sharews will no longer give that shareholder any right to vote at a shareholders meeting.
Restrictions on transfer of shares There are the following restrictions on the transfer of shares in the Company certain restrictions which may from time to time be imposed by laws and regulations for example insider trading laws pursuant to the Companys share dealing code the directors and senior executives of the Company require approval to deal in the Companys shares where a person with at least a 0.25% interest in a class of shares has been served with a disclosure notice and has failed to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares the subscriber ordinary shares may not be transferred without the prior written consent of the directors the directors can without giving any reason refuse to register the transfer of any shares which are not fully paid transfers cannot be in favour of more than four joint holders and the directors can refuse to register the transfer of an uncertificated share in the circumstances set out in the uncertificated securities rules as defined in the Companys Articles of Association.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or on voting rights.
B shares and C shares Holders of B shares and C shares are entitled to receive an annual noncumulative preferential dividend calculated at a rate of 75% of six month LIBOR on a value of 155 pence per B share and 159 pence per C share respectively but are not entitled to any further right of participation in the profits of the Company.
They are also entitled to payment of 155 pence per B share and 159 pence per C share respectively on a return of capital on windingup excluding any intragroup reorganisation on a solvent basis.
Except in limited circumstances the holders of the B shares and C shares are not entitled in their capacity as holders of such shares to receive notice of any general meeting of the Company nor to attend speak or vote at any such general meeting.
Both B and C shares represent significantly less than 0.01% of the total share capital.
Purchase of own shares The Company is authorised to purchase its own shares in the market.
Approval to renew this authority will be sought from the shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
The Company did not purchase any of its own shares during the year.
12.1 million shares are held as treasury shares 3 March 2016 12.6 million.
During the course of the year the Company transferred 495300 shares from treasury to the Employee Share Ownership Trust for the future satisfaction of awards under the Companys share schemes.
Employee share schemes Whitbread does not have any employee share schemes with shares which have rights with regard to the control of the Company that are not exercisable directly by the employees.
Directors report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 101 Major interests As at the end of the financial year the Company had received formal notification under the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the following material holdings in its shares the percentages shown are the percentages at the time of the disclosure and have not been recalculated based on the issued share capital at the yearend Number of shares % of issued share capital BlackRock Inc.
9422457 5.15 MFS Investment Management 9330908 5.11
Partners 9240506 5.04 Aberdeen Asset Management 9155869 4.99 Employment policies Whitbread has a range of employment policies covering such issues as diversity employee wellbeing and equal opportunities.
The Company takes its responsibilities to the disabled seriously and seeks not to discriminate under any circumstances including in relation to training career development and promotion against current or prospective employees because of any disability or for any other reason.
Fair and full consideration is given to applications for employment made by disabled persons having regard to their aptitudes and abilities.
Employees who become disabled during their career at Whitbread will be retained in employment wherever possible and given help with rehabilitation and training.
Employee involvement The importance of good relations and communications with employees is fundamental to the continued success of our business.
Each of the Groups operating businesses maintains employee relations and consults employees as appropriate to its own particular needs.
In addition our employee opinion survey Your Say is conducted twice a year to provide insight into the views of employees.
Our employees are actively encouraged to take part in our Sharesave scheme which is available to all employees and offers an option price discounted by 20%.
Regular internal communications are made to all employees to ensure that they are kept well informed of the performance of the Group and of financial and economic factors that may affect the Companys performance.
Further information on employee involvement can be found in the Winning Teams section on pages 24 to 29.
Mandatory Green House Gas Reporting In order to comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 Strategic and Directors Report Regulations 2013 we have amended our environmental reporting accordingly.
We have considered the six main GHGs and report in CO e for our Scope 1 direct and Scope 2 indirect emissions.
We have used the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard methodology to calculate our emissions and DEFRA GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting.
Scope 1 includes emissions from the fuels we use in our hotels restaurants offices and coffee shops such as natural gas and liquid petroleum gas.
It also includes CO e from owned vehicles which include company cars but excludes logistics as this is an outsourced operation.
Refrigerant gas FGas losses are captured for UK operations only due to reporting capabilities.
Scope 2 relates to the indirect emissions associated with the generation of the electricity consumed in our sites.
When defining the scope of our data we do not report on operations under Joint Venture agreements where we do not have operational control such as Costa Beijing and Premier Inn UAE.
For reasons of materiality small one man offices in Australasia and the Far East have been excluded.
All other sites throughout the world are included.
Where possible we have reported billed or AMR data which now represents 88% of our total global emissions.
For those operations which are currently beyond our reporting capabilities such as Costa Shanghai we have used an estimation approach using known sales data and local conversion factors.
For further information about our estimation techniques and the number and location of Whitbread sites please view the corporate responsibility pages on our website site Source of emissions 201516 201617 Change % Gas Scope 1 54105 55680 2.9 LPG 3246 3285 1.2 Fuel oil 203 193 4.9 Fgas 4109 2749 33.1 Business travel 3510 3871 10.3 Electricity Scope 2 2100 2003 4.6 Gross emissions 275123 266074 3.3 Turnover  millions 2922 3110 6.4 Tonnes carbon per 1 million turnover 95 86 9.5 Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 102
Amendment of the Companys Articles of Association Any amendments to the Articles of Association of the Company may be made in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 by way of special resolution.
Significant agreements The Companys facility bond and private placement loan notes agreements details of which can be found in Note 19 to the accounts contain provisions entitling the counterparties to exercise termination or other rights in the event of a change of control of the Company.
Contractual arrangements The Group has contractual arrangements with numerous third parties in support of its business activities none of which are considered individually to be essential to its business and accordingly it has not been considered necessary for an understanding of the development performance or position of the Groups business to disclose information about any of those thirdparties.
Financial instruments Information on the Companys use of financial instruments financial risk management objectives and policies and exposure is given in Note 22 and Note 23 to the consolidated financial statements.
Political donations The Company has not made any political donations during the year and intends to continue its policy of not doing so for the foreseeable future.
Auditor
Deloitte LLP has expressed its willingness to continue in office as auditor of the Company and a resolution proposing its reappointment will be put to shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
After proper consideration the Audit Committee is satisfied that Deloitte LLP continues to be objective and independent of the Company.
In coming to this conclusion the Audit Committee gave full consideration to any nonaudit work carried out by Deloitte LLP and has concluded that certain services will not be carried out by Deloitte LLP as outlined in the Committees terms of reference.
Disclosure of information to auditor The directors have taken all reasonable steps to make themselves aware of relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information.
The directors are not aware of any relevant audit information which has not been disclosed to the auditor.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the strategic report on pages 4 to 61.
The financial position of the Company its cash flows net debt and borrowing facilities and the maturity of those facilities are set out in the Group Finance Directors review on pages 54 to 57.
In addition there are further details in the financial statements on the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies Note 22 and on financial instruments Note 23.
A combination of the strong operating cash flows generated by the business and the significant headroom on its credit facilities supports the directors view that the Group has sufficient funds available for it to meet its foreseeable working capital requirements.
The directors have concluded that the going concern basis remains appropriate.
The viability statement can be found on page 58.
Annual General Meeting The AGM will be held at 2pm on 21 June 2017 at Church House Conference Centre Deans Yard Westminster London SW1P 3NZ.
The Notice of Meeting is enclosed with this report for shareholders receiving hard copy documents and is available at site for those who have elected to receive documents electronically.
At the 2017 AGM all voting will be by poll.
Electronic handsets will be utilised and results will be displayed on the screen at the meeting.
Approved by the Board on 24 April 2017 and signed.
Chris Vaughan General Counsel and Company
Registered Office Whitbread Court Houghton Hall Business Park Porz Avenue
Bedfordshire
LU5 5XE Registered company number Directors report continued Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 103 Directors responsibility statement The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Accounts in accordance with applicable UK laws and regulations.
UK company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU and applicable UK law.
Further they have elected to prepare the Company financial statements in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable UK law.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing the Group financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner which presents relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRS is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups financial position and financial performance state that the Group financial statements comply with IFRS subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the consolidated financial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group will continue in its business.
In preparing the Company financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable UK accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and with regard to the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for the system of internal control for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for preparing the strategic report including the corporate governance report and the directors remuneration report and the directors report in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and applicable regulations including the Listing Rules and the Disclosure and Transparency Rules.
A copy of the financial statements of the Group is posted on the Groups website.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Annual Report included on the website.
Information published on the Groups website is accessible in many countries with different legal requirements.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Each of the directors the names and functions of whom are set out on pages 64 and 65 confirms that to the best of their knowledge they have complied with the above requirements in preparing the financial statements in accordance with applicable accounting standards and that the financial statements give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and result of the Group.
In addition each of the directors confirms that the strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Having taken advice from the Audit Committee the Board considers the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and that it provides the information necessary for the shareholders to assess the Groups and Companys performance business model and strategy.
Signed on behalf of the Board Alison Brittain Chief Executive Nicholas Cadbury Group Finance Director Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 104
Independent auditors report to the members of Whitbread PLC Opinion on financial statements of Whitbread plc In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 2 March 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice involving FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The financial statements that we have audited comprise the Consolidated income statement the Consolidated statement of comprehensive income the Consolidated and parent Company statements of changes in equity the Consolidated and parent Company balance sheets the Consolidated cash flow statement and the related notes 1 to 30 of the Consolidated financial statements and notes 1 to 10 of the parent Company financial statements including the Accounting Policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Parent Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Going concern and the directors assessment of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within the directors report on page 102 and the directors statement on the longerterm viability of the Group contained within the strategic report on page 58.
Summary of our audit approach Key risks The key risks that we identified in the current year were revenue recognition valuation of the defined benefit obligation and classification and presentation of nonunderlying items.
Within this report any new risks are identified with and any risks which are the same as the prior year are identified with .
Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 26.0m which was determined on the basis of 5% of profit before tax.
Scoping We focused our Group audit scope primarily on all significant trading entities at both Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa and the Group head office.
These locations represent the principal business units and account for 99% of the Groups revenue 101% of the Groups profit before tax and 97% of the Groups net assets.
Significant changes in our approach In the current year we have included a risk surrounding the classification and presentation of nonunderlying items due to an increased number of adjusting items and the judgement and complexity in accounting for the restructuring sale and leaseback transactions and the costs incurred in exiting the Premier Inn operations in South East Asia and India.
The risk of management override of controls has been removed in the current period as this had a lower effect on the allocation of resources in the second year of our audit.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors confirmation on page 58 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages 58 to 61 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors statement within the directors report on page 102 about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements and the directors explanation on page 58 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We confirm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 105 Revenue recognition Risk  Revenue recognition As described in the Accounting policies and Revenue disclosures in notes 2 and 3 to the financial statements the Group generates revenues from three revenue streams totalling 3106.0m in the current year 201516 2921.8m.
The main revenue streams comprise a high volume of low level transactions from accommodation sale of services restaurant and food and beverage sales sale of goods.
There are manual adjustments made to revenue outside of core transactional processes for example in respect of reclassifications other income streams loyalty schemes and franchise income which represent the key areas of focus for the audit due to their significance and certain estimates required in accounting for these items e. schemes and deferred revenues for franchisees.
How the scope of our audit responded to the risk We have performed the following procedures to address this audit risk profiled the manual journal entries posted to revenue assessed the impact of these on revenue and tested a sample of these journal entries by verifying to supporting documentation to confirm the entry was valid and appropriate for loyalty schemes tested the redemption rate calculation agreed the number of loyalty points outstanding to third party evidence and reperformed the liability calculation and for franchise income recalculated the deferred revenue with reference to agreements with franchisees.
We also performed the following procedures to test the revenue balance controls testing tested the controls over revenue including those in the IT systems that support the recording of revenue analytical reviews performed substantive analytical procedures on the major revenue streams with reference to store and hotel and restaurant data and tests of detail utilised analytical software to perform substantive tests of detail for a sample of the revenue balance by reconciling source data for each sample to the general ledger and cash receipts.
Key observations Following our audit procedures we found that revenue had been recorded appropriately.
Valuation of the defined benefit obligation Risk description As described in the Audit Committee report on page 73 the Accounting Policies note 2 and the Retirement Benefits note note 29 the Group has a defined benefit pension scheme which is closed to new members and to future accrual.
At 2 March 2017 the Group recorded a net retirement obligation of 425.1m 2016 288.1m including 2808.2m of liabilities 2016 2220.4m and 2383.1m of assets 2016 1932.3m.
The pension valuation is dependent on market conditions and key assumptions made in particular relating to investment markets discount rate inflation expectations and life expectancy assumptions.
The setting of these assumptions is complex and requires the exercise of significant management judgement with the support of third party actuaries.
As such it continues to represent a key audit risk.
Independence
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also confirm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
Our assessment of risks of material misstatement The assessed risks of material misstatement described below are those that had the greatest effect on our audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
In the current year we have included a risk surrounding the presentation and classification of nonunderlying items due to the judgement and complexity in accounting for certain of these items.
The risk of management override of controls has been removed in the current period as this had a lower effect on the allocation of resource in the second year of our audit.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 106
Independent auditors report to the members of Whitbread PLC continued Valuation of the defined benefit obligation How the scope of our audit responded to the risk To address this audit risk we have performed the following procedures Actuarial assumptions engaged our internal pension specialists to review the key assumptions used and considered the methodology utilised to derive these assumptions.
Futhermore we have benchmarked these assumptions against external market data to assess their appropriateness in calculating the scheme assets and liabilities and Reviewed the disclosures in the financial statements considering the IAS 19 report prepared by the actuary.
Key observations From the work completed we are satisfied that the methodology and assumptions applied in relation to determining the pension valuation are appropriate.
Classification and presentation of nonunderlying items Risk description As described in the Audit Committee report on page 73 and the Accounting Policies note 2 the recognition and presentation of income and costs within adjusted performance measures APMs to derive Underlying profit before tax under IFRS is judgemental with IFRS only requiring the separate presentation of material items.
Judgement is exercised by management in determining the classification of items as nonunderlying.
In addition the accounting for certain of these items is more complex this year.
As such it has been recognised as a key area of audit focus.
In the current year adjustments totalling 49.8m 201516 58.6m have been made to statutory profit before tax to derive underlying profit before tax of 565.2m 201516 546.3m.
The definition of underlying is described in the Accounting Policies Note 2 and the reconciliation between statutory profit before tax and underlying profit before tax is included in note 6 to the financial statements.
The most significant items classified as nonunderlying in 201617 are Premier Inn India and South East Asia business exit of 30.0m UK Restructuring costs of 21.6m Costa international restructuring of 14.5m Impairment of property plant and equipment net of reversals of 7.5m and Property plant and equipment disposals and property reversions resulting in a gain of 19.3m.
How the scope of our audit responded to the risk We have performed the following procedures to address this audit risk Classification as nonunderlying evaluated the appropriateness of the inclusion of items both individually and in aggregate within nonunderlying profits including assessing the consistency of items included year on year and compliance with the accounting policies.
In addition we also assessed oneoff items identified through the course of the audit but which had been recognised within underlying profit before tax and For each of the items identified above obtained and assessed managements accounting papers and considered the judgements and assumptions used in these.
For each of these agreed on a sample basis to supporting evidence where possible recalculated the provisions in place where relevant and understood and challenged the key assumptions applied by management through benchmarking recalculation and agreement to third party support e.
For the disclosures reviewed the consistency of the presentation of nonunderlying measures throughout the Annual Report and the information included in note 6 to the financial statements.
Key observations From the work performed we are satisfied that the items recognised within nonunderlying have been appropriately accounted for and that their presentation is in line with the definition included within the accounting policies and consistent with prior year.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 107 At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
The Group audit team followed a programme of planned visits that has been designed so that a senior member of the audit team visits each of the locations where the Group audit scope was focused at least once every two years and the most significant of them at least once a year.
In the current year we performed testing in the UK for Premier Inn UK Costa UK and the Group audit and visited Costa Poland.
In years where we do not visit a significant component we will include the component audit team in our team briefing discuss their risk assessment attend their closing meeting and review documentation of the findings from their work.
Revenue
Profit before tax
Full scope audit 3076.6 522.3 2441.0
Total 3106.0 515.4 2524.8 We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 1.3m 2016 0.5m as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Based on that assessment we focused our Group audit scope primarily on the audit work at four components Premier Inn and Restaurants UK Costa UK Costa Poland and Costa Shanghai.
These were subject to a full audit where the extent of our testing was based on our assessment of the risks of material misstatement and of the materiality of the Groups operations at those locations.
These locations represent the principal business units and together account for 99% of the Groups revenue 101% of the Groups profit before tax and 97% of the Groups net assets.
They were also selected to provide an appropriate basis for undertaking audit work to address the risk of material misstatement identified above.
Group materiality m
Audit Committee reporting threshold
Group Materiality Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows
2016 25.0m Basis for determining materiality 5% of profit before tax of 515.4m 2016 487.7m was used to determine our materiality in the current year.
This is consistent with the prior year.
Rationale for the benchmark applied In determining our final materiality based on our professional judgement we have considered profit before tax to be the most appropriate measure for business performance.
The materiality applied also represents 5% of profit before tax less than 1% of revenue and 1% of equity.
Governance Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 108
Independent auditors report to the members of Whitbread PLC continued Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Corporate Governance Statement
Under the Listing Rules we are also required to review part of the
Corporate Governance Statement
Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
Our duty to read other information in the Annual Report Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the annual report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the directors statement that they consider the annual report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the Annual Report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We confirm that we have not identified any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
We also comply with International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are effective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the parent Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the annual report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Nicola Mitchell FCA Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor
24 April 2017
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 109 Consolidated accounts 201617 110 Consolidated income statement 111 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 112 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 113 Consolidated balance sheet 114 Consolidated cash flow statement 115 Notes to the consolidated financial statements Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 110 Consolidated accounts Consolidated income statement Year ended 2 March 2017
52 weeks to 2 March 53 weeks to 3 March Revenue 3 4 3106.0 2921.8 Operating costs 5 2557.2 2397.9 Operating profit before joint ventures and associate 548.8 523.9 Share of profit from joint ventures 15 3.2 3.3 Share of profit from associate 0.7 0.9 Operating profit 552.7 528.1 Finance costs 8 37.6 41.2 Finance revenue 8 0.3 0.8 Profit before tax 4 515.4 487.7 Analysed as Underlying profit before tax 4 565.2 546.3 Nonunderlying items 6 49.8 58.6 Profit before tax 4 515.4 487.7 Tax expense 99.5 100.4 Analysed as Underlying tax expense 9 119.1 116.1 Nonunderlying tax credit 6 19.6 15.7 Tax expense 9 99.5 100.4 Profit for the year 415.9 387.3 Attributable to Parent shareholders 421.6 391.2 Noncontrolling interest 5.7 3.9 Earnings per share Note 10 52 weeks to 2 March pence 53 weeks to 3 March pence Earnings per share Diluted 230.89 214.00 Underlying earnings per share Diluted 245.95 236.82 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 111 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Year ended 2 March 2017
52 weeks to 2 March 53 weeks to 3 March Profit for the year 415.9 387.3 Items that will not be reclassified to the income statement Remeasurement lossgain on defined benefit pension scheme 29 214.8 201.6 Current tax on pensions 9 15.6 14.7 Deferred tax on pensions 9 26.7 55.4 Deferred tax change in rate of corporation tax on pensions 9 3.1 0.7 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to the income statement Net lossgain on cash flow hedges 23 0.2 6.5 Current tax on cash flow hedges 9 0.5 0.9 Deferred tax on cash flow hedges 9 0.6 0.4 Deferred tax change in rate of corporation tax on cash flow hedges 9 0.1 0.1 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 22.9 7.1 Other comprehensive lossincome for the year net of tax 153.1 172.4 Total comprehensive income for the year net of tax 262.8 559.7 Attributable to Parent shareholders 268.4 563.5 Noncontrolling interest 5.6 3.8 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 112 Consolidated accounts Consolidated statement of changes in equity Year ended 2 March 2017
Note 25
Note 26
Note 26
Note 26
Note 26
Note 26
Non controlling interest
At 26 February 2015 149.8 59.2 12.3 3833.0 1.4 2080.9 1972.0 5.9 1977.9 Profit for the year    391.2   391.2 3.9 387.3 Other comprehensive income    158.8 7.0 6.5 172.3 0.1 172.4 Total comprehensive income    550.0 7.0 6.5 563.5 3.8 559.7 Ordinary shares issued 0.2 3.4     3.6  3.6 Loss on ESOT shares issued    6.7  6.7 Accrued sharebased payments    17.3   17.3  17.3 Tax rate change on historical revaluation    1.3   1.3  1.3 Equity dividends    155.1   155.1  155.1 At 3 March 2016 150.0 62.6 12.3 4239.8 5.6 2067.7 2402.6 2.1 2404.7 Profit for the year    421.6   421.6 5.7 415.9 Other comprehensive loss    175.8 22.8 0.2 153.2 0.1 153.1 Total comprehensive income    245.8 22.8 0.2 268.4 5.6 262.8 Ordinary shares issued 0.2 5.4     5.6  5.6 Loss on ESOT shares issued    6.4  6.4 Accrued sharebased payments    17.7   17.7  17.7 Tax on sharebased payments    0.4   0.4  0.4 Tax rate change on historical revaluation    0.7   0.7  0.7 Equity dividends    167.1   167.1  167.1 At 2 March 2017 150.2 68.0 12.3 4330.9 28.4 2061.5 2528.3 3.5 2524.8 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 113 Consolidated balance sheet At 2 March 2017
2 March 3 March
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 12 275.7 258.1 Property plant and equipment 13 3972.4 3831.0 Investment in joint ventures 15 53.0 39.5 Derivative financial instruments 23 43.3 21.6 Trade and other receivables 17 6.8 7.7 4351.2 4157.9 Current assets Inventories 16 48.2 44.8 Derivative financial instruments 23 12.3 3.2 Trade and other receivables 17 163.6 140.0 Cash and cash equivalents 18 63.0 57.1 Assets held for sale 13 15 50.5 2.3 Total assets 4 4688.8 4405.3
Current liabilities Borrowings 19 157.4 94.0 Provisions 21 36.3 14.7 Derivative financial instruments 23 2.3 4.4 Current tax liabilities 9 45.9 41.2 Trade and other payables 24 596.9 538.2 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 19 795.6 872.9 Provisions 21 12.3 22.7 Derivative financial instruments 23 8.3 9.6 Deferred tax liabilities 9 62.0 94.7 Pension liability 29 425.1 288.1 Trade and other payables 24 21.9 20.1 1325.2 1308.1 Total liabilities 4 2164.0 2000.6 Net assets 4 2524.8 2404.7
Share capital 25 150.2 150.0 Share premium 26 68.0 62.6 Capital redemption reserve 26 12.3 12.3 Retained earnings 26 4330.9 4239.8 Currency translation reserve 26 28.4 5.6 Other reserves 26 2061.5 2067.7 Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent 2528.3 2402.6 Noncontrolling interest 3.5 2.1 Total equity 2524.8 2404.7 Alison Brittain Nicholas Cadbury Chief Executive Finance Director 24 April 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 114 Consolidated accounts Consolidated cash flow statement Year ended 2 March 2017
52 weeks to 2 March 53 weeks to 3 March Profit for the year 415.9 387.3 Adjustments for Tax expense 9 99.5 100.4 Net finance cost 8 37.3 40.4 Share of profit from joint ventures 15 3.2 3.3 Share of profit from associate 0.7 0.9 Net gainloss on disposal of property plant and equipment and property reversions 6 16.3 20.9 Net gain on disposal of investment in associate 6 11.8 Depreciation and amortisation 12 13 220.1 197.6 Impairment of property plant and equipment intangible assets and investments 14 15 30.0 5.4 Restructuring provisions created 21 28.0 Sharebased payments 28 17.7 17.3 Other noncash items 8.6 5.6 Cash generated from operations before working capital changes 825.1 770.7 Increase in inventories 3.1 7.6 Increase in trade and other receivables 7.1 15.2 Increase in trade and other payables 45.2 34.3 Cash generated from operations 860.1 782.2 Payments against provisions 21 22.3 15.1 Pension payments 29 90.3 84.3 Interest paid 34.9 25.6 Interest received 0.3 0.6 Corporation taxes paid 86.8 85.1 Net cash flows from operating activities 626.1 572.7 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 4 571.2 680.3 Investment in intangible assets 4 38.6 35.4 Proceedscosts from disposal of property plant and equipment 192.9 0.2 Proceeds from disposal of investment in associate 14.1 Business combinations net of cash acquired  9.2 Capital contributions and loans to joint ventures 7.7 3.0 Dividends from associate 0.4 0.8 Net cash flows from investing activities 410.1 727.3 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital 5.6 3.6 Increase in shortterm borrowings 20 17.6 20.8 Proceeds from longterm borrowings 20  445.2 Repayments of longterm borrowings 20 67.4 101.9 Renegotiation costs of longterm borrowings 20 0.6 3.6 Dividends paid 11 167.1 155.1 Net cash flows from financing activities 211.9 209.0 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 20 4.1 54.4 Opening cash and cash equivalents 20 57.1 2.1 Foreign exchange differences 20 1.8 0.6 Closing cash and cash equivalents 18 63.0 57.1 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 115 Notes to the consolidated financial statements At 2 March 2017 1 Authorisation of consolidated financial statements The consolidated financial statements of Whitbread PLC for the year ended 2 March 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 24 April 2017.
Whitbread PLC is a public limited company incorporated and fully domiciled in England and Wales.
The Companys ordinary shares are traded on the London Stock Exchange.
The address of the registered office is given on page 172.
The significant activities of the Group are described in Note 4 Segment information and in the strategic report on pages 4 to 61.
2 Accounting policies Basis of accounting and preparation The consolidated financial statements of Whitbread PLC and all its subsidiaries have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted for use in the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for certain financial instruments that are measured at fair values at the end of each reporting period and the defined benefit pension scheme as explained in the accounting policies below.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
Further detail is contained in the viability statement included in the strategic report on page 58.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest hundred thousand except when otherwise indicated.
The financial year represents the 52 weeks to 2 March 2017 prior financial year 53 weeks to 3 March 2016.
The accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements are consistent with those followed in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended 3 March 2016 except for the adoption of the new standards and interpretations that are applicable for the year ended 2 March 2017.
The significant accounting policies adopted are set out below.
The Group has adopted the following standards and interpretations which have been assessed as having no financial impact or disclosure requirements at this time The IASBs annual improvement process 20122014 IAS 1 Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS 1 IAS 16 and IAS 38 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation  Amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 38 IAS 16 and IAS 41 Bearer Plants  Amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 41 IAS 27 Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements  Amendments to IAS 27 IFRS 10 IFRS 12 and IAS 28 Investment Entities Applying the Consolidation Exception  Amendments to IFRS 10 IFRS 12 and IAS 28 and IFRS 11 Accounting for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations  Amendments to IFRS 11.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the accounts of Whitbread PLC and all its subsidiaries together with the Groups share of the net assets and results of joint ventures and associate incorporated using the equity method of accounting.
These are adjusted where appropriate to conform to Group accounting policies.
The financial statements of significant trading subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting year as the parent Company except for Yueda Costa Shanghai Food and Beverage Management Company Limited which has a yearend of 31 December as per Chinese legislation.
A subsidiary is an entity controlled by the Group.
Control is the power to direct the relevant activities of the subsidiary which significantly affect the subsidiarys return so as to have rights to the variable return from its activities.
Apart from the acquisition of Whitbread Group PLC by Whitbread PLC in 200001 which was accounted for using merger accounting acquisitions by the Group are accounted for under the acquisition method and any goodwill arising is capitalised as an intangible asset.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the consolidated financial statements from or up to the date that control passes respectively.
All intraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
Significant accounting policies
Goodwill arising on acquisition is capitalised and represents the excess of the fair value of consideration over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities of a subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
On disposal of a subsidiary the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 116 Consolidated accounts Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 2 Accounting policies continued Intangible assets Intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Intangible assets acquired separately from a business are carried initially at cost.
An intangible asset acquired as part of a business combination is recognised outside of goodwill if the asset is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights and its fair value can be measured reliably.
Amortisation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated life of the asset as follows trading licences have an indefinite life reacquired franchise rights are amortised over the life of the acquired franchise agreement IT software and technology is amortised over periods of three to six years acquired customer relationships are amortised over 15 years and operating rights agreements are amortised over the life of the contract.
The carrying values are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that they may not be recoverable.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost or deemed cost at transition to IFRS less accumulated depreciation and any impairment in value.
Gross interest costs incurred on the financing of qualifying assets are capitalised until the time that the assets are available for use.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the asset as follows freehold land is not depreciated freehold and long leasehold buildings are depreciated to their estimated residual values over periods up to 50 years and plant and equipment is depreciated over three to 30 years.
The residual values are reviewed annually.
The carrying values of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable.
Any impairment in the values of property plant and equipment is charged to the income statement.
Profits and losses on disposal of property plant and equipment reflect the difference between net selling price and carrying amount at the date of disposal and are recognised in the income statement.
Payments made on entering into or acquiring leaseholds that are accounted for as operating leases are amortised on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Impairment
The Group assesses assets or groups of assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable.
Individual assets are grouped for impairment assessment purposes at the lowest level at which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets cash generating units or CGUs.
If such indication of impairment exists or when annual impairment testing for an asset group is required the Group makes an estimate of the recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of an asset or CGU is the greater of its fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash inflows the recoverable amount is determined with reference to the CGU to which the asset belongs.
Impairment losses are recognised in the consolidated income statement within operating costs.
An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or CGU exceeds its estimated recoverable amount.
Impairment losses recognised in respect of CGUs are allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the units and then to reduce the carrying amounts of other assets in the CGU on a prorata basis.
An assessment is made at each reporting date as to whether there is any indication that previously recognised impairment losses may no longer exist or may have decreased.
If such an indication exists the CGUs recoverable amount is estimated.
A previously recognised impairment loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the estimated future cash flows used to determine the assets recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised.
If that is the case the carrying amount of the asset is increased to its recoverable amount.
That increased amount cannot exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
Such a reversal is recognised in the income statement.
After such a reversal the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to allocate the assets carrying amount less any residual value on a straightline basis over its remaining useful life.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 117 2 Accounting policies continued For the purposes of impairment testing all centrally held assets are allocated in line with IAS 36 to CGUs based on managements view of the consumption of the asset.
Any resulting impairment is recorded against the centrally held asset.
Goodwill and intangible assets Goodwill acquired through business combinations is allocated to groups of CGUs at the level management monitor goodwill which is at strategic business unit level.
The Group performs an annual review of its goodwill to ensure that its carrying amount is not greater than its recoverable amount.
In the absence of a comparable recent market transaction that demonstrates that the fair value less the costs of disposal of goodwill and intangible assets exceeds their carrying amount the recoverable amount is determined from value in use calculations.
An impairment is then made to reduce the carrying amount to the recoverable amount.
Property plant and equipment For the purposes of the impairment review of property plant and equipment the Group considers each trading outlet to be a separate CGU.
The carrying values of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Consideration is also given where appropriate to the market value of the asset either from independent sources or in conjunction with an accepted industry valuation methodology.
Investments in joint ventures The Group assesses investments for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If any such indication of impairment exists the carrying amount of the investment is compared with its recoverable amount.
Where the carrying amount exceeds the recoverable amount the investment is written down to its recoverable amount.
Assets held for sale Noncurrent assets and disposal groups are classified as held for sale only if available for immediate sale in their present condition and a sale is highly probable and expected to be completed within one year from the date of classification.
Such assets are measured at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less the cost to sell and are not depreciated or amortised.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is calculated on the basis of first in first out and net realisable value is the estimated selling price less any costs to sell.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Provisions are discounted to present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability.
The amortisation of the discount is recognised as a finance cost.
Onerous contracts Present obligations arising under onerous contracts are recognised and measured as provisions.
An onerous contract is considered to exist where the Group has a contract under which the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations under the contract exceed the economic benefits expected to be received under it.
Warranties
Provisions for the expected costs of warranty obligations arising on the acquisition or disposal of a business are recognised at the date of the relevant transaction at the directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the Groups obligation.
Restructuring costs A restructuring provision is recognised when the Group has developed a detailed formal plan and has raised a valid expectation in those affected that it will carry out the restructuring by starting to implement the plan or announcing its main features to those affected by it.
The measurement of a restructuring provision includes only the direct expenditures arising from the restructuring which are those amounts that are both necessarily entailed by the restructuring and not associated with the ongoing activities of the entity.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 118 Consolidated accounts 2 Accounting policies continued Nonunderlying items and use of underlying performance measures We use a range of measures to monitor the financial performance of the Group.
These measures include both statutory measures in accordance with IFRS and alternative performance measures APMs which are consistent with the way that the business performance is measured internally.
The term underlying profit is not defined under IFRS and may not be comparable with similarly titled profit measures reported by other companies.
It is not intended to be a substitute for or superior to statutory measurements of profit.
Underlying measures of profitability are nonIFRS because they exclude amounts that are included in or include amounts that are excluded from the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS.
We report underlying measures because we believe they provide both management and investors with useful additional information about the financial performance of the Groups businesses.
Underlying measures of profitability represent the equivalent IFRS measures adjusted for specific items that we consider hinder comparison of the financial performance of the Groups businesses either from one period to another or with other similar businesses.
The face of the income statement presents underlying profit before tax and reconciles this to profit before tax.
Underlying earnings per share is calculated using underlying profit after tax attributable to parent shareholders.
The adjustments made to reported profit in the consolidated income statement in order to derive our underlying results may include Profit or loss on disposal of property plant and equipment property reversions and onerous leases.
On occasion we may dispose of properties either as part of a sale and leaseback transaction or because the property is no longer required in our ongoing business.
In addition the Group may recognise liabilities in respect of lease obligations on properties which have been previously disposed of but where the lease obligations have reverted to the Group under privity.
Profits or losses on these items may be significant and are not reflective of the Groups ongoing trading results Profit or loss on the sale of a business or investment.
These disposals are not part of the Groups ongoing trading business and are therefore excluded Significant oneoff restructuring costs resulting from a strategic review of the Groups businesses or operations the inclusion of which would distort the year on year comparability of the Groups trading results Impairment of assets as the result of restructuring or closure of a business and impairment of sites which are underperforming or are to be closed the inclusion of which would distort the yearonyear comparability of the Groups trading results Amortisation of intangible assets recognised as part of a business combination or other transaction outside of the ordinary course of business Finance chargecredit for defined benefit pension scheme.
These costs are noncash and do not relate to the Groups ongoing activities as the scheme is closed to future accrual Finance costs resulting from the unwinding of discounts on provisions created in respect of nonunderlying items and Significant and oneoff tax settlements in respect of prior years including the related interest and the impact of changes in the statutory tax rate the inclusion of which would distort year on year comparability as well as the tax impact of the nonunderlying items identified above.
Foreign currency translation Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rates of exchange quoted at the balance sheet date.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates as at the dates of the initial transactions.
Trading results are translated into the functional currency generally sterling at average rates of exchange for the year.
Daytoday transactions in a foreign currency are recorded in the functional currency at an average rate for the month in which those transactions take place which is used as a reasonable approximation to the actual transaction rate.
Translation differences on monetary items are taken to the income statement.
The differences that arise from translating the results of foreign entities at average rates of exchange and their assets and liabilities at closing rates are also dealt with in a separate component of equity.
On disposal of a foreign entity the deferred cumulative amount recognised in equity relating to that particular foreign operation is recognised in the income statement.
All other currency gains and losses are dealt with in the income statement.
A number of subsidiaries within the Group have a nonsterling functional currency.
The financial performance and end position of these entities are translated into sterling in the consolidated financial statements.
Balance sheet items are translated at the rate applicable at the balance sheet date.
Transactions reported in the income statement are translated using an average rate for the month in which they occur.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 119 2 Accounting policies continued Revenue recognition Revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of the goods or services provided have transferred to the buyer the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the Group.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration receivable from the sale of goods and services to third parties after deducting discounts allowances for customer loyalty and other promotional activities.
Revenue includes duties which the Group pays as principal but excludes amounts collected on behalf of other parties such as value added tax.
All sales between Group businesses are eliminated on consolidation.
Revenue of the Group comprises the following streams Sale of goods Revenue from the sale of food beverages and merchandise is recognised at the point of sale with the exception of wholesale transactions which are recognised on delivery.
The Group operate some customer loyalty programmes.
Where award credits are granted as part of a sale transaction a portion of revenue equal to the fair value of the award points earned is deferred until redemption.
The fair value of points awarded is determined with reference to the discount received upon redemption and the level of redemption Rendering of services Revenue from room sales and other guest services is recognised when rooms are occupied and as services are provided and Franchise fees Revenue from fees received in connection with the franchise of the Groups brand names is recognised when earned.
Leases
Leases where the lessor retains substantially all the risks and benefits of ownership of the asset are classified as operating leases.
Rental payments in respect of operating leases are charged against operating profit on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Lease incentives are recognised as a reduction of rental costs over the lease term.
Finance revenue Interest income is recognised as the interest accrues using the effective interest method.
Borrowing costs Borrowing costs are recognised as an expense in the period in which they are incurred except for gross interest costs incurred on the financing of major projects which are capitalised until the time that the projects are available for use.
Retirement benefits In respect of the defined benefit pension scheme the obligation recognised in the balance sheet represents the present value of the defined benefit obligation reduced by the fair value of the scheme assets.
The cost of providing benefits is determined using the projected unit credit actuarial valuation method.
Remeasurements are recognised in full in the period in which they occur in the statement of comprehensive income and are not reclassified to the income statement in subsequent periods.
For defined benefit plans the employers portion of the past and current service cost is charged to operating profit with net interest costs reported within finance costs.
In addition all administration costs other than those relating to the management of plan assets or taxes payable by the plan itself are charged as incurred to operating costs in the income statement.
Net interest is calculated by applying the opening discount rate to the opening net defined benefit obligation taking into account the expected contributions and benefits paid.
Curtailments and settlements relating to the Groups defined benefit plan are recognised in the period in which the curtailment or settlement occurs.
Payments to defined contribution pension schemes are charged as an expense as they fall due.
Sharebased payment transactions Equitysettled transactions Certain employees and directors of the Group receive equitysettled remuneration in the form of sharebased payment transactions whereby employees render services in exchange for shares or rights over shares.
The cost of these equity settled transactions is measured by reference to the fair value determined using a stochastic model at the date at which they are granted.
The cost of equitysettled transactions is recognised together with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the performance conditions or nonvesting conditions are fulfilled ending on the relevant vesting date.
Except for awards subject to marketrelated conditions for vesting the cumulative expense recognised for equitysettled transactions at each reporting date until the vesting date reflects the extent to which the vesting period has expired and is adjusted to reflect the directors best available estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
The income statement charge or credit for a period represents the movement in cumulative expense recognised as at the beginning and end of that period.
If options are subject to marketrelated conditions awards are not cumulatively adjusted for the likelihood of these targets being met.
Instead these conditions are included in the fair value of the awards.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately.
Where an equitysettled award is forfeited the related expense recognised to date is reversed.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 120 Consolidated accounts 2 Accounting policies continued Cashsettled transactions The cost is fairvalued at grant date and expensed over the period until the vesting date with recognition of a corresponding liability.
The liability is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date up to and including the settlement date with changes in fair value recognised in the income statement for the period.
Tax
The income tax charge represents both the income tax payable based on profit for the year and deferred income tax.
Deferred income tax is recognised in full using the liability method in respect of temporary differences between the tax base of the Groups assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts that have originated but have not been reversed by the balance sheet date.
No deferred tax is recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.
Deferred income tax is recognised in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in associates and interests in joint ventures except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Income tax is charged or credited to other comprehensive income if it relates to items that are charged or credited to other comprehensive income.
Similarly income tax is charged or credited directly to equity if it relates to items that are charged or credited directly to equity.
Otherwise income tax is recognised in the income statement.
Treasury shares Own equity instruments which are held by the Group treasury shares are deducted from equity.
No gain or loss is recognised in the income statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of the Groups own equity instruments.
Investments in joint ventures and associates Investments in joint arrangements are classified as either joint operations or joint ventures depending on the contractual rights and obligations of each investor.
The Group has assessed the nature of its joint arrangements and determined them to be joint ventures.
Associates are all entities over which the Group has significant influence but not control generally accompanying a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
Investments in joint ventures and associates are initially recognised at cost being the fair value of the consideration given including acquisition charges associated with the investment.
After initial recognition investments in joint ventures and associates are accounted for using the equity method.
Recognition and derecognition of financial assets and liabilities The recognition of financial assets and liabilities occurs when the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
The derecognition of financial assets takes place when the Group no longer has the right to cash flows the risks and rewards of ownership or control of the asset.
The derecognition of financial liabilities occurs when the obligation under the liability is discharged cancelled or expires.
Financial assets Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Some assets held by the Group are classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss.
On initial recognition these assets are recognised at fair value.
Subsequent measurement is also at fair value with changes recognised through finance revenue or costs in the income statement.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market do not qualify as trading assets and have not been designated as either fair value through profit and loss or availableforsale.
Such assets are carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method if the time value of money is significant.
Gains and losses are recognised in the income statement when the loans and receivables are derecognised or impaired as well as through the amortisation process.
Trade receivables are recognised and carried at original invoice amount less any uncollectable amounts.
An estimate for doubtful debts is made when collection of the full amount is no longer probable.
Bad debts are written off when identified.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and shortterm deposits in the balance sheet comprise cash at bank cash in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purpose of the cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as defined above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 121 2 Accounting policies continued Derivative financial instruments The Group enters into derivative transactions with a view to managing interest and currency risks associated with underlying business activities and the financing of those activities.
Derivative financial instruments used by the Group are stated at fair value on initial recognition and at subsequent balance sheet dates.
The fair value of derivative instruments is calculated by discounting all future cash flows by the applicable market yield curves at the balance sheet date.
Cash flow hedges mitigate exposure to variability in cash flows that are either attributable to a particular risk associated with a recognised asset or liability or a forecast transaction.
Fair value hedges mitigate exposure to changes in the fair value of a recognised asset or liability or an unrecognised firm commitment and include foreign currency swaps.
Hedge accounting is only used where at the inception of the hedge there is formal designation and documentation of the hedging relationship it meets the Groups risk management objective strategy for undertaking the hedge and it is expected to be highly effective.
The portion of any gains or losses on cash flow hedges which meet the conditions for hedge accounting and are determined to be effective is recognised directly in the statement of comprehensive income.
The gains or losses relating to the ineffective portion are recognised immediately in the income statement.
The change in fair value of derivatives designated as part of a fair value hedge is recognised in the income statement in finance costs.
The change in the fair value of the hedged asset or liability that is attributable to the hedged risk is also recognised in the income statement within finance costs.
When a firm commitment that is hedged becomes an asset or a liability recognised on the balance sheet then at the time the asset or liability is recognised the associated gains or losses that had previously been recognised in equity are included in the initial measurement of the acquisition cost or other carrying amount of the asset or liability.
For all other cash flow hedges the gains or losses that are recognised in equity are transferred to the income statement in the same period in which the transaction that results from a firm commitment that is hedged affects the income statement.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
At that point in time for cash flow hedges any cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument recognised in equity is kept in equity until the forecast transaction occurs.
If a hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur the net cumulative gain or loss recognised in equity is transferred to the income statement.
When a fair value hedge item is derecognised the unamortised fair value is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Gains or losses arising from changes in the fair value of derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognised immediately in the income statement.
Borrowings
Borrowings are initially recognised at the fair value of the consideration received net of any directly associated issue costs.
Borrowings are subsequently recorded at amortised cost with any difference between the amount initially recorded and the redemption value recognised in the income statement using the effective interest method.
Significant accounting judgements and estimates The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported as assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date and the amounts reported as revenues and expenses during the year.
However the nature of estimation means that the actual outcomes could differ from those estimates.
In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies management has made the following judgements and estimates which have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements Key accounting judgements Residual values and asset lives The residual value is the net realisable value of an asset at the end of its useful economic life.
The Group has taken an assessment of the residual values that are appropriate for the business and reviews this assessment annually.
Note 13 provides details of the value of fixed assets capitalised.
Intangible asset capitalisation  IT software and technology assets The amount capitalised includes the total cost of any external products or services as well as any internal costs directly attributable to the development of the assets.
Management judgement is involved in determining whether projects meet the criteria for capitalisation.
Note 12 provides details of the value of IT software capitalised.
Nonunderlying items During the year certain items are identified and separately disclosed as nonunderlying.
Judgement is applied as to whether the item meets the necessary criteria as per the accounting policy disclosed earlier in this note.
Note 6 provides information on all of the items disclosed as nonunderlying in the current year financial statements.
Areas of estimation uncertainty
An impairment test of tangible and intangible assets is undertaken each year using both an EBITDA multiple and a discounted cash flow approach.
Note 14 describes the assumptions used together with an analysis of the sensitivity to changes in key assumptions.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 122 Consolidated accounts 2 Accounting policies continued Asset lives Asset lives are based upon managements estimation at the point of capitalisation.
Periodically these are reviewed to ensure that the estimated lives of the assets remain appropriate and if not the assets are relifed prospectively.
Notes 12 and 13 provide details on the depreciation and amortisation booked.
Defined benefit pension Defined benefit pension plans are accounted for in accordance with actuarial advice using the projected unit credit method.
Note 29 describes the assumptions used together with an analysis of the sensitivity to changes in key assumptions.
Restructuring provisions Restructuring costs are provided for using the best information available to management at the balance sheet date.
This includes estimates of future costs and judgements on the likely outcometiming of restructuring activities.
Note 21 provides details of the value of the provisions carried.
Taxation
The calculation of the Groups total tax charge necessarily involves a degree of estimation and judgement in respect of certain items where the tax treatment cannot be finally determined until resolution has been reached with the relevant tax authority.
The final resolution of some of these items may give rise to material income statement andor cash flow variances.
Corporation tax is calculated on the basis of income before taxation taking into account the relevant local tax rates and regulations.
For each operating entity the current income tax expense is calculated and differences between the accounting and tax base are determined resulting in deferred tax assets or liabilities.
Assumptions are made around the tax net book value of assets to which capital allowances apply the level of capital allowances the extent of rollover gains indexation thereon and the tax base into which they have been rolled.
Assumptions are also made around the assets which qualify for capital allowances and the level of disallowable expenses and these affect the income tax calculation.
Provisions may be made for uncertain exposures or recoveries which can have an impact on both deferred and current tax.
A deferred tax asset shall be recognised for the carry forward of unused tax losses pension deficits and unused tax credits to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the unused tax losses and unused tax credits can be utilised.
Details of the carrying value of corporation and deferred tax can be found in Note 9.
Standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB not effective for the current year and not early adopted by the Group The following standards and interpretations which have been issued by the IASB and are relevant for the Group subject to EU ratification become effective after the current yearend and have not been early adopted by the Group IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 Financial Instruments was issued in July 2014 and is a replacement of IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and
IFRS 9 covers the classification measurement and derecognition of financial assets and financial liabilities together with a new hedge accounting model and a new expected credit loss model for calculating impairment.
The new standard becomes effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 subject to EU adoption.
The Group has undertaken an initial impact assessment which indicates that the adoption of IFRS 9 will not have a material impact on its consolidated results and financial position.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers The IASB issued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers in May 2014.
The new standard provides a single fivestep revenue recognition model applicable to all sales contracts which is based upon the principle that revenue is recognised when control of goods or services is transferred to the customer.
It replaces all existing revenue recognition guidance under current IFRS and becomes effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 subject to EU adoption.
The
Group has undertaken an initial impact assessment which indicates that the adoption of IFRS 15 will not have a material impact on its consolidated result and financial position but is likely to result in additional disclosure requirements.
IFRS 16 Leases The IASB issued IFRS 16 Leases in January 2016.
The new standard provides a single lessee accounting model requiring lessees to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases unless the lease term is 12 months or less or the underlying asset has a low value.
It replaces the existing leasing Standard IAS 17 Leases and related Interpretations and becomes effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 subject to EU adoption.
The Group has determined that the application of IFRS 16 will have a material impact on its consolidated financial result and financial position.
This includes recognition of interest and amortisation expense in place of fixed rental expense in the income statement and the recognition of right of use assets and lease liabilities for its operating lease portfolio on the balance sheet.
There is no net cash flow impact on application of IFRS 16.
The Group is currently undertaking a detailed assessment to determine the full impact of IFRS 16 on its consolidated results and financial position.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 123 2 Accounting policies continued IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative  Amendment to IAS 7 The IASB issued the amendment in January 2016.
The improvements to disclosure relate to the statement of cash flows and require companies to provide information about changes in their financing liabilities.
This amendment is a response to requests from investors for information that helps them better understand changes in a companys debt.
The amendment will help investors to evaluate changes in liabilities arising from financing activities including changes from cash flows and noncash changes such as foreign exchange gains or losses and becomes effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017 subject to EU adoption.
The Group has determined that the impact of IAS 7 will be limited to disclosure and will have no impact on its consolidated result and financial position.
Whilst the following standards and interpretations are relevant to the Group they have been assessed as having minimal or no financial impact or additional disclosure requirements at this time IFRS 4 Applying IFRS 9 with IFRS 4 Insurance contracts  Amendments to IFRS 4 IFRS 14 Regulatory Deferral Accounts IAS 40 Amendments to IAS 40 Transfers of Investment Property IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Loss IFRS 2 Amendments to IFRS 2 IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Translations and Advance Consideration and The IASBs annual improvement process 20142016.
1 As the consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union the adoption date is as per the EU not the IASB.
3 Revenue An analysis of the Groups revenue is as follows Sale of goods 1717.2 1626.8 Rendering of services 1349.1 1260.0 Franchise fees 39.7 Revenue 3106.0 2921.8 4 Segment information For management purposes the Group is organised into two strategic business units Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa based upon their different products and services Premier Inn and Restaurants provide services in relation to accommodation and food and Costa generates income from the operation of its branded owned and franchised coffee outlets.
The UK and International Premier Inn and Restaurants segments have been aggregated on the grounds that the International segment is immaterial.
Management monitors the operating results of its strategic business units separately for the purpose of making decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance.
Segment performance is measured based on underlying operating profit.
Included within the unallocated and elimination columns in the tables below are the costs of running the public company.
The unallocated assets and liabilities are cash and debt balances held and controlled by the central treasury function taxation pensions certain property plant and equipment centrally held provisions and central working capital balances.
Intersegment revenue is from Costa to the Premier Inn and Restaurants segment and is eliminated on consolidation.
Transactions were entered into on an arms length basis in a manner similar to transactions with third parties.
The following tables present revenue and profit information and certain asset and liability information regarding business operating segments for the years ended 2 March 2017 and 3 March 2016.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 124 Consolidated accounts 4 Segment information continued Year ended 2 March 2017 Premier Inn and
Costa
Unallocated and elimination
Revenue
Revenue from external customers 1907.9 1198.1  3106.0 Intersegment revenue  3.6 3.6 Total revenue Note 3 1907.9 1201.7 3.6 3106.0 Underlying operating profit 468.0 158.0 33.6 592.4 Underlying net finance cost   27.2 27.2 Underlying profit before tax 468.0 158.0 60.8 565.2 Nonunderlying items Note 6 Net gainloss on disposal of property plant and equipment and property reversions 26.0 5.9 0.8 19.3 PI International business exit 30.0   30.0 Costa international restructuring  14.5  14.5 UK restructuring 15.6 5.9 0.1 21.6 Settlement of historic VAT claim  5.3  5.3 Net gain on disposal of investment in associate 11.8   11.8 Amortisation of acquired intangibles  2.5  2.5 Impairment net of reversals 2.9 4.6  7.5 IAS 19 income statement charge for pension finance cost   9.4 9.4 Unwinding of discount on provisions  0.2 0.5 0.7 Total nonunderlying items 10.7 28.3 10.8 49.8 Profit before tax 457.3 129.7 71.6 515.4 Tax expense Note 9 99.5 Profit for the year 415.9 Assets and liabilities Segment assets 4020.2 511.4  4531.6 Unallocated assets   157.2 157.2 Total assets 4020.2 511.4 157.2 4688.8 Segment liabilities 427.8 163.3  591.1 Unallocated liabilities   1572.9 1572.9 Total liabilities 427.8 163.3 1572.9 2164.0 Net assets 3592.4 348.1 1415.7 2524.8 Other segment information Share of profit from joint ventures Note 15 2.5 0.7  3.2 Share of profit from associate 0.7   0.7 Investment in joint ventures 41.0 12.0  53.0 Total property rent Note 5 139.8 121.4  261.2 Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment  cash basis 459.7 111.5  571.2 Property plant and equipment  accruals basis Note 13 455.7 121.5  577.2 Intangible assets Note 12 25.8 12.8  38.6 Depreciation  underlying 131.0 71.5  202.5 Amortisation  underlying 13.3 1.8  15.1 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 125 4 Segment information continued Year ended 3 March 2016 Premier Inn and
Costa
Unallocated and elimination
Revenue
Revenue from external customers 1822.0 1099.8  2921.8 Intersegment revenue  3.4 3.4 Total revenue Note 3 1822.0 1103.2 3.4 2921.8 Underlying operating profit 446.9 153.5 31.6 568.8 Underlying net finance cost   22.5 22.5 Underlying profit before tax 446.9 153.5 54.1 546.3 Nonunderlying items Note 6 Net loss on disposal of property plant and equipment and property reversions 0.4 5.5 15.0 20.9 Intangible assets accelerated amortisation 7.2 0.9 2.0 10.1 Amortisation of acquired intangibles  4.3  4.3 Impairment net of reversals 0.3 5.7  5.4 IAS 19 income statement charge for pension finance cost   17.2 17.2 Unwinding of discount on provisions   0.7 0.7 Total nonunderlying items 7.3 16.4 34.9 58.6 Profit before tax 439.6 137.1 89.0 487.7 Tax expense Note 9 100.4 Profit for the year 387.3 Assets and liabilities Segment assets 3842.2 444.4  4286.6 Unallocated assets   118.7 118.7 Total assets 3842.2 444.4 118.7 4405.3 Segment liabilities 366.4 136.8  503.2 Unallocated liabilities   1497.4 1497.4 Total liabilities 366.4 136.8 1497.4 2000.6 Net assets 3475.8 307.6 1378.7 2404.7 Other segment information Share of profit from joint ventures Note 15 3.3   3.3 Share of profit from associate 0.9   0.9 Investment in joint ventures 36.3 3.2  39.5 Total property rent Note 5 123.4 111.2 0.1 234.7 Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment  cash basis 581.0 99.3  680.3 Property plant and equipment  accruals basis Note 13 604.6 102.6  707.2 Intangible assets Note 12 32.2 3.2  35.4 Depreciation  underlying 112.0 59.4  171.4 Amortisation  underlying 9.0 2.7 0.1 11.8 Revenues from external customers are split geographically as follows United Kingdom 2985.0 2822.4 NonUnited Kingdom 121.0 99.4 3106.0 2921.8 1 United Kingdom UK revenue is revenue where the source of the supply is the UK.
This includes Costa franchise income invoiced from the UK.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 126 Consolidated accounts 4 Segment information continued Noncurrent assets are split geographically as follows United Kingdom 4123.4 3973.1 NonUnited Kingdom 184.5 163.2 4307.9 4136.3 1 Noncurrent assets exclude derivative financial instruments.
5 Operating costs Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 375.6 368.2 Employee benefits expense Note 7 793.3 737.1 Operating lease payments net of sublease receipts 262.7 235.9 Amortisation of intangible assets Note 12 17.6 16.1 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Note 13 202.5 171.4 Utilities rates and other site property costs 717.6 694.4 Net foreign exchange differences 0.5 0.3 Other operating charges 151.2 138.1 Nonunderlying items Note 6 2557.2 2397.9 1 Nonunderlying items excludes amortisation of acquired intangibles of 2.5m 201516 4.3m.
These amounts are included in amortisation of intangible assets.
Analysis of operating lease payments Minimum lease payments attributable to the current period 243.5 219.0 IAS 17  impact of future minimum rental uplifts 1.9 0.4 Minimum lease payments recognised as an operating expense 245.4 218.6 Contingent rents 15.8 16.1 Total property rent 261.2 234.7 Plant and machinery operating lease payments 3.5 3.4 Operating lease payments  sublease receipts 2.0 2.2 Total operating lease payments net of sublease receipts 262.7 235.9 Fees paid to the Groups auditor during the period consisted of Audit of the Groups financial statements 0.5 0.5 Audit of the Groups subsidiaries 0.3 0.3 Total audit fees 0.8 0.8 Audit related assurance 0.1 0.1 Other 0.1 Total nonaudit fees 0.2 0.1 Included in other operating charges 1.0 0.9 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 127 6 Nonunderlying items As set out in the policy in Note 2 we use a range of measures to monitor the financial performance of the Group.
These measures include both statutory measures in accordance with IFRS and APMs which are consistent with the way that the business performance is measured internally.
We report underlying measures because we believe they provide both management and investors with useful additional information about the financial performance of the Groups businesses.
Underlying measures of profitability represent the equivalent IFRS measures adjusted for specific items that we consider hinder the comparison of the financial performance of the Groups businesses either from one period to another or with other similar businesses.
Previously this note was reported as exceptional items and nonunderlying adjustments.
The definition and policy has been simplified in 201617 to refer to nonunderlying items only.
There has been no change in definition or metric and therefore presentation is reflected in the comparative disclosure without any restatement of values.
Nonunderlying items were as follows Operating costs Net gainloss on disposal of property plant and equipment and property reversions PI International business exit Costa international restructuring UK restructuring Settlement of historic VAT claim Net gain on disposal of investment in associate Intangible assets accelerated amortisation Amortisation of acquired intangibles Note 12 2.5 4.3 Impairment of property plant and equipment net of reversals Nonunderlying operating costs 39.7 40.7 Net finance costs IAS 19 pension finance cost Note 29 9.4 17.2 Unwinding of discount on provisions Nonunderlying net finance costs 10.1 17.9 Nonunderlying items before tax 49.8 58.6 Tax adjustments included in reported profit after tax but excluded in arriving at underlying profit after tax Tax on nonunderlying items 12.3 2.8 Nonunderlying tax items  tax base cost 2.1 0.1 Deferred tax relating to UK tax rate change Nonunderlying tax credit 19.6 15.7 1 During the year the Group made a net gain on asset disposals of 26.0m through three sale and leaseback transactions.
The balance relates to changes in onerous contract provisions in the UK of 2.4m Poland release of 0.4m and Singapore of 2.9m and minor disposals in the year of 1.8m.
2 On 13 July 2016 the Group announced its intention to exit hotel operations in South East Asia.
This has resulted in the recognition of impairment losses on assets of 11.0m investment in joint ventures of 0.9m and goodwill of 3.0m as well as the recognition of a restructuring provision of 15.1m for costs of exiting management agreements and closure of regional offices.
3 During the year Costa has undertaken a strategic review of its international operations.
This has led to the decision to exit its French equity business and to restructure its Chinese operations.
In France this has resulted in the recognition of impairment losses of 1.5m store closure costs of 0.8m and restructuring costs of 6.8m including a restructuring provision of 6.6m for redundancy and lease exit costs.
In China the review has led to impairment losses of 3.2m store closure costs of 1.6m and onerous lease provisions of 0.6m.
The restructure is ongoing and there are expected to be further closure costs in the next financial year.
The share attributable to the parent shareholders is 2.7m.
4 During the year the Group undertook significant operational reorganisation of support centre operations.
This restructuring has resulted in costs of 12.4m including staff redundancy and consultation costs asset impairments of 2.9m as well as the recognition of a restructuring provision of 6.3m covering staff redundancy and consultation costs.
5 During the year the Group received a refund on settlement of a historic VAT claim.
6 During the year the Group disposed of its investment in Morrison Street Hotel Limited resulting in a net gain of 11.8m.
7 Following a review of IT software and technology assets during the prior year additional amortisation of 10.1m was recognised in the income statement in respect of systems for which there was no future economic benefit.
8 Net impairment losses arising on sites which are to be closed or are underperforming.
Further details are provided in Note 14.
9 The finance cost arising from the unwinding of the discount rate within provisions is included in nonunderlying finance costs reflecting the nonunderlying nature of the provisions created.
10 Impact of the reduction in the main rate of UK corporation tax to 19% from 1 April 2017 and to 17% from 1 April 2020.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 128 Consolidated accounts 7 Employee benefits expense Wages and salaries 733.2 682.1 Social security costs 51.0 46.5 Pension costs 9.1 8.5 Included in wages and salaries is a sharebased payments expense of 17.7m 201516 17.3m which arises from transactions accounted for as equitysettled and cashsettled sharebased payments.
The average number of people directly employed in the business segments on a fulltime equivalent basis was as follows
Number
Premier Inn and Restaurants 27201 27115 Costa 14768 13990 Unallocated 75 70 Total operations 42044 41175 Excluded from the above are employees of joint ventures and associate undertakings.
Directors remuneration is disclosed below Directors remuneration 3.0 3.6 Aggregate contributions to the defined contribution pension scheme  0.1 Aggregate gains on the exercise of share options 3.8 10.1
Number
Number of directors accruing benefits under defined contribution schemes 2 2 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 129 8 Finance costsrevenue Finance costs Bank loans and overdrafts 5.3 5.3 Other loans 31.0 28.0 Interest capitalised Note 13 8.9 10.0 Impact of ineffective portion of cash flow and fair value hedges Note 23 0.1 Finance revenue Bank interest receivable 0.1 0.4 Other interest receivable 0.2 0.2 Impact of ineffective portion of cash flow and fair value hedges Note 23  0.2 Underlying net finance costs 27.2 22.5 Nonunderlying net finance costs IAS 19 pension finance cost Note 29 9.4 17.2 Unwinding of discount on provisions Note 21 0.7 0.7 Total net finance costs 37.3 40.4 Total finance costs 37.6 41.2 Total finance revenue 0.3 0.8 Total net finance costs 37.3 40.4 9 Taxation Consolidated income statement Current tax Current tax expense 111.6 116.1 Adjustments in respect of previous periods 1.7 8.0 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 6.0 2.9 Adjustments in respect of previous periods 0.8 8.2 Change in UK tax rate to 17% 201516 18% 5.2 13.0 Tax reported in the consolidated income statement 99.5 100.4 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Current tax Cash flow hedges 0.5 0.9 Pensions 15.6 14.7 Deferred tax Cash flow hedges 0.6 0.4 Pensions 26.7 55.4 Change in UK tax rate to 17% 201516 18%  pensions 3.1 0.7 Change in UK tax rate to 17% 201516 18%  cash flow hedges 0.1 0.1 Tax reported in other comprehensive income 39.0 42.8 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 130 Consolidated accounts 9 Taxation continued A reconciliation of the tax charge applicable to underlying profit before tax and profit before tax at the statutory tax rate to the actual tax charge at the Groups effective tax rate for the years ended 2 March 2017 and 3 March 2016 respectively is as follows 201617 201516 Tax on underlying profit Tax on profit Tax on underlying profit Tax on profit Profit before tax as reported in the consolidated income statement 565.2 515.4 546.3 487.7 Tax at current UK tax rate of 20% 201516 20.08% 113.0 103.1 109.7 98.0 Effect of different tax rates and unrecognised losses in overseas companies 4.3 8.3 3.5 5.1 Effect of joint ventures and associate 0.5 0.5 0.9 0.9 Expenditure not allowable 3.1 4.9 4.0 11.0 Adjustments to current tax expense in respect of previous years 2.1 1.6 8.0 8.0 Adjustments to deferred tax expense in respect of previous years 1.8 0.8 7.8 8.2 Impact of deferred tax being at a different rate from current tax rate 0.5 0.5 Impact of change in tax rate on deferred tax balance  5.2  13.0 Tax expense reported in the consolidated income statement 119.1 99.5 116.1 100.4 Current tax liability The corporation tax balance is a liability of 45.9m 2016 liability of 41.2m.
Deferred tax Deferred tax relates to the following
Consolidated income statement Deferred tax liabilities Accelerated capital allowances 44.0 48.7 4.7 3.3 Rolled over gains and property revaluations 68.1 73.3 4.5 8.0 Gross deferred tax liabilities 112.1 122.0 Deferred tax assets Pensions 53.1 28.7 0.7 2.2 Gross deferred tax assets 50.1 27.3 Deferred tax expense 10.4 7.7 Net deferred tax liability 62.0 94.7 Total deferred tax liabilities relating to disposals during the year were nil 2016 nil.
The Group has incurred overseas tax losses which subject to any local restrictions can be carried forward and offset against future taxable profits in the companies in which they arose.
The Group carries out an annual assessment of the recoverability of these losses and does not think it is appropriate at this stage to recognise any deferred tax asset.
If the Group were to recognise these deferred tax assets in their entirety profits would increase by 16.5m 2016 10.7m of which the share attributable to the parent shareholders is 13.9m 2016 8.9m.
At 2 March 2017 there was no recognised deferred tax liability 2016 nil for taxes that would be payable on any unremitted earnings as all such amounts are permanently reinvested or where they are not there are no corporation tax consequences of such companies paying dividends to parent companies.
Tax relief on total interest capitalised amounts to 1.8m 2016 2.0m.
Factors affecting the tax charge for future years The Finance No 2 Act 2015 reduced the main rate of UK corporation tax to 19% from 1 April 2017 and to 18% from 1 April 2020.
The effect of these rates was included in the financial statements in 201516.
The Finance Act 2016 further reduced the main rate of UK corporation tax to 17% with effect from 1 April 2020.
The effect of the new rate is a reduction of the deferred tax liability by a net of 2.7m comprising a credit of 5.2m to the income statement a charge of 3.2m to the statement of consolidated income and a reserves movement of 0.7m.
The rate changes will also impact the amount of the future cash tax payments to be made by the Group.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 131 10 Earnings per share The basic earnings per share EPS figures are calculated by dividing the net profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders therefore before noncontrolling interests by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year after deducting treasury shares and shares held by an independently managed employee share ownership trust ESOT.
The diluted earnings per share figures allow for the dilutive effect of the conversion into ordinary shares of the weighted average number of options outstanding during the year.
Where the average share price for the year is lower than the option price the options become antidilutive and are excluded from the calculation.
The number of such options was nil 2016 nil.
The numbers of shares used for the earnings per share calculations are as follows million million Basic weighted average number of ordinary shares 182.2 181.4 Effect of dilution  share options 0.4 1.4 Diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares 182.6 182.8 The total number of shares in issue at the yearend as used in the calculation of the basic weighted average number of ordinary shares was 195.4m less 12.1m treasury shares held by Whitbread PLC and 1.0m held by the ESOT 2016 195.2m less 12.6m treasury shares held by Whitbread PLC and 0.9m held by the ESOT.
The profits used for the earnings per share calculations are as follows Profit for the year attributable to parent shareholders 421.6 391.2 Nonunderlying items  gross 49.8 58.6 Nonunderlying items  taxation 19.6 15.7 Nonunderlying items  noncontrolling interest 2.7 1.2 Underlying profit for the year attributable to parent shareholders 449.1 432.9 pence pence Basic on profit for the year 231.39 215.66 Nonunderlying items  gross 27.33 32.30 Nonunderlying items  taxation 10.76 8.65 Nonunderlying items  noncontrolling interest 1.48 0.66 Basic on underlying profit for the year 246.48 238.65 Diluted on profit for the year 230.89 214.00 Diluted on underlying profit for the year 245.95 236.82 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 132 Consolidated accounts 11 Dividends paid and proposed 201617 201516 pence per share m pence per share m Final dividend proposed and paid relating to the prior year 61.85 112.6 56.95 103.4 Interim dividend proposed and paid for the current year 29.90 54.5 28.50 51.7 Total equity dividends paid in the year 167.1 155.1 Dividends on other shares B share dividend 0.80  0.80 C share dividend 0.80  0.80 Total dividends paid 167.1 155.1 Proposed for approval at Annual General Meeting Final equity dividend for the current year 65.90 120.1 61.85 112.4 A final dividend of 65.90p per share 2016 61.85p amounting to a dividend of 120.1m 2016 112.4m was recommended by the directors at their meeting on 24 April 2017.
A dividend reinvestment plan DRIP alternative will be offered.
These consolidated financial statements do not reflect this dividend payable.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 133 12 Intangible assets
Brand
Customer relationships IT software and technology
Total
Cost
At 26 February 2015 179.4 5.1 5.9 85.5 17.2 293.1 Additions    34.0 1.4 35.4 Businesses acquired 0.6     0.6 Assets written off  5.1  2.7  7.8 Foreign currency adjustment    0.2  0.2 Additions    38.6  38.6 Assets written off    29.9  29.9 Foreign currency adjustment 0.1   0.3 0.1 0.5 Amortisation and impairment At 26 February 2015  5.1 1.8 35.3 2.8 45.0 Amortisation during the year   0.4 22.0 3.8 26.2 Amortisation on assets written off  5.1  2.7  7.8 At 3 March 2016   2.2 54.6 6.6 63.4 Amortisation during the year   0.3 14.5 2.8 17.6 Amortisation on assets written off    29.9  29.9 Impairment Note 14 3.0   0.8  3.8 Foreign currency adjustment    0.1  0.1 At 2 March 2017 3.0  2.5 40.1 9.4 55.0 Net book value at 2 March 2017 177.1  3.4 85.9 9.3 275.7 Net book value at 3 March 2016 180.0  3.7 62.4 12.0 258.1 Included in the amortisation for the year is amortisation relating to acquired intangibles amounting to 2.5m 201516 4.3m and accelerated amortisation of IT software and technology assets of nil 201516 10.1m.
The carrying amount of goodwill allocated by segment is presented below Premier Inn and Restaurants 110.4 113.4 Costa 66.7 66.6 The carrying amount of goodwill at 2 March 2017 comprised 110.4m for Premier Inn and Restaurants and 66.7m for Costa.
The Premier Inn and Restaurants CGU and the Costa CGU are also operating segments and represent the lowest level within the Group at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
The customer relationships asset arose with the acquisition of Coffee Nation in a previous financial year.
It is being amortised over a period of 15 years.
IT software and technology assets have been assessed as having finite lives and are amortised under the straightline method over periods ranging from three to six years from the date the asset became fully operational.
Other intangibles comprise Costa overseas trading licences and territory fees reacquired franchise rights Costa Express operating rights agreements and development costs.
The trading licences which have a carrying value of 1.6m 2016 1.6m are deemed to have indefinite lives as there is no foreseeable limit to the period over which they are expected to contribute to the Groups net cash inflow.
The operating rights agreements are being amortised over ten years and have a carrying value of 0.2m 2016 0.2m.
Development costs have a carrying value of 1.9m 2016 2.6m and are being amortised over six years.
The reacquired franchise right arose from the acquisition of Life Coffee Cafes Limited in 201415 and is being amortised over five years and has a carrying value of 5.2m 2016 7.2m.
The balance of 0.4m 2016 0.4m relates to territory fees which are being amortised over 20 years.
Capital expenditure commitments Capital expenditure commitments in relation to intangible assets at the yearend amounted to 8.2m 2016 10.9m.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 134 Consolidated accounts 13 Property plant and equipment Land and buildings Plant and equipment
Cost
At 26 February 2015 2691.1 1261.4 3952.5 Additions 439.9 267.3 707.2 Businesses acquired 8.9 0.3 9.2 Interest capitalised 10.0  10.0 Reclassified 0.2 0.2 Assets written off 6.0 71.1 77.1 Foreign currency adjustment 4.0 2.2 6.2 Disposals 1.1 4.2 5.3 At 3 March 2016 3147.0 1455.7 4602.7 Additions 277.7 299.5 577.2 Interest capitalised 8.9  8.9 Reclassified 1.1 1.1 Assets written off 7.0 158.4 165.4 Foreign currency adjustment 15.5 7.6 23.1 Movements to held for sale in the year 64.7 8.0 72.7 Disposals 179.3 11.1 190.4 At 2 March 2017 3197.0 1586.4 4783.4 Depreciation and impairment At 26 February 2015 170.4 503.7 674.1 Depreciation charge for the year 19.2 152.2 171.4 Impairment Note 14 0.5 5.9 5.4 Reclassified 0.8 0.8 Depreciation on assets written off 6.0 71.1 77.1 Foreign currency adjustment 0.1 1.2 1.3 Disposals 0.7 2.7 3.4 At 3 March 2016 181.7 590.0 771.7 Depreciation charge for the year 28.5 174.0 202.5 Impairment Note 14 13.0 12.3 25.3 Depreciation on assets written off 7.0 158.4 165.4 Foreign currency adjustment 1.2 5.0 6.2 Movements to held for sale in the year 18.4 6.5 24.9 Disposals 0.7 3.7 4.4 At 2 March 2017 198.3 612.7 811.0 Net book value at 2 March 2017 2998.7 973.7 3972.4 Net book value at 3 March 2016 2965.3 865.7 3831.0 Included above are assets under construction of 337.2m 2016 511.4m.
There is a charge in favour of the pension scheme over properties with a market value of 408.0m 2016 408.0m.
See Note 29 for further information.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 135 13 Property plant and equipment continued Capital expenditure commitments Capital expenditure commitments for property plant and equipment for which no provision has been made 156.4 142.4 In addition to the capital expenditure commitments disclosed above the Group has also signed agreements with certain third parties to develop new trading outlets within the Premier Inn and Restaurants strategic business unit as part of its pipeline.
These developments are dependent upon the outcome of future events such as the granting of planning permission and consequently do not represent a binding capital commitment at the yearend.
The directors consider that developments likely to proceed as planned will result in further capital investment of 670.0m over the next five years 2016 500.0m.
Capitalised interest Interest capitalised during the year amounted to 8.9m using an average rate of 3.6% 201516 10.0m using an average rate of 3.9%.
Assets held for sale During the year seven property assets with a combined net book value of 5.7m 201516 nil were transferred to assets held for sale.
Eight sites with a net book value of 6.0m 2016 one site with a net book value of 0.3m continued to be classified as held for sale at the yearend.
No sites were sold during the year 2016 two and an impairment loss of nil 2016 nil was recognised in the year.
In addition as a result of the decision to exit hotel operations in India and South East Asia assets with a net book value of 42.1m have been transferred to asset held for sale at the yearend.
14 Impairment During the year impairment losses of 31.9m 201516 7.7m and impairment reversals of 2.8m 201516 2.3m were recognised.
Intangible
Intangible
Property plant and equipment
Impairment losses Premier Inn and Restaurants 3.8  18.6 1.7 Costa   9.5 6.0 Total impairment losses 3.8  28.1 7.7 Impairment reversals Premier Inn and Restaurants   2.6 2.0 Costa   0.2 0.3 Total impairment reversals   2.8 2.3 Total net impairment charge 3.8  25.3 5.4 Property plant and equipment The Group considers each trading site to be a CGU and each CGU is reviewed annually for indicators of impairment.
Where indicators of impairment are identified an impairment assessment is undertaken.
In assessing whether an asset has been impaired the carrying amount of the CGU is compared to its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use.
In the absence of any information about the fair value of a CGU the recoverable amount is deemed to be its value in use.
The Group estimates value in use using a discounted cash flow model which applies a pretax discount rate of 7.0% in the UK 201516 8.1% 7.1% in France 201516 8.1% 7.2% in China 201516 8.4% 6.5% in Singapore 201516 7.5% and 7.5% in Poland 201516 8.8%.
The future cash flows are based on assumptions from the business plans and cover a fiveyear period.
These business plans and forecasts include managements most recent view of mediumterm trading prospects.
Cash flows beyond this period are extrapolated using longterm growth rates for the relevant country ranging from 2.0% to 3.5% with the UK the most significant country being 2.0% 201516 2.0%.
The events and circumstances that led to the impairment charge of 28.1m are set out below Premier Inn and Restaurants As a result of the decision to exit hotel operations in India and South East Asia impairment losses of 10.2m have been recorded to bring asset values in line with realisable values.
As part of the UK operational restructure seven restaurant sites were converted to Brewers Fayre leading to an impairment of 2.9m.
In addition seven restaurant sites were transferred to assets held for sale resulting in an impairment of 3.9m.
The remaining 1.6m impairment arose on sites which are to be closed or are underperforming.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 136 Consolidated accounts 14 Impairment continued
The Costa international restructuring has resulted in impairment losses of 1.5m in France and 3.2m in China.
The remaining impairment charge includes 2.8m in the UK 0.9m in Singapore and 1.1m in Poland where stores are to be closed or are underperforming.
Impairment reversals Following an improvement in trading performance and an increase in amounts of estimated future cash flows of previously impaired sites reversals of 2.8m have been recognised 2.6m in Premier Inn and Restaurants and 0.2m in Costa.
Sensitivity to changes in assumptions The level of impairment is predominantly dependent upon judgements used in arriving at future growth rates and the discount rates applied to cash flow projections.
The impact on the impairment charge of applying different assumptions to the growth rates used in the fiveyear business plans and in the pretax discount rates would be an incremental impairment charge of Incremental impairment charge Premier Inn and
Costa
Total
Impairment if business plan growth rates were reduced by 1% pt 4.1  4.1 Impairment if discount rates were increased by 1% pt 4.0  4.0
Goodwill acquired through business combinations is allocated to groups of CGUs at strategic business unit level being the level at which management monitor goodwill.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
In the absence of a recent market transaction the recoverable amount is determined from value in use calculations.
The future cash flows are based on assumptions from the business plans and cover a fiveyear period.
These business plans and forecasts include managements most recent view of mediumterm trading prospects.
Cash flows beyond this period are extrapolated using a 2.0% growth rate 201516 2.0%.
The pretax discount rate applied to cash flow projections is 7.0% 201516 8.1%.
The resultant impairment review required 3.0m impairment of goodwill allocated to the Premier Inn and Restaurants CGU 201516 nil as a result of the decision to exit hotel operations in India and South East Asia.
No impairment was required for goodwill allocated to the Costa CGU 201516 nil.
Intangible assets The decision to exit hotel operations in India and South East Asia resulted in an impairment of intangible assets of 0.8m 201516 nil.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 137 15 Investment in joint ventures % equity interest Principal joint ventures Investment held by Principal activity Country of incorporation 2017 2016 Premier Inn Hotels LLC PTI Middle East Limited Hotels United Arab Emirates 49.0 49.0 Hualian Costa Beijing Food and Beverage Management Company Limited Costa Beijing Limited Coffee shops China 50.0 50.0
Tasland Indonesia WHRI Holding Company Limited Hotels Indonesia 50.0 50.0 Premier Inn Kier Limited Premier Inn Hotels
Property England 50.0 50.0 Healthy Retail Limited Whitbread Group PLC Convenience food England 49.0 During the year the Group acquired a 49% interest in Healthy Retail Limited for total consideration of 7.1m.
The following table provides summarised information of the Groups investment in joint ventures Share of joint ventures balance sheets Current assets 12.9 12.3 Noncurrent assets 73.0 56.5 Share of gross assets 85.9 68.8 Current liabilities 11.9 8.5 Noncurrent liabilities 27.2 24.8 Share of gross liabilities 39.1 33.3 Loans to joint ventures 3.6 2.6 Share of net assets 50.4 38.1 Premium paid on acquisition cost in excess of share of net assets at acquisition 5.9 1.4 Impairment losses 0.9 Transferred to assets held for sale 2.4 Aggregate carrying amount of the Groups interest in joint ventures 53.0 39.5 Share of joint ventures revenue and expenses Revenue 38.7 30.6 Operating costs 34.6 26.5 Finance costs 0.9 0.8 Operating profit before tax and net profit 3.2 3.3 At 2 March 2017 the Groups share of the capital commitments of its joint ventures amounted to 9.9m 2016 2.5m.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 138 Consolidated accounts 16 Inventories Raw materials and consumables at cost 12.8 10.0 Finished goods at cost 35.4 34.8 Total inventories at lower of cost and net realisable value 48.2 44.8 17 Trade and other receivables Trade receivables 92.6 92.7 Prepayments and accrued income 44.8 39.0 Other receivables 33.0 16.0 Analysed as Current 163.6 140.0 Noncurrent  other receivables 6.8 7.7 Trade and other receivables are noninterest bearing and are generally on 30day terms.
The provision for impairment of receivables at 2 March 2017 was 1.6m 2016 5.8m.
The ageing analysis of trade receivables is as follows Neither past due nor impaired 81.2 83.6 Past due but not impaired Less than 30 days 9.6 7.9 Between 30 and 60 days 0.5 0.8 Greater than 60 days 1.3 0.4 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 139 18 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 62.9 57.0 Shortterm deposits 0.1 0.1 Shortterm deposits are made for varying periods of between one day and one month depending on the immediate cash requirements of the Group.
They earn interest at the respective shortterm deposit rates.
The fair value of cash and cash equivalents is 63.0m 2016 57.1m.
For the purposes of the consolidated cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents comprise the amounts as disclosed above.
19 Financial liabilities Current Noncurrent
Shortterm borrowings On demand 109.6 92.0 Other loans 2017 15.2 2.0 Revolving credit facility 950m 2021   66.9 146.6 Private placement loan notes 2017 to 2022 32.6  284.6 282.6 Senior unsecured bonds 2025   444.1 443.7 Shortterm borrowings Shortterm borrowings are typically overnight borrowings repayable on demand.
Interest rates are variable and linked to LIBOR.
Revolving credit facility 950m The committed revolving credit facility RCF terms give a total available committed credit of 950m which runs until September 2020 with options over two oneyear extensions subject to agreement by the banking partners that will potentially extend the maturity to September 2022.
In November 2016 the first extension option was activated extending the loan maturity date to September 2021.
Loans have variable interest rates linked to LIBOR.
The facility is multicurrency.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 140 Consolidated accounts 19 Financial liabilities continued Private placement loan notes The Group holds loan notes with coupons and maturities as shown in the following table Title Year issued Principal value Maturity Coupon Series A loan notes 2010 US40.0m 13 August 2017 4.55% Series B loan notes 2010 US75.0m 13 August 2020 5.23% Series C loan notes 2010 25.0m 13 August 2020 5.19% Series A loan notes 2011 US60.0m 26 January 2019 3.92% Series B loan notes 2011 US56.5m 26 January 2019 4.12% Series C loan notes 2011 US93.5m 26 January 2022 4.86% Series D loan notes 2011 25.0m 6 September 2021 4.89% The Group entered into a number of crosscurrency swap agreements in relation to the loan notes to eliminate any foreign exchange risk on interest rates or on the repayment of the principal borrowed.
These swaps expire in line with the loan notes and are discussed in Note 23.
On 1 March 2017 the Group entered into agreements securing funding of 200.0m from new private placement loan notes which will be drawn down in two tranches of 100.0m on 16 May 2017 and 16 August 2017.
The funds have a maturity of 16 August 2027 and a coupon of between 2.54% and 2.63%.
Senior unsecured bonds The Group issued 450.0m 2025 bonds with a coupon of 3.375% on 28 May 2015.
An analysis of the interest rate profile and the maturity of the borrowings together with related interest rate swaps is as follows Year ended 2 March 2017
1 year 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years
5 years
Fixed to floating rate swaps   50.1  50.1 Floating to fixed interest rate swaps   50.0  50.0 Floating rate 124.8  66.9  191.7 Fixed to floating rate swaps   50.1  50.1 Floating to fixed interest rate swaps   50.0  50.0 Year ended 3 March 2016
1 year 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years
5 years
Fixed to floating rate swaps   50.1  50.1 Floating to fixed interest rate swaps 50.0  50.0  100.0 Floating rate 94.0  146.6  240.6 Fixed to floating rate swaps   50.1  50.1 Floating to fixed interest rate swaps 50.0  50.0  100.0 The maturity analysis is grouped by when the debt is contracted to mature rather than by repricing dates as allowed under IFRS.
There are 50.0m of swaps 2016 50.0m with maturities beyond the life of the current RCF  which are in place to hedge against the core level of debt the Group will hold.
The carrying amount of the Groups borrowings is denominated in sterling and US dollars.
At 2 March 2017 the Group had available 880.0m 2016 800.0m of undrawn committed borrowing facilities in respect of revolving credit facilities on which all conditions precedent had been met.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 141 20 Movements in cash and net debt Year ended 2 March 2017 3 March 2016 Cost of borrowings Cash flow
Fair value adjustments to loans
2 March Cash at bank and in hand 57.0 62.9 Shortterm deposits 0.1 0.1
Cash and cash equivalents 57.1  4.1 1.8   63.0 Shortterm bank borrowings 92.0  17.6    109.6 Loan capital under one year 2.0 47.8 Loan capital over one year 872.9 795.6 Total loan capital 874.9 0.6 67.4 28.1 6.5 1.9 843.4 Year ended 3 March 2016 26 February Cost of borrowings Cash flow
Fair value adjustments to loans
3 March Cash at bank and in hand 1.9 57.0 Shortterm deposits 0.2 0.1
Cash and cash equivalents 2.1  54.4 0.6   57.1 Shortterm bank borrowings 71.2  20.8    92.0 Loan capital under one year 1.9 2.0 Loan capital over one year 512.2 872.9 Total loan capital 514.1 3.6 343.3 14.1 5.1 1.9 874.9 Net debt includes US denominated loan notes of US325.0m 2016 US325.0m retranslated to 267.8m 2016 233.8m.
These notes have been hedged using crosscurrency swaps.
At maturity 208.3m 2016 208.3m will be repaid taking into account the crosscurrency swaps.
If the impact of these hedges is taken into account reported net debt would be 830.5m 2016 884.3m.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 142 Consolidated accounts 21 Provisions
Onerous
Other
Total
At 26 February 2015  27.2 7.3 34.5 Created  16.9  16.9 Unwinding of discount rate  0.7  0.7 Utilised  15.0 0.1 15.1 Business acquired  0.4  0.4 At 3 March 2016  30.2 7.2 37.4 Created 28.0 4.6  32.6 Unwinding of discount rate  0.7  0.7 Utilised 5.0 17.3  22.3 Foreign currency adjustment 0.1 0.3  0.2 At 2 March 2017 22.9 18.5 7.2 48.6 Analysed as Current 22.9 6.2 7.2 36.3 Noncurrent  12.3  12.3 At 2 March 2017 22.9 18.5 7.2 48.6 Analysed as Current  14.7  14.7 Noncurrent  15.5 7.2 22.7 At 3 March 2016  30.2 7.2 37.4
Restructuring provisions have been recognised as a result of the Groups decision to exit certain markets and restructure its operations.
On 13 July 2016 the Group announced its intention to exit hotel operations in South East Asia.
This resulted in the recognition of a restructuring provision of 15.1m for costs of exiting management agreements and closure of regional offices.
The Group has also recognised restructuring provisions of 12.9m resulting from decisions to exit the Costa equity market in France and the reorganisation of support centre operations.
The restructuring provisions are expected to be used within one year.
Onerous contracts Onerous contract provisions relate primarily to property reversions.
Provision is made for rent and other property related costs for the period that a sublet or assignment of the lease is not possible.
Where the property is deemed likely to be assigned provision is made for the best estimate of the reverse lease premium payable on the assignment.
Where the property is deemed likely to be sublet the rental income and the timing of the cash flows are estimated by both internal and external property specialists and a provision is maintained for the estimated cost incurred by the Group.
Onerous lease provisions are discounted using a discount rate of 3.74% 2016 3.74% based on an approximation for the time value of money.
The amount and timing of the cash outflows are subject to variation.
The Group utilises the skills and expertise of both internal and external property experts to determine the provision held.
Provisions are expected to be utilised over a period of up to 18 years.
Other
Other provisions relate to warranties given on the disposal of businesses.
These are expected to be used within one year.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 143 22 Financial risk management objectives and policies The Groups principal financial instruments other than derivatives comprise bank loans private placement loans senior unsecured bonds cash shortterm deposits trade receivables and trade payables.
The Groups financial instrument policies can be found in the accounting policies in Note 2.
The Board agrees policies for managing the financial risks summarised below Interest rate risk The Groups exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to the Groups longterm debt obligations.
Interest rate swaps are used where necessary to maintain a mix of fixed and floating rate borrowings to manage this risk in line with the Group treasury policy.
Although the private placement loan notes are US dollar denominated crosscurrency swaps mean that the interest rate risk is effectively sterling only.
At the yearend 761.2m 90.3% of Group debt was fixed for an average of 6.29 years at an average interest rate of 4.0% 2016 776.2m 88.9% for 7.29 years at 4.1%.
In accordance with IFRS 7 the Group has undertaken sensitivity analysis on its financial instruments which are affected by changes in interest rates.
This analysis has been prepared on the basis of a constant amount of net debt a constant ratio of fixed to floating interest rates and on the basis of the hedging instruments in place at 2 March 2017 and 3 March 2016 respectively.
Consequently the analysis relates to the situation at those dates and is not representative of the years then ended.
The following assumptions were made balance sheet sensitivity to interest rates applies only to derivative financial instruments as the carrying value of debt and deposits does not change as interest rates move gains or losses are recognised in equity or the income statement in line with the accounting policies set out in Note 2 and cash flow hedges were effective.
Based on the Groups net debt position at the yearend a 1% pt change in interest rates would affect the Groups profit before tax by approximately 0.8m 201516 1.0m and equity by approximately 7.3m 2016 13.1m.
Liquidity risk In its funding strategy the Groups objective is to maintain a balance between the continuity of funding and flexibility through the use of overdrafts and bank loans.
This strategy includes monitoring the maturity of financial liabilities to avoid the risk of a shortage of funds.
Excess cash used in managing liquidity is placed on interestbearing deposit where maturity is fixed at no more than three months.
Shortterm flexibility is achieved through the use of shortterm borrowing on the money markets.
The tables below summarise the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities at 2 March 2017 and 3 March 2016 based on contractual undiscounted payments including interest 2 March 2017
Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years More than 5 years
Interestbearing loans and borrowings 109.6 7.6 66.2 382.0 513.2 1078.6 Derivative financial instruments   2.3 9.2  11.5 Trade and other payables  230.2  21.9  252.1 Accrued financial liabilities   233.1   233.1 Provisions in respect of financial liabilities  7.8 28.3 10.3 5.2 51.6 3 March 2016
Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years More than 5 years
Interestbearing loans and borrowings 92.0 1.0 28.0 413.1 621.4 1155.5 Derivative financial instruments   2.6 2.7 2.0 7.3 Trade and other payables  204.7  20.1  224.8 Accrued financial liabilities   218.2   218.2 Provisions in respect of financial liabilities  3.7 11.2 10.7 7.7 33.3 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 144 Consolidated accounts 22 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Credit risk There are no significant concentrations of credit risk within the Group.
The Group is exposed to a small amount of credit risk that is primarily attributable to its trade and other receivables.
This is minimised by dealing with counterparties with good credit ratings.
The amounts included in the balance sheet are net of allowances for doubtful debts which have been estimated by management based on prior experience and any known factors at the balance sheet date which may indicate that a provision is required.
The Groups maximum exposure on its trade and other receivables is the carrying amount as disclosed in Note 17.
With respect to credit risk arising from the other financial assets of the Group which comprise cash and cash equivalents the Groups exposure arises from default of the counterparty with a maximum exposure equal to the carrying value of these instruments.
The Group seeks to minimise the risk of default in relation to cash and cash equivalents by spreading investments across a number of counterparties.
In the event that any of the Groups banks get into financial difficulty the Group is exposed to the risk of withdrawal of currently undrawn committed facilities.
This risk is mitigated by the Group having a range of counterparties to its facilities.
Foreign currency risk Foreign exchange exposure is currently not significant to the Group.
Although the Group has US dollar denominated loan notes these have been swapped into sterling thereby eliminating foreign currency risk.
Sensitivity analysis has therefore not been carried out.
The Group monitors the growth and risks associated with its overseas operations and will undertake hedging activities as and when they are required.
Capital management The Groups primary objective in regard to capital management is to ensure that it continues to operate as a going concern and has sufficient funds at its disposal to grow the business for the benefit of shareholders.
The Group seeks to maintain a ratio of debt to equity that balances risks and returns and also complies with lending covenants.
See pages 54 to 57 of this report for the policies and objectives of the Board regarding capital management analysis of the Groups credit facilities and financing plans for the coming years.
The Group aims to maintain sufficient funds for working capital and future investment in order to meet growth targets.
The management of equity through share buybacks and new issues is considered as part of the overall leverage framework balanced against the funding requirements of future growth.
In addition the Group may carry out a number of sale and leaseback transactions to provide further funding for growth.
The Groups financing is subject to financial covenants.
These covenants relate to measurement of EBITDA against consolidated net finance charges interest cover and total net debt leverage ratio on a notadjustedfor pension and property lease basis.
The Group has complied with all of these covenants.
The above matters are considered at regular intervals and form part of the business planning and budgeting processes.
In addition the Board regularly reviews the Groups dividend policy and funding strategy.
23 Financial instruments Fair values As in the prior year the carrying value of financial assets and liabilities disclosed in Notes 17 18 19 20 21 and 24 are considered to be reasonable approximations of their fair values.
The fair value of derivative instruments is calculated by discounting all future cash flows by the market yield curve at the balance sheet date using level 2 techniques.
IFRS 13 requires that the classification of financial instruments at fair value be determined by reference to the source of inputs used to derive the fair value.
The classification uses the following threelevel hierarchy Level 1 Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 Other techniques for which all inputs which have a significant effect on the recorded fair value are observable either directly or indirectly and Level 3 Techniques which use inputs which have a significant effect on the recorded fair value that are not based on observable market data.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 145 23 Financial instruments continued Financial assets Derivative financial instruments  level 2 55.6 24.8 Financial liabilities Derivative financial instruments  level 2 10.6 14.0 During the year ended 2 March 2017 there were no transfers between fair value measurement levels.
Derivative financial instruments include 43.3m assets 2016 21.6m and 8.3m liabilities 2016 9.6m due after one year.
Derivative financial instruments
Cash flow hedges At 2 March 2017 the Group has interest rate swaps in place to swap a notional amount of 50.0m 2016 100.0m whereby it receives a variable interest rate based on LIBOR on the notional amount and pays fixed rates of between 5.145% and 5.190% 2016 5.145% and 5.372%.
These swaps have maturities beyond the current life of the revolving credit facility and are in place to hedge against the core level of debt the Group will hold.
The swaps are being used to hedge the exposure to changes in future cash flows from variable rate debt.
The Group also has crosscurrency swaps in place whereby it receives a fixed interest rate of between 3.92% and 4.86% 2016 3.92% and 4.86% on a notional amount of US250.0m 2016 US250.0m and pays an average of 4.72% on a notional sterling balance of 158.2m 2016 4.72% on 158.2m.
The cash flow hedges were assessed to be highly effective at 2 March 2017 and a net unrealised gain of 0.2m 201516 net unrealised loss of 6.5m has been recorded in other comprehensive income.
The ineffectiveness recorded within finance costs in the income statement for 201617 was nil 201516 a debit of 1.0k.
Fair value hedges At 2 March 2017 the Group has crosscurrency swaps in place whereby it receives a fixed interest rate of 5.23% 2016 5.23% on a notional amount of US75.0m 2016 US75.0m and pays a spread of between 1.715% and 1.755% 2016 1.715% and 1.755% over 6m GBP LIBOR on a notional sterling balance of 50.1m 2016 50.1m.
The fair value hedges were also assessed to be highly effective at 2 March 2017.
An increase in the fair value of the interest rate swap of 6.5m 2016 an increase of 5.4m offset by a loss in the fair value of the hedged items of 6.6m 2016 loss of 5.2m led to a debit of 0.1m recorded within finance costs in the income statement 2016 a credit of 0.2m in finance revenue in the income statement.
Cash flow and fair value hedges are expected to impact on the income statement in line with the liquidity risk table shown in Note 22.
24 Trade and other payables Trade payables 162.1 144.4 Other taxes and social security 40.0 44.6 Deferred income 93.6 70.7 Accruals 233.1 218.1 Other payables 90.0 80.5 Analysed as Current 596.9 538.2 Noncurrent 21.9 20.1 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 146 Consolidated accounts 25 Share capital Ordinary share capital Allotted called up and fully paid ordinary shares of 76.80p each 2016 76.80p each million m At 26 February 2015 195.0 149.8 Issued 0.2 0.2 At 3 March 2016 195.2 150.0 Issued 0.2 0.2 At 2 March 2017 195.4 150.2 At the 2016 Annual General Meeting the Company was authorised to purchase up to 18.3m of its own shares on the open market.
During the year no ordinary shares were acquired 201516 nil.
No shares were cancelled in the year 201516 nil.
During the year options over 0.2m ordinary shares fully paid were exercised by employees under the terms of various share option schemes 201516 0.2m.
Preference share capital B shares C shares Allotted called up and fully paid shares of 1p each 2016 1p each million m million m At 26 February 2015 3 March 2016 and 2 March 2017 2.0  1.9 B shareholders are entitled to an annual noncumulative preference dividend paid in arrears on or around 2 July each year on a notional amount of 155p per share.
C shareholders are entitled to an annual noncumulative preference dividend paid in arrears on or around 14 January each year on a value of 159p per share.
Other than shares issued in the normal course of business as part of the sharebased payments schemes there have been no transactions involving ordinary shares or potential ordinary shares since the reporting date and before the completion of these consolidated financial statements.
26 Reserves Share premium The share premium reserve is the premium paid on the Companys 76.80p ordinary shares.
The issue of shares in lieu of cash dividends was treated as a bonus issue with the nominal value of the shares being charged against the share premium account.
Capital redemption reserve A capital redemption reserve was created on the cancellation of the Groups B and C preference shares Note 25 and also includes the nominal value of cancelled ordinary shares.
Retained earnings In accordance with IFRS practice retained earnings include revaluation reserves which are not distributable under UK law.
Currency translation reserve The foreign currency translation reserve is used to record exchange differences arising from the translation of the consolidated financial statements of foreign subsidiaries and other foreign currency investments.
Other reserves The movement in other reserves during the year is set out in the table below
Merger reserve
Total other reserves At 26 February 2015 204.5 1855.0 21.4 2080.9 Other comprehensive income  net gain on cash flow hedges   6.5 6.5 Loss on ESOT shares issued 6.7   6.7 At 3 March 2016 197.8 1855.0 14.9 2067.7 Other comprehensive loss  net loss on cash flow hedges   0.2 0.2 Loss on ESOT shares issued 6.4   6.4 At 2 March 2017 191.4 1855.0 15.1 2061.5 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 147 26 Reserves continued Treasury reserve This reserve relates to shares held by an independently managed employee share ownership trust ESOT and treasury shares held by Whitbread PLC.
The shares held by the ESOT were purchased in order to satisfy outstanding employee share options and potential awards under the LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP and other incentive schemes.
The movement in treasury shares during the year is set out in the table below Treasury shares held by Whitbread PLC ESOT shares held million m million m At 26 February 2015 13.3 194.7 0.6 9.8 Transferred 0.7 10.3 0.7 10.3 Exercised during the year   0.4 6.7 At 3 March 2016 12.6 184.4 0.9 13.4 Transferred 0.5 7.2 0.5 7.2 Exercised during the year   0.4 6.4 At 2 March 2017 12.1 177.2 1.0 14.2 The treasury shares reduce the amount of reserves available for distribution to shareholders by 191.4m 2016 197.8m.
Merger reserve The merger reserve arose as a consequence of the merger in 200001 of Whitbread Group PLC and Whitbread PLC.
Hedging reserve This hedging reserve records movements for effective cash flow hedges measured at fair value.
27 Commitments and contingencies Operating lease commitments The Group leases various buildings which are used within the Premier Inn and Restaurants and Costa businesses.
The leases are noncancellable operating leases with varying terms escalation clauses and renewal rights.
The Group also leases various plant and equipment under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
Contingent rents are the portion of the lease payment that is not fixed in amount but based upon the future amount of a factor that changes other than with the passage of time e. indices or future market rates of interest.
Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases on an undiscounted basis are as follows Due within one year 247.0 214.5 Due after one year but not more than five years 850.8 724.6 Due after five years but not more than ten years 742.0 675.4 Due after ten years 1298.9 1282.2 3138.7 2896.7 Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases disclosed above includes 13.7m in relation to privity contracts 201516 40.5m.
Future lease costs in respect of these privity contracts are included within the onerous contracts provision Note 21.
Onerous contracts are under constant review and every effort is taken to reduce this obligation.
The weighted average lease life of future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases is 11.7 years 2016 12.3 years.
Group companies have sublet space in certain properties.
The future minimum sublease payments expected to be received under noncancellable sublease agreements as at 2 March 2017 are 25.8m 2016 49.5m of which 14.5m 2016 36.6m relates to privity contracts.
Contingent liabilities There are no contingent liabilities to be disclosed in the year ended 2 March 2017 2016 nil.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 148 Consolidated accounts 28 Sharebased payment plans Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP The LTIP awards shares to directors and senior executives of the Group.
Vesting of all shares under the scheme will depend on continued employment and meeting earnings per share EPS and return on capital employed ROCE performance targets over a threeyear period the vesting period.
Details of the performance targets for the LTIP awards can be seen in the remuneration report on pages 78 to 98.
The awards are settled in equity once exercised.
Movements in the number of share awards are as follows
Awards
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 685426 817642 Granted during the year 284129 223730 Exercised during the year 257797 302577 Expired during the year 88115 53369 Outstanding at the end of the year 623643 685426 Exercisable at the end of the year 26855 9963 Deferred equity awards Awards are made under the Whitbread Leadership Group Incentive Scheme implemented during 200405.
The awards are not subject to performance conditions and will vest in full on the release date subject to continued employment at that date.
If the director or senior executive of the Group ceases to be an employee of Whitbread prior to the release date normally three years after the award by reason of redundancy retirement death injury ill health disability or some other reason considered to be appropriate by the Remuneration Committee the awards will be released in full.
If employment ceases for any other reason the proportion of awards which vest depends upon the year in which the award was made and the date that employment ceased.
If employment ceases in the first year after an award is made none of the awards vest between the first and second anniversary 25% vests and between the second and third anniversary 50% vests.
Movements in the number of share awards are as follows
Awards
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 412520 415264 Granted during the year 92415 158573 Exercised during the year 217637 129252 Expired during the year 13301 32065 Outstanding at the end of the year 273997 412520 Exercisable at the end of the year 1602 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 149 28 Sharebased payment plans continued Employee sharesave scheme The employee sharesave scheme is open to all employees and provides for a purchase price equal to the market price on the day preceding the date of invitation with a 20% discount.
The shares can be purchased over the sixmonth period following the third or fifth anniversary of the commencement date depending on the length chosen by the employee.
Movements in the number of share options and the related weighted average exercise price WAEP are as follows 2017 2016
WAEP per share Options
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 1293149 32.49 1224544 27.30 Granted during the year 669441 29.46 465854 38.66 Exercised during the year 235267 22.42 208513 17.01 Expired during the year 401792 35.39 188736 31.26 Outstanding at the end of the year 1325531 31.87 1293149 32.49 Exercisable at the end of the year 77410 25.07 89110 18.80 Outstanding options to purchase ordinary shares of 76.80p between 2016 and 2021 are exercisable at prices between 13.39 and 38.66 per share 2016 between 2015 and 2020 at prices between 13.39 and 38.66.
The weighted average contractual life of the share options outstanding as at 2 March 2017 is between two and three years.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for options exercised during the year was 39.09 2016 43.25.
The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the years ended 2 March 2017 and 3 March 2016
Number of shares granted
Fair value
Price at grant date
Years
Expected dividend yield %
Riskfree rate %
LTIP awards 26042016 284129 94.2 10623009  39.69 3.00 2.0 na na Nonmarket 29042015 223730 94.2 11001341  52.20 3.00 2.0 na na Nonmarket Deferred equity awards 26042016 92415 94.2 3455210  39.69 3.00 2.0 na na Service 28042015 158573 94.2 7916916  53.00 3.00 2.0 na na Service SAYE  3 years 02122016 558278 20.3 3864568 29.46 34.10 3.25 2.0 25.0 0.23 Service 02122015 388343 20.5 3739296 38.66 46.97 3.25 2.0 20.0 0.86 Service SAYE  5 years 02122016 111163 22.9 868061 29.46 34.10 5.25 2.0 25.0 0.59 Service 02122015 77511 22.7 826437 38.66 46.97 5.25 2.0 20.0 1.35 Service 1 Return on capital employed.
2 Earnings per share.
3 Employment service.
The fair value of share options granted is estimated as at the date of grant using a stochastic model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
Expected volatility reflects the assumption that historical volatility is indicative of future trends which may not necessarily be the actual outcome.
The riskfree rate is the rate of interest obtainable from government securities over the expected life of the equity incentive.
The expected dividend yield is calculated on the basis of publicly available information at the time of the grant date which in most cases is the historic dividend yield.
No other features relating to the granting of options were incorporated into the measurement of fair value.
Employee share ownership trust ESOT The Company funds an ESOT to enable it to acquire and hold shares for the LTIP.
The ESOT held 1.0m shares at 2 March 2017 2016 0.9m.
All dividends on the shares in the ESOT are waived by the Trustee.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 150 Consolidated accounts 28 Sharebased payment plans continued Total charged to the income statement for all schemes Long Term Incentive Plan 7.1 7.4 Deferred equity 5.7 6.4 Employee sharesave scheme 4.9 3.5 Equitysettled 17.7 17.3 29 Retirement benefits Defined contribution schemes The Group operates a contractedin defined contribution scheme under the Whitbread Group Pension Fund.
Contributions by both employees and Group companies are held in externally invested trusteeadministered funds.
The Group contributes a specified percentage of earnings for members of the above defined contribution scheme and thereafter has no further obligations in relation to the scheme.
The total cost charged to income in relation to the defined contribution scheme in the year was 8.6m 201516 8.1m.
At the yearend 30344 employees 2016 29307 were active members of the scheme which also had 11772 deferred members 2016 6181.
Defined benefit scheme The defined benefit final salary section of the principal Group pension scheme the Whitbread Group Pension Fund was closed to new members on 31 December 2001 and to future accrual on 31 December 2009.
The Whitbread Group Pension Fund is set up under UK trust law registered with Her Majestys Revenue and Customs and regulated by the Pensions Regulator.
The Whitbread Group Pension Fund is governed by a corporate trustee which operates the scheme in accordance with the requirements of UK pensions legislation.
At the yearend the scheme had no active members 2016 nil 21942 deferred pensioners 2016 22792 and 16581 pensions in payment 2016 16647.
The liability recognised in the balance sheet in respect of the defined benefit pension scheme is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the reporting period less the fair value of plan assets.
The IAS 19 pension cost relating to the defined benefit section of the Whitbread Group Pension Fund is assessed in accordance with actuarial advice from and calculations provided by Lane Clark and Peacock using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of high quality corporate bonds that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension obligation.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to equity in other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
As the scheme is closed to future accrual there is no future service cost.
Under the governing documentation of the Whitbread Group Pension Fund any future surplus in the Fund would be returnable to Whitbread PLC by a reduction in future contributions.
As such there are no adjustments required in respect of IFRIC 14 IAS 19  The Limit on a Defined Benefit Asset Minimum Funding Requirements and their Interaction.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit plan obligation at the end of the reporting period is 18.0 years 2016 16.5 years.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 151 29 Retirement benefits continued
Expected contributions to be made in the next reporting period total 92.6m 2016 82.1m.
In 201617 contributions were 88.1m with 78.2m from the employer 9.1m from Moorgate Scottish Limited Partnership SLP and 0.8m of benefits settled by the Group in relation to an unfunded scheme 201516 82.0m with 73.0m from the employer 8.9m from Moorgate SLP and 0.1m of benefits settled by the Group in relation to an unfunded scheme.
In addition Whitbread paid 2.2m 201516 2.3m of investment manager expenses.
A scheme specific actuarial valuation for the purpose of determining the level of cash contributions to be paid into the Whitbread Group Pension Fund was undertaken as at 31 March 2014.
A deficit recovery plan and some protection whilst the scheme remains in deficit have been agreed with the Trustee.
The Group made payments of 75.0m in 201617 and will make the following payments to the Fund 80.0m in 201718 80.0m in 201819 80.0m in 201920 80.0m in 202021 80.0m in 202122 and 2.6m in 202223.
For the period of the deficit the Group has agreed to give undertakings to the Trustee similar to some of the covenants provided in respect of its banking agreements up to the value of any outstanding recovery plan payments or the remaining deficit if lower.
Until the next valuation the Trustee has also been given a promise of accelerated payments of up to 5.0m per annum where increases in ordinary dividends exceed RPI and the right to consultation before any special distributions can be made.
In addition to the scheduled deficit contribution payments described above the Pension Scheme will receive a share of the income profits and a variable capital payment from its investment in Moorgate SLP which was established by the Group in the year ended 4 March 2010 the share in profits is accounted for by the Group as contributions when paid.
The partnership interests in Moorgate SLP are held by the Group the general partner and by the Pension Scheme.
Moorgate SLP holds an investment in a further partnership Farringdon Scottish Partnership SP which was also established by the Group during 200910.
Property assets with a market value of 221.0m have been transferred from other Group companies to Farringdon SP and leased back to Whitbread Group PLC and Premier Inn Hotels Limited.
The Group retains control over these properties including the flexibility to substitute alternative properties.
However the Trustee has first charge over the property portfolio and certain other assets with an aggregate value of 228.0m.
The Group retains control over both partnerships and as such they are fully consolidated in these consolidated financial statements.
The Pension Scheme is a partner in Moorgate SLP and as such is entitled to an annual share of the profits of the partnership over the next eight years.
At the end of this period the partnership capital allocated to the Pension Scheme partner will depending on the funding position of the Pension Scheme at that time be transferred in cash to the Pension Scheme up to a value of 150.0m 2016 150.0m.
Under IAS 19 the investment held by the Pension Scheme in Moorgate SLP a consolidated entity does not represent a plan asset for the purposes of the consolidated financial statements.
Accordingly the pension deficit position in these consolidated financial statements does not reflect the 190.2m 2016 165.8m investment in Moorgate SLP held by the Pension Scheme.
During the year ended 28 February 2013 the Group entered into a charge in favour of Whitbread Pension Trustees Limited over properties with a market value totalling 180.0m at that date.
The charge was to secure the obligations of the Group to make payments to the Pension Fund as part of the recovery plan to reduce the deficit.
This together with the properties secured as a consequence of the arrangement surrounding the partnerships secures properties totalling 408.0m in favour of the Pension Scheme.
Risks
Through its defined benefit scheme the Group is exposed to a number of risks in relation to the IAS 19 deficit the most significant of which are detailed below Risk Description Principal impact on assets and obligation reconciliations Market volatility The defined benefit obligation is linked to AArated corporate bonds whilst scheme assets are invested in equities gilts bonds property and cash.
This exposes the Group to risks including those relating to interest rates equity markets property markets and foreign exchange.
Changing market conditions in conjunction with discount rate fluctuations will lead to volatility in the Groups net pension liability on the balance sheet pension expense in the income statement and remeasurement movements in other comprehensive income.
Return on plan assets Inflationary risk Due to the link between the scheme obligation and inflation an increased rate of inflation will lead to higher scheme liabilities.
Actuarial movements in financial assumptions
The defined benefit obligation is calculated by projecting the future cash flows of the scheme for many years into the future.
Consequently the assumptions used can have a significant impact on the balance sheet position and income statement charge.
In practice future Scheme experience may not be in line with the assumptions adopted.
For example an increase in the life expectancy of members would increase scheme liabilities.
Discount rate interest income on scheme assets and cost on liabilities Mortality actuarial movements in demographic assumptions Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 152 Consolidated accounts 29 Retirement benefits continued The principal assumptions used by the independent qualified actuaries in updating the most recent valuation carried out as at 31 March 2014 of the UK scheme to 2 March 2017 for IAS 19 purposes were
2 March %
3 March % PreApril 2006 rate of increase in pensions in payment 3.10 2.80 PostApril 2006 rate of increase in pensions in payment 2.10 2.00 Pension increases in deferment 3.10 2.80 Discount rate 2.60 3.70 Inflation assumption 3.20 2.90 The mortality assumptions are based on standard mortality tables which allow for future mortality improvements.
The assumptions are that a member currently aged 65 will live on average for a further 21.3 years 2016 21.3 years if they are male and for a further 24.5 years 2016 24.4 years if they are female.
For a member who retires in 2036 at age 65 the assumptions are that they will live on average for a further 22.8 years 2016 22.8 years after retirement if they are male and for a further 26.0 years 2016 25.9 years after retirement if they are female.
The amounts recognised in the income statement in respect of the defined benefit scheme are as follows Net interest on net defined benefit liability 9.4 17.2 Administrative expenses 3.1 3.0 Total expense recognised in the income statement gross of deferred tax 12.5 20.2 Amounts recognised in operating profit for service costs or curtailment are nil 201516 nil.
The amounts taken to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income are as follows Actuarial lossesgains 601.7 203.9 Return on plan assets greaterless than discount rate 386.9 2.3 Remeasurement effects recognised in other comprehensive income 214.8 201.6 The amounts recognised in the balance sheet are as follows Present value of defined benefit obligation 2808.2 2220.4 Fair value of scheme assets 2383.1 1932.3 Liability recognised in the balance sheet 425.1 288.1 During the year the accounting deficit increased from 288.1m at 3 March 2016 to 425.1m at 2 March 2017.
The principal reasons for this deterioration were a decrease in the discount rate and an increase in expected future inflation.
Changes in the present value of the defined benefit obligation are as follows Opening defined benefit obligation 2220.4 2447.8 Interest cost 80.4 79.5 Remeasurement due to Changes in financial assumptions 612.9 154.8 Experience adjustments 11.2 49.1 Benefits paid 93.5 102.9 Benefits settled by the Group in relation to an unfunded pension scheme Closing defined benefit obligation 2808.2 2220.4 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 153 29 Retirement benefits continued Changes in the fair value of the scheme assets are as follows Opening fair value of scheme assets 1932.3 1894.0 Interest income on scheme assets 71.0 62.3 Return on plan assets greaterlower than discount rate Contributions from employer Additional contributions from Moorgate SLP Investment manager expenses paid by the employer Benefits paid 93.5 102.9 Administrative expenses 3.1 3.0 Closing fair value of scheme assets 2383.1 1932.3 The major categories of plan assets are as follows 2017 2016 Quoted and pooled
Total
Quoted and pooled
Total
Government bonds 872.7  872.7 686.3  686.3
2135.6 247.5 2383.1 1761.8 170.5 1932.3 1 The total of these four items equals the cash paid by the Group as per the consolidated cash flow statement.
2 Includes cost of managing fund assets.
3 Other primarily relates to assets held in respect of cash and net current assets.
The assumptions in relation to discount rate mortality and inflation have a significant effect on the measurement of scheme liabilities.
The following table shows the sensitivity of the valuation to changes in these assumptions
Discount rate 0.25% increase to discount rate 125.0 88.0 0.25% decrease to discount rate 134.0 94.0
0.25% increase to inflation rate 97.0 69.0 0.25% decrease to inflation rate 94.0 66.0 Life expectancy Additional oneyear increase to life expectancy 95.0 75.0 The above sensitivity analyses are based on a change in an assumption whilst holding all other assumptions constant.
In practice this is unlikely to occur and changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated.
When calculating the sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to significant actuarial assumptions the same method projected unit credit method has been applied as when calculating the pension liability recognised within the balance sheet.
The methods and types of assumptions did not change.
Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 154 Consolidated accounts 30 Related party disclosure The Group consists of a parent Company Whitbread PLC incorporated in the UK and a number of subsidiaries joint ventures and associate held directly and indirectly by Whitbread PLC which operate and are incorporated around the world.
Note 10 to the Companys separate financial statements lists details of the interests in subsidiaries and related undertakings.
The Group holds 6% as a general partnership interest in Moorgate Scottish Limited Partnership SLP with Whitbread Pension Trustees holding the balance as a limited partner.
Moorgate SLP holds a 67.8% investment in a further partnership Farringdon Scottish Partnership SP which was established by the Group to hold property assets.
The remaining 32.2% interest in Farringdon SP is owned by the Group.
The partnerships were set up in 200910 as part of a transaction with Whitbread Pension Trustees and the Group retains control over both partnerships and as such they are fully consolidated in these consolidated financial statements.
Further details can be found in Note 29.
Shares in Whitbread Group PLC are held directly by Whitbread PLC.
Shares in the other subsidiaries are held directly and indirectly by Whitbread Group PLC.
Related party transactions Joint ventures Joint ventures
Associate
Sales to a related party 5.2 3.8  3.3 Amounts owed by related party 1.7 0.9 Amounts owed to related party  0.1 Joint ventures For details of the Groups investments in joint ventures see Note 15.
Associate
The Group held an investment in Morrison Street Hotel Limited which was disposed of during the year.
For details of the disposal see Note 6.
Compensation of key management personnel including directors Shortterm employee benefits 6.4 6.2 Post employment benefits  0.2 Sharebased payments 4.0 5.9 Terms and conditions of transactions with related parties Sales to and purchases from related parties are made at normal market prices.
Outstanding balances at yearend are unsecured and settlement occurs in cash.
There have been no guarantees provided or received for any related party receivables.
No provision for doubtful debts relating to amounts owed by related parties has been made 2016 nil.
An assessment is undertaken each financial year through examining the financial position of the related parties and the market in which the related parties operate.
Transactions with other related parties Details of transactions with directors are detailed in the remuneration report on pages 78 to 98.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Consolidated accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 155 Company accounts 201617 156 Company balance sheet 157 Company statement of changes in equity 158 Notes to the Company financial statements Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 156 Company accounts Company balance sheet At 2 March 2017
2 March 3 March Fixed assets Investment in subsidiaries 4 2374.1 2356.4 Total noncurrent assets 2374.1 2356.4 Current assets Debtors amounts falling due within one year 5 2.7 1.5 Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year 6 425.5 252.1 Net current liabilities 422.8 250.6 Net assets 1951.3 2105.8 Capital and reserves Share capital 7 150.2 150.0 Share premium 8 68.0 62.6 Capital redemption reserve 8 12.3 12.3 Retained earnings 8 1912.2 2078.7 Treasury reserve 8 191.4 197.8 Shareholders funds 8 1951.3 2105.8 1 The profit and loss account of the parent Company is omitted from the Companys accounts by virtue of the exemption granted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The loss generated in the year for ordinary shareholders and included in the financial statements of the parent Company amounted to 10.7m 201516 loss of 5.9m.
Alison Brittain Nicholas Cadbury Chief Executive Finance Director 24 April 2017 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 157 Company statement of changes in equity Year ended 2 March 2017
Note 8
Note 9
Note 9
Note 9
Note 9
At 26 February 2015 149.8 59.2 12.3 2169.6 194.7 2196.2 Loss for the year    5.9  5.9 Total comprehensive loss    5.9  5.9 Ordinary shares issued 0.2 3.4    3.6 Accrued sharebased payments    100.3  100.3 ESOT adjustment    23.5 9.8 33.3 Loss on ESOT shares issued    6.7 6.7 Equity dividends    155.1  155.1 At 3 March 2016 150.0 62.6 12.3 2078.7 197.8 2105.8 Loss for the year    10.7  10.7 Total comprehensive loss    10.7  10.7 Ordinary shares issued 0.2 5.4    5.6 Accrued sharebased payments    17.7  17.7 Loss on ESOT shares issued    6.4 6.4 Equity dividends    167.1  167.1 At 2 March 2017 150.2 68.0 12.3 1912.2 191.4 1951.3 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 158 Company accounts Notes to the Company financial statements At 2 March 2017 1 Basis of accounting The financial statements of Whitbread PLC for the year ended 2 March 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 24 April 2017.
The financial year represents the 52 weeks to 2 March 2017 prior financial year 53 weeks to 3 March 2016.
The financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with applicable UK Accounting
The Company meets the definition of a qualifying entity under FRS 100 Application of Financial Reporting Requirements as issued by the Financial Reporting Council FRC.
Accordingly in the year ended 3 March 2016 the Company underwent transition from reporting under UK GAAP to FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
The financial statements are therefore prepared in accordance with FRS 101.
As permitted by FRS 101 the Company has taken advantage of the disclosure exemptions available under that standard in relation to sharebased payments noncurrent assets held for sale financial instruments capital management presentation of comparative information in respect of certain assets presentation of a cash flow statement standards not yet effective impairment of assets and related party transactions.
Where required equivalent disclosures are given in the consolidated financial statements of the Group.
2 Summary of significant accounting policies
Investments held as fixed assets are stated at cost less provision for any impairment.
The carrying value of investments are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
3 Dividends paid and proposed 201617 201516
Pence per share m Final dividend proposed and paid relating to the prior year 61.85 112.6 56.95 103.4 Interim dividend proposed and paid for the current year 29.90 54.5 28.50 51.7 Total equity dividends paid in the year 167.1 155.1 Dividends on other shares B share dividend 0.80  0.80 C share dividend 0.80  0.80 Total dividends paid Proposed for approval at Annual General Meeting Final equity dividend for the current year 65.90 120.1 61.85 112.4 A final dividend of 65.90p per share 2016 61.85p amounting to a dividend of 120.1m 2016 112.4m was recommended by the directors at their meeting on 24 April 2017.
A dividend reinvestment plan DRIP alternative will be offered.
These financial statements do not reflect this dividend payable.
Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 159 4 Investment in subsidiary undertakings Investments at cost At 3 March 2016 2356.4 2256.1 Contributions to subsidiaries in respect of sharebased payments 17.7 100.3 At 2 March 2017 2374.1 2356.4 Significant trading subsidiary undertakings Principal activity Country of incorporation Country of principal operations % of equity and votes held Whitbread Group PLC Hotels and Restaurants England England 100.0 Premier Inn Hotels Limited Hotels England England 100.0 Costa Limited Operators of coffee shops and roasters and wholesalers of coffee beans England England 100.0 Yueda Costa Shanghai Food and Beverage Management Company Limited Operators of coffee shops China China 51.0 Coffeeheaven International Limited Operators of coffee shops in Eastern Europe England Poland 100.0 Costa Express Limited Operators of customerfacing espresso based selfserve coffee bars England England 100.0 Whitbread Group PLC in which the Company has an investment holds 6% as a general partnership interest in Moorgate Scottish Limited Partnership SLP with Whitbread Pension Trustees holding the balance as a limited partner.
Moorgate SLP holds a 67.8% investment in a further partnership Farringdon Scottish Partnership SP which was established by the Group to hold property assets.
The remaining 32.2% interest in Farringdon SP is owned by Whitbread Group PLC.
The partnerships were set up in 200910 as part of a transaction with Whitbread Pension Trustees.
Further details can be found in Note 29 of the Whitbread PLC consolidated financial statements.
Shares in Whitbread Group PLC are held directly by Whitbread PLC.
Shares in the other subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by Whitbread Group PLC or its subsidiaries.
A full list of subsidiaries and related undertakings is provided in Note 10.
5 Debtors Amounts falling due within one year Corporation tax receivable 2.7 1.5 6 Creditors Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 420.0 246.5 Unclaimed dividends 5.5 5.6 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 160 Company accounts 7 Share capital Ordinary share capital Allotted called up and fully paid ordinary shares of 76.80p each 2016 76.80p each million m At 26 February 2015 195.0
At 3 March 2016 195.2
At 2 March 2017 195.4 At the 2016 Annual General Meeting the Company was authorised to purchase up to 18.3m of its own shares on the open market.
During the year no ordinary shares were acquired 201516 nil.
No shares were cancelled in the year 201516 nil.
During the year options over 0.2m ordinary shares fully paid were exercised by employees under the terms of various share option schemes 201516 0.2m.
Preference share capital B Shares C Shares Allotted called up and fully paid shares of 1p each 2016 1p each million m million m At 26 February 2015 3 March 2016 and 2 March 2017 2.0 At 2 March 2017 there were outstanding options for employees to purchase up to 1.3m 2016 1.3m ordinary shares of 76.80p each between 2016 and 2021 at prices between 13.39 and 38.66 per share 2016 between 2015 and 2020 at prices between 13.39 and 38.66 per share.
8 Reserves Share premium The share premium reserve is the premium paid on the Companys 76.80p ordinary shares.
Capital redemption reserve A capital redemption reserve was created on the cancellation of the Companys B and C preference shares and also includes the nominal value of cancelled ordinary shares.
Retained earnings Included in retained earnings are distributable reserves of 1794.1m.
Treasury reserve This reserve relates to shares held by an independently managed employee share ownership trust ESOT and treasury shares held by Whitbread PLC.
The shares held by the ESOT were purchased in order to satisfy outstanding employee share options and potential awards under the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP and other incentive schemes.
The movement in treasury shares during the year is set out in the table below Treasury shares held by Whitbread PLC ESOT shares held million m million m At 3 March 2016 12.6 Transferred 0.5 7.2 0.5 Exercised in the year   0.4 6.4 At 2 March 2017 12.1 Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 161 9 Contingent liabilities Whitbread PLC is a member of the Whitbread Group PLC VAT group.
All members are jointly and severally liable for the liability.
At the balance sheet date the Group liability stood at 24.5m 2016 27.2m.
10 Related parties The Company has taken advantage of the exemption under paragraph 8k of Financial Reporting Standard 101 not to disclose transactions with other Group companies.
Details of related undertakings are shown below Active related undertakings Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Boutique Premier Inn Soi 11 Ltd Thailand Ordinary THB 100.00 Brickwoods Limited England Ordinary 0.25 Coffeeheaven Holdings Limited England Ordinary 0.01 Coffeeheaven International Limited England Ordinary 0.01 Costa Beijing Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Costa Catering Management Shanghai Co.
Ltd China Ordinary HKD 1.00 Costa China Holdings Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Costa Coffee India Private Limited India Ordinary INR 10.00 Costa Coffee Polska S.
Poland
Ordinary PLN 10.00 Costa Express Canada Limited Canada Ordinary CAD 1.00 Costa Express Holdings Limited England Deferred Ordinary 0.01 Ordinary  A 0.01 Ordinary  B 0.01 Costa Express Limited England Ordinary 0.10 Costa France S.
France
Ordinary EUR 1.00 Costa International Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Costa Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Deferred USD 0.01 Costa M.
Trading DMCC United Arab
Ordinary AED 1000 Costa Singapore Private Limited Singapore Ordinary SGD 1.00 Duttons Brewery Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 162 Company accounts Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Elm Hotel Holdings Limited England Ordinary 0.10 Farringdon Scottish Partnership Scotland na na na na Hualian Costa Beijing Food and Beverage Management Company Limited China Ordinary USD 1.00 Life Coffee Cafes Limited England Ordinary 1.00 MidTier Singapore Private Limited Singapore Ordinary SGD 1.00 Milton SC 2 Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Milton SC Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Milton 1 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Moorgate Scottish Limited Partnership Scotland na na na na Orchard Incorporations 13S Ltd Scotland A Ordinary 1.00 B Ordinary 1.00 PI Hotels and Restaurants Ireland Limited Ireland Ordinary EUR 1.00 Premier Inn Jersey Limited Jersey Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn UK Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Glasgow Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn GmbH Germany Ordinary EUR 25000 Premier Inn Hotels Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Hotels LLC United Arab
Ordinary AED 1000 Premier Inn Hotels Qatar LLC Qatar Ordinary QAR 100.00 Premier Inn India Private Limited India Ordinary INR 10.00 Premier Inn International Development Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Kier Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 B Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Manchester Airport Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Manchester Trafford Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Ochre Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Pattaya Limited Thailand Ordinary THB 10.00 Premier Inn Westminster Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Travel Inn India Limited England Ordinary 1.00
Tasland Indonesia Indonesia Ordinary IDR 500000
Whitbread Indonesia Indonesia Ordinary USD 1.00 PTI Middle East Limited United Arab
Ordinary AED 1000 SIA Coffee Nation Latvia Ordinary L VL 1.00 Silk Street Hotels Limited England Deferred 1.00 Ordinary USD 0.01 St Andrews Homes Limited England Ordinary 1.00 10 Related parties continued Active related undertakings continued Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 163 10 Related parties continued Active related undertakings continued Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Swift Hotels Limited England Preference 5.00 Ordinary 1.00
F.
Ashe and Nephew Limited England Deferred 1.00 Ordinary 0.01 The Costa Foundation England na na na na Whitbread Asia Pacific Private Limited Singapore Ordinary SGD 1.00 Whitbread Condor Holdings Ltd England Ordinary 0.0001 Whitbread East Pennines Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Group PLC England Ordinary 0.25 100.0 A Ordinary 0.25 100.0 Whitbread Holdings Germany GmbH Germany Ordinary EUR 25000 Whitbread Hotel Company Limited England Ordinary 0.10 Whitbread Properties Limited England 5% NonCumulative Preference 0.50 7% NonCumulative Preference 0.25 Ordinary 0.175 Whitbread West Pennines Limited England Ordinary 1.00 WHRI Development DMCC United Arab
Ordinary AED 1000 WHRI Holding Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Yueda Costa Shanghai Food and Beverage Management Company Limited China Ordinary CNY 1.00 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 164 Company accounts Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Advisebegin Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Alastair Campbell and Company Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Archibald Campbell Hope and King Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Autumn Days Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Belgrave Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Belstead Brook Manor Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Brewers Fayre Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Britannia Inns Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Broughton Park Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00
Hungary Kft Hungary Ordinary HUF 1.00 Carpenters of Widnes Limited England Ordinary 0.01 Deferred Ordinary 1.00 Cherwell Inns Limited England A Ordinary NonVoting 1.00 Ordinary 1.00 Chiswell Overseas Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Chiswell Properties Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Churchgate Manor Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Coffee Nation Employee Benefit Trustee Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Coffee Nation UK Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Condor Overseas Holdings Two Limited  UK tax resident.
Dissolved on 8 March 2017 British Virgin Islands Deferred Consideration 1.00 Ordinary B 1.00 Preference B 1.00 Costa Card ELMI Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Costa Denmark ApS Denmark Ordinary DKK 1000 Costa Express GmbH Germany Ordinary EUR 25000  100.0 100.0 Costa Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong Ordinary HKD 1.00 Country Club Hotels Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Cromwell Hotel Stevenage England Ordinary 1.00 Cymric Hotel Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Danesk Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 David Williams Builth Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Dealend Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Delamont Freres Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Delauney Freres Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Dome Restaurants Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Dragon Inns and Restaurants Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Dukes Head 1988 Limited England B Ordinary 1.00 W Ordinary 1.00
Lacon and Co.
Limited England Ordinary 1.00 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 165 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable
Holdings Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Evan Evans Bevan Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Finite Hotel Systems Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 B Ordinary 1.00 Fleet Wines and Spirits Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Forest of Arden Golf and Country Club Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Gable Care Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews Castle England A Ordinary 1.00 Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews Holdings Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 B Ordinary 1.00 C Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews Inns England Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews Restaurants England Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews B. and S.
Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews Enterprises England Ordinary 1.00 Goodhews Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Gough Brothers Limited England Deferred Ordinary 0.20 Ordinary 0.20 Grosvenor Leisure Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Hammock Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Hart and Co.
Boats Limited England 1% NonCumulative Preference 1.00 Ordinary 1.00 1% NonCumulative Preference 0.01 Harveys Leisure Promotions Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 B Ordinary 1.00 Hunter and Oliver Limited England Ordinary 1.00
Burton Warwick Limited England Ordinary 1.00
Norman and Ellery Limited England Ordinary 1.00 James Bell and Company Limited England Deferred Ordinary 0.25 Ordinary 0.01 Jestbread Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Kingsmill Hotel Company Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Lambtons Ale Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Latewise Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Lawnpark Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Leisure and Retail Resources Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 166 Company accounts Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Lloyds Avenue Catering Limited England 3% NonCumulative Preference 1.00 Ordinary 1.00 London International Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Lorimer and Clark Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Mackeson and Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Mackies Wine Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Maredrove Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Marine Hotel Porthcawl Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Marlow Catering Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Meon Valley Golf and Country Club Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Milton 2 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Morans of Bristol Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Morriss Wine Stores Limited England Ordinary 1.00 5.6% NonCumulative Preference 1.00 New Clapton Stadium Company Limited England Ordinary 0.05 Norseman Lager Limited England Ordinary 1.00 P I Hotels Limited England Ordinary 1.00 P I Hotels York Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Pacific Caledonian Properties Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Percheron Properties Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Peter Dominic Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Piquant Caterers Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Pizzaland Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Belfast Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Bournemouth Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Castleford Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Chippenham Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Doncaster Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Gateshead Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Hull Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Investments GmbH formerly Costa Coffee Germany GmbH Germany Ordinary EUR 25000 Premier Inn Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Manchester Holdings Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Manchester Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Northampton Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Portsmouth Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Sheffield Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings continued Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 167 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings continued Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Premier Inn Trentham Gardens Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Premier Inn Troon Limited England Ordinary 0.10 Premier Restaurant Holdings Limited Ireland Ordinary EUR 1.27 Priory Leisure Limited England Ordinary 1.00 PSU2 kft Hungary Ordinary HUF 1.00
C.
Gough and Co.
Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Raybain Northern Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Raybain Wine Bars Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Respotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Rhymney Breweries Limited England Ordinary 0.25 S and S Property Limited England Ordinary 1.00
H.
Ward and Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Salford Automatics Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Scorechance 1 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Scorechance 12 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Scorechance 17 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Scorechance 25 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Scorechance 8 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Sheffield Automatics Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Shewell Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Silk Street Hotel Liverpool Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Small and Co.
Engineering Limited England 7% Cumulative Preference 1.00 Ordinary 1.00 Small and Co.
Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Spring Soft Drinks Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Sprowston Manor Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Square October 1 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Square October 2 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Square October 3 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 St Andrews Homes  Limited England Ordinary 1.00 St Martins Care Homes Investments Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Stoneshell Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Stripe Travel Inn Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Strong and Co.
Ordinary 1.00 Summerfields Care Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Sun Taverns Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Sweetings Chop House Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Swift Lurchrise Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 168 Company accounts Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Swift Hotels  Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Swift Hotels Management Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Swift Inns and Restaurants Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Swift Profit Sharing Scheme Trustees Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Swift Quest Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Swingbridge Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Tewkesbury Park Golf and Country Club Ltd England Ordinary 1.00 The Barcave Group Limited England 7% Cumulative Preference 1.00 Ordinary 1.00 The Dominic Group Limited England Ordinary 1.00 The Four Seasons Hotel Investments Limited
8% Cumulative Preference 8% Cumulative Preference Ordinary 1.00 Preferred Ordinary 1.00 The Four Seasons Hotel Investments Management Limited England Ordinary 1.00 The Four Seasons Hotel Limited England Ordinary 1.00 The Oyster Spa Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 The Portsmouth and Brighton United Breweries Limited England Ordinary 0.25 Thomas Wethered and Sons Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Threlfalls Liverpool and Birkenhead Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Threlfalls Salford Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Trentrise Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Uncle Sams Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Virlat Limited England Ordinary 1.00
M.
Darley Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Preference 1.00 Preferred Ordinary 0.01
R.
Wines Limited England Deferred 1.00 Ordinary 0.01 Wentworth Guarantee Company BVI Limited  UK tax resident.
Dissolved on 8 March 2017 British Virgin Islands Ordinary 1.00 Wentworth Guarantee Company Limited England na na na na Wentworth No.
1 Limited  UK tax resident.
Dissolved on 8 March 2017 British Virgin Islands Ordinary 1.00 Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings continued Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 169 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings continued Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Wentworth No.
2 Limited  UK tax resident.
Dissolved on 8 March 2017 British Virgin Islands Ordinary 1.00 Wentworth No.
3 Limited  UK tax resident.
Dissolved on 8 March 2017 British Virgin Islands Ordinary 1.00 Wentworth No.
4 Limited  UK tax resident.
Dissolved on 8 March 2017 British Virgin Islands Ordinary 1.00 West Country Breweries Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Wheeler Gate Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread G.
Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Company Two Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Developments Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Devon Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Directors 1 Limited England Ordinary 0.05 Whitbread Directors 2 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Dunstable Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Enterprise Centre Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Finance PLC England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Fremlins Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Golf and Country Club Limited England 5% NonCumulative Preference 1.00 A Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Golf Club Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Guarantee Company Two Limited England na na na na Whitbread Healthcare Trustees Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Hotel Bournemouth Limited England Ordinary 0.05 Whitbread Hotels Management Limited England Deferred 1.00 USD 0.01 Whitbread International Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread International Trading Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Investment Company Limited England Ordinary 0.25 Whitbread Investment Company Securities Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread London Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Nominees Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Pension Trustee Directors Company Limited England na na na na Whitbread Pension Trustees England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Pub and Bars Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Pub Partnership Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Pub Restaurants Business Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 170 Company accounts Name of related undertaking Country of incorporation Class of shares held % of class of shares held by the parent
Company % of nominal value where applicable Whitbread Quest Trustee Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Restaurants Australia Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Ordinary 0.56 Whitbread Restaurants Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Scotland Limited Scotland Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Secretaries Limited England Ordinary 0.05 4% Preference 0.05 Whitbread Share Ownership Trustees Limited England na na na na Whitbread Spa Company Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Sunderland  Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Sunderland 2 Limited England Ordinary 1.00 5.6% NonCumulative Preference 1.00 Whitbread Sunderland Limited England Ordinary 5.00 Preference 5.00 Whitbread Trafalgar Properties Limited England A Ordinary 1.00 B Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread UK Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Wales Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Whitbread Wessex Limited England Ordinary 1.00 White Cross Films Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Wiggin Tree Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Willhouse Limited England Deferred 1.00 Q Ordinary 1.00 W Ordinary 1.00 William Overy Crane Hire Limited England Ordinary 1.00 Notes to the Company financial statements continued At 2 March 2017 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings continued Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 171 The registered office of the above compaines is as follows 1 Whitbread Court Houghton Hall Business Park Porz Avenue Dunstable Bedfordshire LU5 5XE 2 17067 21st Floor Ocean Tower 1 Sukhumvit 16 Sammitr Ratchadapisek Road Klongtoey Subdistrict Klongtoey District Bangkok Metropolis Thailand 3 Room 3002 ICP No 1318 North Sichuan Road Hongkou District Shanghai  China 4 Unit No.
216 Second Floor at Squareone C2 District Centre Saket New Delhi  India 5 Chodna 52 00872 Warsaw Poland 6 Co AccuSearch Inc 215 10205101 Street Edmonton AB T5J 2Y9 Canada 7 Knaves Beach Loudwater High Wycombe Buckinghamshire HP10 9QR 8 41 Rue Saint Augustin 75002 Paris France 9 Unit No.
Almas33A Almas Tower Plot No.
LT2 Jumeirah Lakes Towers Dubai United Arab Emirates 10 38 Beach Road 2911 South Beach Tower Singapore  Singapore 11 4th Floor 115 George Street Edinburgh EH2 4JN Scotland 12 Room 520 and 524 5th Floor East Tower Sichuan Building 1 Fu Wai Avenue Xicheng District Beijing China 13 1 Coleman Street 0506A The Adelphi  Singapore 14 4th Floor Saltire Court 20 Castle Terrance Edinburgh EH1 2EN Scotland 15 Caledonian Exchange 19A Canning Street Edinburgh EH3 8HE Scotland 16 TMF Group Ireland Ltd 3rd Floor Kilmore House Park Lane Spencer Dock Dublin 1 Ireland 17 TMF Channel Islands Ltd 2830 The Parade St Helier Jersey JE1 1EQ 18 Ground Floor Premier Inn Dubai Investment Park PO Box 35118 Dubai United Arab Emirates 19 3rd Floor Tornado Towers PO Box 34040 Doha Qata 20 TMF BVI Ltd TMF Place PO Box 964 Road Town Tortola VG1110 British Virgin Islands 21 Room No.
314 Hotel Premier Inn District Centre Shalimar Bagh Outer Ring Road Haiderpur Red Light New Delhi  India 22 Gowling WLG UK LLP 4 More London Riverside London SE1 2AU 23 No 23626 Moo 10 Soi 15 Pattaya Sai 2 Road Tambol Nongpure Amphur Banglamung Chonburi Province 20260 Thailand 24 Jalan Raya Juanda No.73 RT 18 RW05 Semanbung Village Gedangan Sub District Sidoarjo Regency East Java Province Indonesia 25 Gandaria 8 Office Tower 19th Floor Unit A1 Jalan Sultan Iskandarmuda Kebayoran Lama 12240 Indonesia 26 TMF Services B.
Nassima Tower Office 1401 Sheikh Zayed Road PO Box  Dubai United Arab Emirates 27 Ieriu iela 3 Riga LV1084 Latvia 28 Almas 6C Almas Tower Jumeirah Lake Towers Dubai United Arab Emirates 29 Science and Technology Center Building Room B1 Block F No 666 East Beijing Road Shanghai  China 30 The Royal Scot Hotel 111 Glasgow Road Edinburgh EH12 8NF Scotland 31 Ugocsa utca 4.
B. ep.
1226Budapest Hungary 32 Eschenheimer Anlage 1 60316 Frankfurt am main Germany 33 co TMF Denmark AS Bredgade 6 1 1260 Copenhagen Copenhagen Denmark Tower Two Times Square 1 Matheson Street Causeway Bay Hong Kong 35 Messehurm FreidrichEbertAnlage 49 60308 Frankfurt Germany 36 Ecos office centre eschborn HS Buro und Service GmbH Mergenthaleralle 1012 65760 Eschborn Germany 10 Related parties continued Dormant related undertakings continued Company accounts 201617 Company accounts 201617 Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 172 Shareholder information Contact details
Capita Asset Services Whitbread Share Register The Register 34 Beckenham Road Kent BR3 4TU The website address is site For enquiries regarding your shareholding please telephone 44 0tel.
Alternatively you can email email You can also manage your shareholding by visiting site This is a secure online site where you can sign up to receive shareholder information by email buy and sell shares via the Capita Share Dealing Service view your holding and get an indicative valuation and change your personal details.
You will need to have your investor code to hand.
This can be found on the following documentation share certificate dividend voucher or proxy card.
Please ensure that you advise Capita promptly of any change of address.
Share dealing service For Capita Share Dealing Services you can telephone 44 0tel.
Calls are charged at the standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Calls from outside the United Kingdom will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Capita are open from 900 to 1730 Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
1 These details have been provided for information only and any action you take is at your own risk.
If you are in any doubt about what action to take please consult your own financial adviser.
Should you not wish to use these services you could find a broker in your local area on the internet or enquire about share dealing at any high street bank or building society.
The availability of this service should not be taken as a recommendation to deal.
Registered office Whitbread PLC Whitbread Court Houghton Hall Business Park Porz Avenue
Bedfordshire LU5 5XE General Counsel and Company Secretary Chris Vaughan Dividend Reinvestment Plan To reinvest your dividend you will need to sign up for the Dividend Reinvestment Plan the DRIP.
The terms and conditions of the DRIP and a shareholder dividend form are available at site or can be requested from Capita Asset Services.
For enquiries regarding the DRIP please telephone 44 0tel.
Dividend payments by BACS We can pay your dividends directly to your bank or building society account using BACS.
This means that your dividend will be in your account on the same day we make the payment.
Your tax voucher will be posted to your home address.
If you would like to use this method please ring the Registrars on 44 0tel.
Dividend diary 201718 Exdividend date for final dividend 25 May 2017 Record date for final dividend 26 May 2017 DRIP election date 5 June 2017 Payment of final dividend 30 June 2017 Exdividend date for interim dividend 9 November 2017 Record date for interim dividend 10 November 2017 DRIP election date 20 November 2017 Payment of interim dividend 15 December 2017 Financial reporting calendar Dates subject to confirmation Halfyear end 31 August 2017 Announcement of halfyear results 24 October 2017 End of financial year 1 March 2018 Capital gains tax For further information on The market value of shares in the Company as at 31 March 1982 The reduction of Capital on 10 May 2001 and The special dividend and share consolidation in May 2005 or if you require any further information on capital gains tax allocations please refer to the investors section of the Companys website site Dividend history Shareholder services Shareholder information High Low Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 173 Annual General Meeting 2017 The 2017 AGM will be held at 2pm on Wednesday 21 June 2017 at Church House Conference Centre Deans Yard Westminster London SW1P 3NZ.
Shareholder FAQs Where can I find information about B and C shares As outlined in the original circulars the Company made two separate purchase offers for the B and C shares.
There will be no further purchase offers.
The Company does have the right to convert the B and C shares to ordinary shares but there is no current intention to do so.
The B and C shares will continue to attract an annual dividend payment.
How can I find the current share prices You can keep up to date with the current share price at the Companys website site I have lost my share certificate how can I get a replacement If you have lost your certificate please contact the Companys registrars Capital Asset Services on the shareholder helpline 44 0tel.
They will be able to assist you in arranging a replacement.
Am I entitled to shareholder benefits Shareholders with a holding of 64 shares or more are eligible to receive a shareholder benefits card.
Those shareholders who registered to receive offers in 2016 should automatically have received the card with the Annual Report mailing.
Shareholders who wish to register for a card can do so by contacting Capita whose contact details are shown on page 172.
Analysis of ordinary shares at 2 March 2017
Number of holders % of holders
1100 23394 54.67 852666 0.44 101500 13936 32.57 3302431 1.69 5011000 2879 6.73 2019218 1.03 10015000 1787 4.18 3371685 1.72 500110000 187 0.44 1327934 0.68 1000150000 295 0.69 6891701 3.53 50001100000 97 0.23 6857027 3.51 100001500000 145 0.34 32024124 16.38 5000011000000 30 0.07 21733130 11.12 10000015000000 29 0.07 58832474 30.10 5000001 5 0.01 58272608 29.80 Total 42784 100.00 195484998 100.00 Share price history Shareholder information Shareholder information Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 174 Shareholder information Unsolicited mail We are aware that some shareholders have had occasion to complain of the use by outside organisations of information obtained from Whitbreads share register.
Whitbread like other companies cannot by law refuse to supply such information provided that the organisation concerned pays the appropriate statutory fee.
If you are a resident in the UK and wish to stop receiving unsolicited mail then you should register with the Mailing Preference Service telephonetel or you can register online www. psonline.
Warning to shareholders boiler room scams In recent years many companies have become aware that their shareholders have received unsolicited phone calls or correspondence concerning investment matters.
These are typically from overseas based brokers who target UK shareholders offering to sell them what often turn out to be worthless or high risk shares in US or UK investments.
There operations are commonly known as boiler rooms.
These brokers can be very persistent and extremely persuasive.
The Financial Conduct Authority FCA has found that the average amount lost by investors is around 20000 with around 200m lost in the UK each year.
Even seasoned investors have been caught out with the biggest individual loss recorded by the police being 6 million.
It is not just the novice investor that has been duped in this way many of the victims had been successfully investing for several years.
Shareholders are advised to be wary of unsolicited advice offers to buy shares at a discount or offers of free company reports.
If you receive any unsolicited investment advice make sure you get the correct name of the person or organisation check that they are properly authorised by the FCA before getting involved by visiting www. ca. scamsmart. ca.
REMEMBER if it sounds too good to be true it probably is If you deal with an unauthorised firm you will not be eligible to receive payment under the Financial Services Compensation Scheme FSCS if things go wrong.
The FCA can be contacted by completing an online form at www. ca. call the FCA Consumer Helpline ontel or Action Fraudtel.
Details of any share dealing facilities that the Company endorses will be included in Company mailings.
More detailed information on this or similar activity can be found on the FCA website www. ca.
Shareholder services continued Shareholder information Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 175
Automated trading engine ATE The system which we deploy to vary our prices according to demand levels and room availability within certain prescribed limits.
Average Room Rate ARR Hotel accommodation income divided by the number of rooms occupied by guests.
Compound Annual Growth Rate
The year on year growth rate of an annualised gain over a specified number of years.
Detractors
Customers that score zero to six when completing a survey with ten score choices.
Direct bookings Booking made direct to the Premier Inn website Premier Inn call centre or hotel front desks.
Direct digital Bookings made direct to the Premier Inn website.
Directors forum A group of Whitbreads senior leaders.
Earnings per share EPS Profit attributable to the parent shareholders divided by the basic weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year after deducting treasury shares and shares held by an independently managed share ownership trust ESOT.
EBITDA
Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation excluding income from Joint Ventures and Associates.
EBITDAR
Earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and rent excluding income from Joint Ventures and Associates.
Enablement score Having the correct and adequate amount of tools and resources to perform your job to the best of your abilities.
Engagement score The engagement score is calculated by adding together the positive responses to the Your Say questions regarding pride in the organisation advocacy recommending the Company as a place of work and intention to stay and motivation.
These scores are then averaged to produce an overall engagement score.
Equity stores Costa stores leased or owned by Whitbread as opposed to those leased or operated under franchise agreements.
IFRS
International Financial Reporting
Joint sites A site which has both a Premier Inn and Whitbreadowned pub restaurant in one location.
Like for like Total sites outlets or machines excluding those acquired or disposed of and opened or closed during the current year and the previous year.
This can be applied to alternative performance measures such as revPAR ARR and occupancy.
Like for like sales Period over period change in total sales less sales generated by businesses acquired or disposed of and outlets opened or closed during the current year and the previous year.
This is stated preIFRIC 13 for Premier Inn  UK and Ireland Costa and Restaurants  UK calculated on the 52 weeks to 2 March 2017 vs the 52 weeks to 25 February 2016.
Net debt Total company borrowings after deducting cash and cash equivalents.
Net Recommend Based on the fundamental perspective that every companys customers can be divided into three categories when completing a survey with ten score choices Promoters score nine to ten Passives score seven to eight and Detractors score zero to six.
The
Net Guest Score can be calculated by taking the percentage of customers who are Promoters and subtracting the percentage who are Detractors.
Occupancy
Number of hotel bedrooms occupied by guests expressed as a percentage of the number of bedrooms available in the period.
Operating marginmargins Operating profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue.
Operating profit Profit before interest and tax.
Promotors
Customers that score nine to ten when completing a survey with ten score choices.
RevPAR
Revenue per available room is also known as yield.
This hotel measure is achieved by multiplying the ARR by the occupancy rate.
This measure ignores nonroom income such as food and beverage.
Shareholder information
Whitbread Annual Report and Accounts 201617 176 Shareholder information RevPAR premium Incremental revenue per available room over and above that achieved by direct competitors andor the market Return on CapitalReturns Dividing the underlying operating profit for the year by net assets at the balance sheet date adding back debt taxation liabilities and the pension deficit.
System sales Retail sales from Costa outlets irrespective of whether it is an equity or a franchise store.
Team retention The number of permanent new starters that we retain for the first 90 days 3 months.
Team turnover The level of outgoing and incoming permanent employees within our business over a 12 month period.
Underlying basic EPS Underlying profit attributable to the parent shareholders divided by the basic weighted average number of ordinary shares.
See Note 10 to the consolidated accounts.
Underlying net finance cost Finance costs net of finance revenue excluding nonunderlying finance costs or revenue.
See Note 8 to the consolidated accounts.
Underlying operating profit Underlying profit before underlying net finance costs.
See Note 4 to the consolidated accounts.
Underlying profit Profit excluding nonunderlying items.
See Note 6 to the consolidated accounts.
Underlying profit before tax Underlying profit before underlying tax.
See Note 5 to the consolidated accounts.
Underlying tax Tax expense excluding nonunderlying tax items.
See Note 9 to the consolidated accounts.
The performance of the Group is monitored internally using a variety of statutory and alternative performance measures APMs.
APMs are not defined within IFRS and are used to assess the underlying operational performance of the Group and as such these measures should be considered alongside IFRSs measures.
Glossary continued Glossary Whitbread Court Houghton Hall Business Park Porz Avenue
Bedfordshire
LU5 5XE siteinvestors
Printed by Park Communications on FSC certified paper.
Park is an EMAS certified company and its Environmental Management System is certified to ISO 14001.
