Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Meeting needs in responsible lending Morses Club PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Who we are Approximately 1.8m people regularly use the services of HCC companies.
It is a wellestablished specialist market lending principally to the nonstandard borrower population  defined as people regularly refused credit by mainstream lenders.
It is estimated that the UK nonstandard borrower population is around 10m people.
We aim to meet the real need for responsible lending in the community across the UK particularly for customers with a complex credit history.
Morses Club PLC is a UK consumer finance business in the Home Collected Credit HCC market with a proud heritage going back over 130 years.
Our c.
216000 customers are served by c.1800 selfemployed agents as well as 617 employees based across 98 branches.
Contents
Strategic Report Highlights 1 At a Glance 2 Customer Satisfaction Research 4
Chairmans Statement 6
External Landscape 8 Business Model 10 CEOs Review 12 Investment Highlights and KPIs 14 CFOs Operational and Financial Review 20
Risk Management 24
Principal Risks and Uncertainties 26
Chairmans Introduction
Board of Directors 30 Corporate Governance Report 32 Directors Remuneration Statement 37 Directors Report 40 Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report 43
Consolidated Income Statement 49 Balance Sheets 50 Statements of Changes in Equity 5 1 Cash Flow Statements 52 Notes to the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 53 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 54 2017 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 na 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 na
Adjusted profit before tax m Return on equity 27 .2% Overheads as % of revenue 56.9% Return on assets 20.1% Impairment as % of revenue 24.4% Adjusted earnings per share
Strategic Highlights
All agents now using tablets to ensure the highest levels of compliance quality lending and customer outcomes.
Developed a broader range of products with the introduction of cashless lending Morses Club Card and online lending Dot Dot Loans.
Developed our core business and supplemented it with 105 new agent territory builds in the year.
Completed 7 acquisitions with a gross receivables value of 6.8m with full integration into our core loans platform and credit policy regimes.
Operational Highlights
Customer base grew from 198k to 216k an increase of 9%.
Net receivables grew from 56.8m to 61.2m an increase of 8%.
Achieved year on year sales credit issued growth of 18%.
Managed impairment at 24.4% FY16 20.8%  comfortably within our target range of 22.0% to 27 .0%.
Delivered costefficiency improvements with costs as a percentage of income declining from 58.9% to 56.9%.
Reported profit before tax m Reported earnings per share 1 A reconciliation between adjusted and reported PBT is provided on page 15 2 Return on assets and return on equity are calculated based on adjusted PBT less a notional tax rate of 21% Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 At a Glance Our vision is to become the UKs marketleading nonstandard credit company with our customers at the very heart of our business.
As an established relationshipdriven consumer finance provider we focus on responsible lending and fair helpful service to meet the needs of customers with complex credit histories throughout the UK.
What We Do Our customers are usually ineligible for credit from mainstream lenders.
By offering small affordable loans of up to 1000 either in cash or on a Morses Club Card we proudly provide our customers with an essential service.
The Group is currently in the process of obtaining its full regulatory permissions with the Financial Conduct Authority FCA and continues to operate under interim permissions.
We operate primarily via a network of selfemployed agents from the same communities as their customers.
Loans are finalised in person by a Morses Club agent who then collects the repayments each week.
These personal connections allow us to know our customers and their needs developing strong relationships that often endure for many years.
Treating Customers Fairly We are a responsible lender and our commitment to fair customer treatment is woven throughout our business.
In independent satisfaction surveys over 95% of both employees and agents said they understood the importance of treating customers fairly.
Every time a customer borrows from us their agent conducts an affordability check with them in person helping to ensure good customer outcomes.
We make our rates clear and never charge missed or late payment fees or interest.
Our customercentric approach to lending helps to keep our customer satisfaction scores consistently high.
Investment Opportunity Experienced executive team c.80 years of Home Collected Credit experience
2 market share c.216000 customers across the UK Highly invested IT platform widening product offering and improving infrastructure Well placed to capitalise on regulatorydriven market consolidation Untapped market potential of c.8m people Focus on loan quality Cash generative business model that allows for a progressive dividend policy This report covers Morses Club PLC Shelby Finance Limited trading as Dot Dot Loans and Shopacheck Financial Services Limited together the Group and Morses Club.
The report gives greater emphasis to matters significant to Morses Club PLC and its subsidiary undertakings when viewed as a whole.
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 2 c.1800 agents operating throughout the UK Location of Agents Where We Operate Morses Club operates through a series of local branches based all over the UK.
Our field management team operate from these branches working with our network of selfemployed agents.
Our central support centre is based in Birstall near Leeds.
Branch locations 1 Northern Ireland 2 Scotland 3 North East 4 Yorkshire 5 North West 6 Midlands 7 London and South East 8 Wales and South West 9 South Yorkshire and East Midlands Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 3 Customer Satisfaction During FY17 March 2016
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
January 2017
96% 98.5% 97% 98% 96% 96.5% 95% 98% 95.5% 97% 98% 96% Customer Satisfaction Research Mustard Research an independent research agency contact 200 quality customers on our behalf on a monthly basis and conduct short telephone surveys with them each survey takes about 10 minutes to complete.
The survey covers customer satisfaction with our service and their thoughts on our product offering as well as what they would like to see in the future.
The data from these surveys gives us important insights into our customers our market and our opportunities.
Our customer satisfaction research has allowed us to define what good service looks like for Morses Club and identify any areas where we can improve.
We acknowledge that we cannot provide great service without the hard work of our employees and agents and results from our customer satisfaction research are circulated to each area of the business and monitored closely each month.
We are proud of the consistently high satisfaction results we receive  which are consistently above 95%.
To ensure that we continue to provide our customers with exceptional customer service as well as products and services that meet their needs Morses Club conducts independent customer satisfaction research.
Paidup Customer Research In addition to our monthly customer satisfaction research we conduct independent paidup customer research every year.
During FY17 there were two waves of this research conducted by Mustard Research on our behalf.
In each wave of paidup customer research a sample of 500 customers who have paid off their loan and left Morses Club in the previous 12 months are contacted by telephone and asked to complete a short 10minute survey.
The surveys are important in identifying any trends as to why people have chosen to leave Morses Club and in determining any service improvements we may need to make.
Paidup customer research is a key part of our customer retention activity.
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 4 The agent calls regularly they are lovely and keep you up to date with everything.
Its all on the computer and if you need anything theyre there.
98% customer satisfaction rate with agent service 93.5% likely to recommend us to family and friends 94% likely to consider using Morses Club in the future Very friendly and really easy to communicate with and explain everything to you no hidden things.
The way they treat me and Id expect them to treat everyone else like that  they treat me well.
Its a company which you can actually speak to if you have a problem and they will actually come up and sort it out.
Customer Satisfaction Research Customer Comments from February 2017 Research Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 5tel 1980
Chairmans Statement
T odays Business is Built on a Proud Heritage The Groups shares were first admitted to trading on AIM on 5 May 2016.
The Company has achieved the main strategic objectives which were set by the Board at the time of the Initial Public Offering IPO namely the implementation of the Morses Club Card and the purchase of Shelby Finance Limited whose online system has been used as the platform for the recent launch of our online lending product trading as Dot Dot Loans.
As a result of these investments the Group has continued to grow both its revenue by 10% and adjusted profit by 5% to 99.6m and 17 .7m respectively.
Reported PBT grew by 8% to 11.2m.
Stephen Karle
We are pleased with our continued growth and performance for the year  with progress achieved against all of our key objectives.
Morses Club was founded over 130 years ago as a drapery store in Swindon The success of Morses Club led the business to be the only weekly collected credit business in the GUS PLC Group The retail business expanded until it was acquired by GUS PLC Morses Club began to sell personal loans on an unsecured basis to its customers Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 6tel
Morses Club is the UKs second largest Home Collected Credit HCC provider offering loans with personal professional and friendly service to customers nationwide.
We are committed to Treating Customers Fairly a culture which is embedded throughout our organisation.
We put our customers at the heart of everything we do and actively monitor and develop the ways in which we connect with them.
We continuously monitor customer perceptions and are delighted that monthly independent market research consistently measures customer satisfaction levels at above 95% representing compelling evidence of our customercentric culture.
The Board As part of the corporate governance work prior to the admission to AIM three additional Independent Non Executive Directors were appointed to the Board Sir Nigel Knowles Joanne Lake and Patrick Storey.
Between them they bring a wealth of experience in compliance financial services legal investment banking accounting and general business matters to Board deliberations.
Further details are set out on pages 30 and 31.
The full Board of seven Directors now comprises a majority of Independent NonExecutive Directors.
Corporate Governance Corporate governance provides the framework within which our business operates.
From the outset of our existence as a publicly listed company we have set about the task of implementing a best practice approach to ensure that we are transparently governed and managed within a culture of integrity and accountability.
Our Corporate Governance Report appears on pages 32 to 36 with specific information on risk management and an outline of the measures that we take to mitigate risks on pages 24 to 27 .
Our People The dedicated team of people who work for and with Morses Club PLC are united in their commitment to the vision and values of the company and they share a focus on treating all of our customers fairly.
This genuine attention to customer outcomes has contributed to the high quality of service provided to our customers and to the sustained progress of the Companys performance across a targeted range of key performance measures.
Our people ensure that we are able to deliver on our strategy of providing personal loans in a friendly manner.
I look forward to another successful year.
Stephen Karle
27 April 2017
Perpignon
Limited backed by RCapital LLP Morses Club was acquired by Perpignon Limited backed by RCapital LLP Successful IPO raised 68.5m Morses Club successfully listed on AIM 5 May 2016 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 7 2014
Club
Loans at Home
External Landscape The NonStandard Consumer Credit Market Home Collected Credit HCC is part of the wider UK nonstandard credit market.
This market consists of secured and unsecured lending and is made up of approximately 10 million people.
Nonstandard credit is the provision of secured and unsecured credit to consumers other than through mainstream lenders.
Lenders providing nonstandard credit typically lend on an unsecured basis and the market is characterised by high frequency borrowing.
HCC is a specialised and wellestablished segment of the nonstandard credit market with approximately 1.8m people using its services regularly.
HCC customers are generally part of the C2 D and E socioeconomic groups.
Loans are small and unsecured and typically given in cash this model is facilitated via selfemployed agents.
Other forms of nonstandard credit eg instalment loans do not operate in the same way as HCC and rely on fullyonline lending.
Regulatory Landscape Regulatory responsibility for HCC was transferred from the Office of Fair Trading to the Financial Conduct Authority FCA in April 2014.
Morses Club operates within a legislative and regulatory framework set out in the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and 2006 along with the FCAs handbook and associated guidance notes.
Morses Clubs HCC business currently operates on an interim permission from the FCA whilst application for full authorisation is considered.
Morses
Club has provided all of the requested information to the FCA and is continuing an open dialogue with the FCA regarding full authorisation.
Full permission is anticipated during 2017 .
Morses Club conducts its business taking account of all relevant legislation secondary legislation regulation and practice applicable to UK HCC lenders.
Shelby Finance Limited trading as Dot Dot Loans is operating under full authorisation.
Competitor Landscape The largest three HCC lenders have an aggregate market share of approximately 65%.
Below this level the market is highly fragmented with multiple small lenders operating at a local level.
Morses Club is currently the second largest HCC lender with c.216000 customers nationwide.
The number of HCC lenders in the UK has decreased due to tighter rules and regulations.
Morses Club has acquired several smaller HCC businesses as a result of this and these acquisitions continue to make up part of our growth strategy in 2017 .
Digital Opportunity We believe that new digital technologies will change the way many traditional HCC lenders interact with their customers.
This is already happening through online loan applications automated credit approval processes and the use of prepaid cards like the Morses Club Card in addition to cash.
Morses Club believes that there will always be a segment of the population that relies on Home Collected Credit HCC.
Our developing technology platforms and expertise will not only give us the ability to better support our customers and agents but also enable us to address other segments of the far larger UK nonstandard lending market.
Morses HCC market share Total HCC market share Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 8 Second Largest Player in the HCC Market Morses Club is the second largest player in the UK HCC Market with c.216000 customers.
Our customers are based throughout the UK and we operate using nine regional networks which contain multiple branches.
Managers and agents from each branch are relatively local to the areas they serve and are often part of their customer communities.
Our customer numbers have grown by 9% in the last 12 months and due to our robust credit policy as well as affordability checks and general forbearance we have increased our level of good quality customers.
A significant opportunity for market share gains in a large fragmented market.
We are exploring further enhancements we can make to customer communications and loan management using digital technology and will be looking to create an online customer portal.
Our monthly customer satisfaction surveys have shown that there is significant customer interest in this particularly among the 1835 customer demographic.
Digital technology and communications are there to underpin and enhance the relationship between agents and customers in the HCC space not to replace it.
HCC market UK nonstandard credit market Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 9 Business Model Morses Club is the UKs second largest Home Collected Credit HCC lender with c.216000 customers nationwide and a management team with significant experience in HCC and consumer finance.
Develop products to meet customer needs
Loan application process
Loans for those who struggle to find credit elsewhere Loans of 100 to 1000 available New customers eligible to borrow up to 400 Existing customers eligible to borrow up to 1000 Morses Club Card launched in early 2016 Loans offered in cash or on a Morses Club Card Morses Club website and online channels Agent workforce Refer a friend scheme Social media New customers can apply online via an agent or by phone Existing customers apply via their agent Customers receive an Agreement In Principle conditional on satisfying our credit checks and lending criteria Details sent to customers local branch for assigning to an agent Agent calls to arrange an appointment to finalise the loan Agent conducts affordability checks in the customers home On approval of all checks agent issues cash or Morses Club Card loan customers choice Agent agrees a regular weekly repayment day and time with the customer No hidden charges or penalty interest rates  transparent for customers Advanced technology and equipment underpin loan sales and completions agents and field managers have advanced personal tablets to support consistent UKwide customer service The Lending Process Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 10 5 6
Appropriate repeat lending How This Creates Value We use retained earnings and lower cost debt facilities to lend to our customers at a margin and control the lending risk and costs in order to deliver consistent shareholder returns.
Our ability to do this successfully relies on an established national infrastructure of experienced agents and management to deliver the right products to the right customers technology to ensure regulatory compliance and efficient processes and controls wellconsidered compliance and controls to maintain our ethos of the customer being at the centre of everything we do a customer base of c.
216000 that brings economies of scale to the organisation an experienced management team with a clear understanding of the dynamics of nonstandard lending and vision and technology to enhance the services to existing customers and develop into the broader nonstandard lending space.
What Makes Us Different Treating the Customer Fairly is embedded into our approach to lending.
The interest charged is agreed upfront for each loan  we never charge additional interest even if the loan extends beyond its original term.
Repayments collected weekly by agents Experienced agents familiar with their customers communities Agents are selfemployed and paid in commission Frequent contact with agents means there is always an open channel of communication with customers Issues identified quickly and sensitively supporting customers in difficulty Robust complaints process Customer satisfaction consistently above 95% Customers cite agent relationship as a top reason for high satisfaction Additional loans available for suitable customers according to strict criteria Affordability checks are completed for every single loan Proactive customer retention process eg marketing campaigns retention reports paidup customer research Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 11 Chief Executive Officers Review Growth Strategy The HCC business has benefited from a strong pipeline of territory builds.
These are opportunities where experienced agents join us to build customer growth in specific areas.
These agents already have an excellent grasp of what it takes to build good relationships with customers thus representing a key source of premium quality growth.
Technology
A strong technology platform brings a number of advantages.
Our core underwriting system for HCC has a fully developed automated credit control engine at its centre.
This not only enhances good decision making on the doorstep but allows the business to maintain compliant and highly personalised customer service.
Our mobility platform integrates fully with our core underwriting system and provides highly developed functionality to our field teams and agents.
This has led to increased efficiency gains and has virtually eradicated paper from the operation as well as giving us highly controlled impairment.
Our strategy to build a digital platform that spans all our products and services is underway.
This strategy will exploit the existing platforms and bring new Our strategy to build a digital platform that spans all our products and services is underway .
This strategy will exploit the existing platforms and bring new features to our customers. features to our customers.
Crucially our technology platform increases our potential to develop products and services and to embed regulatory compliance to make it simpler as well as enforceable and auditable.
It means that training in processes procedures and behaviours can be delivered online with minimal disruption to daily operations and management in the field.
Acquisitions
Acquiring smaller businesses within the HCC sector is still achievable but careful assessment of the quality of the business timing and pricing are important factors in securing acquisitions at the right price.
For the first time due to the acquisition of Shelby Finance Limited we are now able to purchase online instalment loan competitors giving us more options to consider when selecting potential targets.
This important activity will remain one of our focal areas for 201718.
Online Instalment Loan Product As well as accelerating our IT platform capabilities the purchase of Shelby Finance Limited has also provided us with the valuable benefit of full approval by the regulator in this very large market sector.
Retraction by competitors toxic brand associations and the need for our competitors and We have continued to invest in technology to support our strategic plan to offer customers a broader range of products and the ability to access credit more flexibly.
Paul Smith
Chief Executive Officer
In addition to the successful introduction of the Morses Club Card in April 2016 we are delighted to have launched our new online instalment product Dot Dot Loans in March 2017 .
We have a number of developments planned for the coming year as part of our expansion into customer rewards customer communication channels social media and financial and cardrelated services.
We remain confident in our outlook with a strong pipeline of territory builds for our growth plan and continue to see attractive acquisition opportunities in the Home Collected Credit HCC and the wider nonstandard finance markets.
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 12 new entrants to take volume risks form a part of the competitive landscape.
The fact that we suffer none of these disadvantages means that we are wellpositioned to enter this market.
HCC Market Conditions The HCC competitive environment continues to reduce although at a slower rate than in previous years.
Consumer demand continues its modest growth.
The key drivers to outperforming the sector are technologies that will lower costs increase capacity improve productivity enforce good compliance adherence and improve our relevance and appeal to younger digitally confident consumers.
Morses Club has already invested in all of these technologies and is reaping the rewards described with 8% overall growth in loans 10% growth in highquality cohorts and 5% growth in the under35 market.
The business is now in a position to lower the cost to serve in both HCC and online lending markets and to improve its productivity.
Overheads as a percentage of revenue have already started to fall reducing to 56.9% from 58.9% in FY16.
There is capacity for the business to grow using the existing field resource with an increase of up to 28% in the ratio of customers to a business manager.
Technology and Customer Service We have continued to concentrate on using technology to help drive further improvements to the customer experience.
The efficiency of our agents and managers has been a key focus.
As a result of our investment in better technologies we can now devote more management time to delivering the right outcomes for customers helping those in difficulty and supporting agent development.
The agents themselves now face far less manual administration with the eradication of paperwork and the ability to sign loan agreements on their tablet.
This in turn eases the business operation improves worklife balance and enhances loyalty to Morses Club thus reducing agent churn.
Digitising our business has brought many planned and subtle advantages in addition to those already detailed.
The fact that every part of the lending and collecting process is digitally and geographically timestamped means that we can deliver enhanced management reporting from our data warehouse.
This makes us a much more transparent organisation.
The platform has also allowed us to automate credit decisions based on policy with minimal levels of intervention or management overrides.
This ensures responsible lending and sound compliance as evidenced by our controlled impairment and the increase in the proportion of debt in our best performing arrears bands.
The installation of tailored risk management systems and complaint management systems illustrate how we have adopted the same systematic approach in these areas too.
Our
PLC.
I am proud that we are equipped and empowered by robust systematised processes managed by highly skilled and ethical management teams.
The fact that we are developing our technology for customer interface and customer use is a hugely positive aspect of the business.
The outcome for the customer is that Morses Club is more accessible as a financial option in their daily life.
For the first time in our history we can gather detailed data on the spending behaviour of our customer base.
This helps us significantly in designing even better valueadded services for our customers which in turn will improve customer acquisition particularly amongst younger age groups and retain more high quality customers.
Regulatory Context I believe that the best way to create a positive relationship with the regulator is to focus on the customer.
Our improvements and investments have been made with our customers satisfaction in mind.
It is however no accident that the developments in which we have invested also enable us to be more productive reduce our operating costs reuse technology many times over for the same investment case and of course to attract and retain customers.
The primary vision of better customer outcomes via technology investment will be the key to maintaining a harmonious relationship something which I believe we are on course to achieve.
Marketing
Morses Club has been in existence for over 130 years and has strong brand loyalty and identity.
Our website traffic demonstrates that this positive brand awareness reaches beyond the HCC market into the wider  nonstandard credit market too.
This will be a major advantage to us as we grow our brand and reputation in and potentially beyond the online instalment market.
Morses Club Card Morses Club Card is our prepaid Visa debit card which allows customers to receive loans via card rather than cash.
The card allows customers to pay for goods and services electronically as well as access cash via cash machines free of charge.
Further benefits of the card include greater security for agents and customers as the cards are PIN protected.
In addition customers have access to an online portal a mobile app as well as the opportunity to earn cashback from selected retailers.
Eloans
We have made a strong start in our diversification strategy.
Our online lending brand launched in March 2017 .
A fully interactive customer portal and downloadable mobile app will mean easier twoway communication with customers.
As the delivery and awareness platforms continue to develop we will be able to take much larger strides into customer retail benefits such as discounting and cashbacks.
Our expansion of our Morses Club Card base the portal and app platforms will allow us to offer simple financial services to our customers and we will encourage our customers to share their experience of Morses Club on social media improving our reputation and relevance with emerging younger markets.
Market Opportunities The Board remains vigilant to market developments that could help accelerate our strategy and augment our vision.
We are currently reviewing several growth and diversification opportunities and our horizonscanning capabilities will ensure that we identify and evaluate these opportunities as they emerge.
Paul Smith
Chief Executive Officer
27 April 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 13 Investment Highlights and Key Performance Indicators KPIs Strategy and Performance On flotation we identified a number of investment highlights for investors.
Building a Marketleading UK Non standard Consumer Finance Company Longestablished UK Home Collected Credit HCC market player with strong returns Proven track record of KPIenhancing acquisitions and organic growth Prudent credit control and shorter duration loans improve both impairment and profitability Consolidation opportunities created by regulatory change Initiatives to futureproof the core business Highly invested IT platform Progressive dividend policy supported by strong cash generation Our KPIs below comprise a set of performance metrics used by management to help gauge the meaningful progress of our business.
The set is not exhaustive and management may also consider other measures when assessing performance.
KPIs
Adjusted profit before tax m Reported profit before tax m Return on equity % 13.0tel 58.6tel 21.5tel A profitability measure that deducts operating and nonoperating expenses but excludes the payment of tax and exceptional and nonrecurring costs.
A measure showing the profit before tax as reported in the Groups statutory accounts.
Adjusted earnings as a percentage of tangible equity value.
Adjusted profit before tax rose to 17 .7m an increase of 5%.
Revenue growth of 10% was achieved whilst maintaining impairment comfortably within managements guidance range and improving operating efficiencies.
Reported profit before tax increased to 11.2m an increase of 8%.
Return on equity of 27 .2% demonstrates the strong returns within HCC and compares favourably with major competitors.
Adjusted earnings per share p Reported earnings per share p Return on assets % natel natel 15.5tel Total earnings divided by the weighted average number of shares adjusted to remove impact of noncore activities and exceptional costs.
Adjusted earnings per share of 10.8p and reported earnings per share of 6.6p reflect the strong profit contribution from our maiden year as a PLC enabling the Group to pay the proposed final dividend of 4.3p interim of 2.1p already paid.
No relevant prior year comparatives are included for the period prior to listing.
Adjusted earnings as a percentage of tangible assets.
Return on assets of 20.1% demonstrates the strong returns within HCC and compares favourably with major competitors.
1 As described in the earnings per share ratio on page 15 2 Net assets less intangible assets excluding capitalised software 3 Total assets less intangible assets excluding capitalised software 4 2015 comparatives not available due to IFRS conversion Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 14 Reconciliation of reported to adjusted PBT mtel Reported PBT 58.6 10.4 11.2 Exceptional Costs Restucturing and other nonrecurring costs
Amortisation of acquisition intangibles
Gain arising on acquisition
Parent Interest charge adjustment Adjusted PBT 13.0 16.8 17.7 I Exceptional costs relate to the costs of flotation on AIM II Restructuring and other nonrecurring costs relate to restructuring costs incurred on acquired businesses III Amortisation of intangibles relates to acquired businesses IV Gain related to the acquisition of Shopacheck Financial Services Limited V Finance charges relate to finance costs previously borne by parent company Tangible equityaverage receivables ratio % Impairment as % of revenue Overheads as % of revenue 2016 2015 na na 25.5tel 57.2tel Tangible equity value at period end as a percentage of average net receivables over the period.
The value of impairment charged as a cost to the income statement as a percentage of revenue.
The direct expenses of running the business as a percentage of revenue including agents commission.
This ratio demonstrates the Groups ability to generate return with very little external debt.
The impairmentrevenue ratio remains comfortably within managements guidance range of 2227%.
The cost income ratio fell from 58.9% to 56.9% in the period as management continues to leverage operational efficiencies from its investment in technology.
Credit issued m Number of customers Number of selfemployed agents 112.0tel 215723 198727 198tel 2015 1826 1839 1tel 2015 Aggregate value of loans issued over the period.
Total number of customers at period end.
Total number of selfemployed agents at period end.
Sales demand was strong especially in H2.
We achieved annual growth of c.18% from core and acquisition sources.
Customer numbers grew by 9% through a combination of organic means and acquisition activity.
During the year the Group introduced its own prepaid Visa debit card aimed at a younger demographic.
By February 2017  around 6500 customers had a Morses Club Card.
Management has focused on reducing vacancy rates and optimising territory sizes during the year rather than increasing absolute agency numbers.
1 As described in the earnings per share ratio on page 15 2 Net assets less intangible assets excluding capitalised software 3 Total assets less intangible assets excluding capitalised software 4 2015 comparatives not available due to IFRS conversion Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 15 FOCUS
Relationship Lending  Our Model Putting You First Customers and Teams Our aim is to be the leading consumer finance provider in the UK for non standard credit through excellence in all that we do.
Our values and culture are founded on responsible lending and supporting our agents to deliver industryleading customer service on the doorstep.
Our Core Values
Our customers are at the heart of everything we do.
Trustworthy
We are direct and transparent in all that we do and say.
Clear
Our systems and processes will always be simple and straightforward.
Flexible
We will show forbearance and understanding meeting our customers needs with matching products.
Team Support Development and Engagement Training and development is central to embedding compliant lending within Morses Club.
All managers and agents receive a thorough induction and everyone in the organisation  from the CEO to the newest starter  participates in compliance and conduct related training every month.
Voluntary turnover is low within our teams consistently measuring less than 1.7%.
Average service length is eight years.
Both labour turnover and service length have remained consistent compared with 201516.
As of 25 February 2017  Morses Club employs 617 people and operates through a field network of 98 administrative branches across the
The Companys support operations compliance central operations customer services finance marketing HR business services IT etc operate from our support centre in Birstall
Our metrics have remained consistent with 201516 results.
79% of employees feel engaged with Morses Club 70% of employees are proud to work for Morses Club 84% of employees think Morses Club provides good customer service 98% of employees understand the importance of Treating Customers Fairly Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 16 Employee and agent satisfaction is independently measured at 70% Mustard Research 2016 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 17 Dot Dot Loans is a UK based online instalment loan product launched in March 2017 .
It has been designed to be simple straightforward and convenient.
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 18 TH IN KIN G N EW A Modern Lens on a Traditional Business Eloans for the Online Customer The core business of Morses Club PLC is Home Collected Credit HCC.
However our growth strategy incorporates a plan to broaden our products and services.
Morses Club launched Dot Dot Loans an online instalment loan product  in March 2017 .
The operational model and target demographic are fundamentally different from the HCC product.
Every loan is applied for and approved online and repayments are collected from the customers bank account on an agreed date each month.
Dot Dot Loans typically targets C1C2D profile customers with a moderate but steady income.
We anticipate that the two products will see only a small overlap of customers.
The new brand website is mobile responsive designed to meet the needs of this different set of consumers who may have access to a wider range of financial options and who expect fast easilyaccessible products.
Why an eloan HCC customers make up approximately 30% of the 10 million people in the nonstandard credit market.
Dot Dot Loans helps us to access the remaining eight million UK consumers who want online instalment credit.
By adding brands to the Morses Club product portfolio we are strengthening our brand presence.
Why Dot Dot Loans We based the eloan product branding on the results of consumer research conducted in August 2016.
Dot Dot Loans speaks to consumers in a clear and friendly manner giving all the facts without lots of financial jargon.
The brand differentiates itself from its competitors and will have the same focus on responsible lending good customer outcomes and treating customers fairly as Morses Club.
1 Mustard Research August 2016 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 19 Chief Financial Officers
Operational and Financial Review
The results for the Group for the 52 weeks to 25 February 2017 illustrate our aim of controlled growth with credit issued up by 18% revenue up by 10% and adjusted profit before tax up by 5%.
Statutory profit before tax is also up 8%.
Impairment as a percentage of revenue of 24.4% FY16 20.8% remains comfortably within our guidance range of 22.0% to 27 .0%.
Despite the increased costs of compliance and PLC status the ratio of total operating costs to revenue decreased by 7% because the benefits of our scale and improved technology drove greater efficiencies.
Net tangible assets being net assets less intangible assets arising from acquisitions plus capitalised software increased by 14% to 54.4m with the net receivables growing by 8% to 61.2m.
The value of gross customer receivables with our top performing customers increased by 10%.
Group Results Credit issued to customers for the year increased by 18% to 144.1m FY16 122.2m of which 5% can be attributed to acquisitions made during this period.
Core growth reflected a successful territory build strategy in which we carried out 105 builds in the year and their quality remains strong.
Revenue increased by 10% to 99.6m FY16 90.6m while the cost of collections rose by 17% to 22.4m FY16 19.2m representing 22.5% FY16 21.2% of revenue.
There are several reasons for the disproportionate increase in collection costs.
Firstly the cost of increased territory build subsidies to agents joining from competitors accounted for 1.2m compared with 0.7m last year.
Managements view is that this is a business development cost as new territory builds are usually lossmaking in the first year but result in highquality profitable customers thereafter.
Secondly agents inherited from acquisitions are generally more expensive creating an estimated cost increase of 0.5m this year FY16 Finally shortening the average loan duration and therefore the finance charges decreases the income to cash yield making the commission paid this is cashbased relatively more expensive.
Commission Breakdown m FY17 FY16 Agent commission 21.2 18.5 New agent subsidies 1.2 0.7 Total commission 22.4 19.2 The Groups financial performance continues to reflect our underlying aims of controlled growth through responsible lending with a continued focus on impairment improving the quality of our customer base.
We believe this leads to higher returns on assets and improved shareholder returns.
Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer The Group achieved an impressive return on equity of 27 .2% FY16 27 .9% an outstanding achievement given our comparatively low gearing.
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 20 Impairment of 24.3m FY16 18.8m was 29% higher than last year increasing as a percentage of revenue from 20.8% to 24.4%.
This increase reflects the very low impairment in the prior year due to modest growth in credit issued in the first half of that year and the second half of the year before.
These lower levels of growth are attributable to the acquisition and integration of the Shopacheck Financial Services business at the time.
This was a major undertaking and meant that management were focused on assessing the customer base that we had inherited and harmonising IT systems credit policy and other processes and procedures rather than on new customer growth.
This current impairment level is still well within our concept of an appropriate range of 22% to 27% for an established Home Collected Credit HCC business.
Impairment is arguably more closely related to credit issued and on this metric the level of impairment of 16.8% of credit issued is only slightly higher than 15.4% of credit issued last year.
Overheads of 34.6m were broadly in line with last years 34.1m despite increased costs associated with being a listed company and the increased investment in compliance activities.
The continued focus on improving operational efficiency resulted in the reduction of overheads as a percentage of revenue from 37 .6% last year to 35.1% this year an efficiency improvement of 7%.
The adjusted profit before tax increased to 17 .7m from 16.8m last year an improvement of 5%.
Adjusted earnings per share increased to 10.8p from 10.2p last year.
Reported profit before tax increased to 11.2m from 10.4m last year an improvement of 8%.
A table of adjustments between reported profit before tax and adjusted profit before tax is shown on page 22.
The Board proposes a final dividend of 4.3p making a total of 6.4p for the year .
This excellent dividend reflects our confidence in the business prospects and our commitment to generating high income yields for our shareholders.
Sources and uses of cash Profit waterfall Uses Sources Cash from operations Cash from funding Core loan book growth
Interest paid Corporation tax paid Dividends paid
PBT FY16
Cost of sales increase
Overheads
Finance costs
PBT FY17 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 21 Chief Financial Officers
Operational and Financial Review
Reconciliation of reported to adjusted PBT mtel Reported PBT 58.6 10.4 11.2 Exceptional Costs Restucturing and other nonrecurring costs
Amortisation of acquisition intangibles
Gain arising on acquisition
Parent Interest charge adjustment Adjusted PBT 13.0 16.8 17.7 I Exceptional costs relate to the costs of flotation on AIM II Restructuring and other nonrecurring costs relate to restructuring costs incurred on acquired businesses III Amortisation of intangibles relates to acquired businesses IV Gain related to the acquisition of Shopacheck Financial Services Limited V Finance charges relate to finance costs previously borne by parent company The amortisation of intangibles reflects the unwind of intangible assets in connection with acquisitions.
This reduction reflects both the lower level of acquisitions in the current year and reduced levels of amortisation in connection with prior year acquisitions.
Intangible assets are amortised over their useful economic life which is based on the expected life of the acquired customer relationships.
Due to the behavioural profile of our customers this will naturally result in a greater amortisation charge in the early years with a corresponding reduction in later years.
No intangible asset is recognised for new customers agents may identify subsequently which management considers to be a conservative approach.
In FY17  the business incurred costs of 2.2m in connection with its IPO on 5 May 2016.
Other nonoperating costs are primarily in connection with nonrecurring restructuring costs of the business and were higher in FY16 due to the costs associated with integrating the Shopacheck Financial Services business into Morses Club.
Online Lending The additional costs associated with establishing our online lending facility were less than 0.1m and have therefore not been separated out from the core business performance.
Return on Equity The Group calculates its return on equity ROE as profit before tax amortisation of intangible assets arising on acquisitions the oneoff costs of the IPO and other nonoperating costs as a percentage of the average book value of the shareholder funds during the period.
The Group achieved an impressive 27 .2% FY16 27 .9% for the current year a particularly pleasing result given the low gearing level by comparison with our peers.
Net Margin The adjusted net margin which excludes amortisation of intangibles on acquisitions the oneoff costs of the IPO and other nonoperating costs decreased to 17 .7% compared to 18.6% last year primarily due to sales growth and investment in our business.
Because creditissued growth exceeded revenue growth and given that impairment is closely related to sales the likeforlike impact of impairment cost to revenue on margin reduced it by 1.7%.
Furthermore the additional cost of the agent commission subsidies impacted net margins by 1.2% against only 0.8% in the previous year.
The net margin for the period decreased only slightly to 11.3% from 11.5% last year as the amortisation of intangibles on acquisitions charge reduced to 3.7m from 5.4m.
Acquisitions and Goodwill In this period the Group made six acquisitions of loan book assets along with the staff who TUPE across under such transactions.
The total sum paid for these books was 5.7m generating intangible assets and goodwill of 2.6m.
This was a lower level of activity compared to last year when we paid 7 .9m and generated intangible assets and goodwill of 2.8m.
In addition we acquired the shares of Shelby Finance Limited in which an established online lending platform and associated credit decision infrastructure formed the primary asset.
Impairment of 16.8% of credit issued remains broadly comparable to the prior year of 15.4% of credit issued.
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 22 The lower intangible amortisation for the year of 3.7m compared with 5.4m in the previous year arises from both the reduced level of acquisitions and lower amortisation of intangible assets from prior year acquisitions.
Dividend
Subject to Shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting on 20 June 2017  the Board proposes to pay a final dividend of 4.3p per ordinary share payable on 21 July 2017 to all shareholders on the register at the close of business on 23 June 2017 .
This payment is additional to the interim dividend of 2.1p per ordinary share already paid making a total dividend for the year of 6.4p.
The high dividend payment reflects the Boards confidence in the business prospects and our commitment to provide a strong income yield to our Shareholders.
Balance Sheet The total equity for the Group has increased from 55.4m at the end of last year to 61.4m.
It should be noted that there is no final dividend accounted for in our first period as a listed company.
Net tangible assets which exclude intangible assets arising on acquisitions have increased by 14% to 54.4m from 47 .8m at the end of last year.
Our main book asset is the net customer loan book which increased in value to 61.2m from 56.8m at the end of last year an increase of 8%.
Gross receivables from customers before impairment provisioning which includes discounting of cash flows increased by 5% in the year.
The higher growth in the net balance sheet value reflects the Groups continued drive to improve loan book quality and thus reduce impairment provisions.
This growth follows a period of contraction in the loan book since March 2014 while we upgraded the debt quality of our Shopacheck Financial Services business acquisition.
Funding
At the end of the financial year our debt stood at 10.0m a marginal rise from the previous years 9.0m.
Christmas represents the Groups peak borrowing period in this financial year borrowing reached 21.5m compared with 20.0m in the previous year.
The Group currently has a 25m revolving debt facility with Shawbrook Bank PLC.
It is secured by a debenture on our business assets and runs until March 2019 with a further termout period until September 2019.
The facility is subject to both financial and debt quality covenants which are typical of this form of lending.
The Group has met these covenants historically and expects to do so for the duration of the facility.
Whilst this facility is sufficient to fund modest business growth and maintain a progressive dividend policy the Directors are working to secure additional facilities in order to exploit any new business opportunities that arise.
We would also like to build relationships with more than one lending institution.
The Board is keen to emphasise that any increase in gearing will always be firmly founded on our culture of Treating Customers Fairly.
Cash Flow Cash from core activities in the year generated 15.1m in cash FY16 13.6m of which 6.8m FY16 10.6m was invested in business acquisitions and capital expenditure.
The dividend payment in FY16 of 17 .5m reflects many years of undistributed earnings as a private company.
A summary cash flow is shown below m FY17 FY16 Cash from Core Activity 15.1 13.6 External funding 1.0 9.0 Total Cash Sources 16.1 22.6 Acquisitions and Capital 6.8 10.6 Core Loan Book Growth 1.4 2.9 Corporation Tax Paid 4.1 1.7 Interest Paid 0.9 0.6 Dividends Paid 2.7 17.5 Total Cash Utilisation 15.9 27.5 Cash Movement 0.2 4.9 Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer 27 April 2017 Strong cash flows from shortterm loan products allow the business to react rapidly to market changes and customer performance.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 23 Principal risks are a risk or a combination of risks that given the Groups current position could seriously affect the performance future prospects or reputation of the Group.
They include those risks that could materially threaten our business model performance solvency or liquidity or prevent us from delivering our strategic objectives.
The Board has the overall responsibility for ensuring that risk is appropriately managed across the Group.
The Board has established the Groups risk appetite and strategy and approved its frameworks methodologies policies and roles and responsibilities.
The Group has an internal audit manager who reports to the Audit Committee Chairman.
The internal audit managers priorities have been agreed by the Boards Audit Committee and Risk and Compliance Committee and focus on i high residual risks and ii those risks which have been significantly reduced by Group actions and procedures.
The Groups approach to risk management is underpinned by the Three Lines of Defence model which is summarised in the diagram below.
Responsibility for the First Line of Defence resides with the frontline business divisions and functions eg operations and finance.
Line managers are directly accountable for identifying and managing the risks arising in their functional or business area.
The Second Line of Defence comprises the Groups central and independent risk management and compliance functions with responsibility for oversight compliance monitoring and reporting to the Boards Risk and Compliance Committee and the Executive Risk Committee.
This is led by the Risk and Compliance Director who reports to the Chairman of the Risk and Compliance Committee and to the CEO.
The Third Line of Defence includes the internal audit manager who reports to the Chairman of the Audit Committee and is independent of the First and Second Lines of Defence.
In addition external accountants undertake a quarterly audit on behalf of the Groups external lenders.
Line of Defence Role Functions First Line of Defence Direct responsibility for the performance and monitoring of frontline control activities across the business Field operations  regional managers area managers and business managers Central operations Banking and finance Second Line of Defence Support and challenge the business via control activities Independently review the effectiveness of frontline control activity Manage fraud Compliance risk and financial crime Third Line of Defence Independently assess and assure Internal control framework Risk management effectiveness Internal audit Use of thirdparty specialists to assist the internal auditor Use of thirdparty internal auditors and legal specialists The Group maintains a risk register covering the entire business.
Risks are rated according to the probability of occurrence and potential impact.
Each risk is assigned to an appropriate individual and all mitigation and action plans are recorded.
The Group operates only in the UK financial services sector and the Directors believe that whatever form Brexit may take it is not a material risk to the business.
The principal risks faced by the business by risk category are as displayed on pages 26 and 27 .
The Directors through the Risk and Compliance Committee have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
Risk Management
Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 24 Viability Statement The Directors consider the Groups viability as part of their continuing programme of monitoring risk.
For the purposes of assessing the future prospects of the Group the Directors have selected a threeyear timeframe.
This timeframe was selected as it corresponds with the Boards strategic planning horizon.
The assessment has been made with reference to the Groups current position and prospects the Groups strategy the Boards risk appetite and the Groups principal risks and uncertainties and how these are identified managed and mitigated as shown on pages 26 and 27.
The strategy for the Group is included on pages 16 to 19 and its business model is on pages 10 and 11.
Home
Collected Credit HCC is a long established offering and parts of the Group have been undertaking this business for more than 80 years.
The Directors review and renew the threeyear strategic plan at least annually.
Progress against the strategic plan is reviewed every month by the Board through presentations from the Executive Management Team on the performance of their respective business units the assessment of market opportunities and the consideration by the Board of its ability to fund its strategic ambitions.
In addition to standard internal governance the Group is also monitored against key financial covenants tied in with current funding facilities.
These are produced and submitted on a monthly basis with key schedules included in the monthly board papers.
The Group is profitable and cash generative.
It currently has a debt facility in the form of a 25m revolving facility secured by a debenture on the assets of the business.
This facility expires in March 2019 and it is the Groups policy to renew such a facility well in advance of this date.
The Directors are very confident that the credit facility will be renewed prior to March 2019.
Due to the shortterm nature of its products the Group is well placed to react promptly to any changes in its liquidity requirements.
Based on the above the Board confirms that it has a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due for the next three years.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 25 Type of Risk Definition Impacts Mitigation
Risk
The risk of poor outcomes for customers.
Offering
Failing to assess affordability.
Failing to identify vulnerable customers.
Failing to show forbearance if customers struggle with their repayments.
Treating Customers Fairly is a fundamental part of the Companys culture.
Comprehensive and verifiable training of agents and staff is undertaken.
First and secondline quality assurance operates alongside an automated mobile technology based sales process.
Regulatory
Risk
The risk of legal or regulatory action resulting in fines penalties censure or other sanction or legal action arising from failure to identify or meet regulatory and legislative requirements only operate in UK.
This also includes the risk that new regulations or changes to the interpretation or implementation of existing regulations may affect the Groups operations and cost base.
Interpretation of the Groups regulatory requirements is not consistent with the FCA principles for business and rules.
Initial gap analysis completed and adjusted when any rules change.
We maintain continuous communication with key external stakeholders and professional contacts.
Legal or regulatory noncompliance.
FCA authorisation process is inappropriately managed.
Governance risk and compliance are independently and externally reviewed.
We sustain good relationships with key external stakeholders to keep our information updated.
Credit Risk The risk of default on a debt may arise from a borrower failing to make the necessary payments.
The initial risk lies with the lender and includes lost principal and interest disruption to cash flow and increased collection costs.
Credit risk and underwriting functions insufficiently assess affordability.
Group policy prescribes lending constraints coupled with automated credit and underwriting functions.
Weekly management information allows the Group to monitor the effects of lending decisions.
Reputational
Risk
Reputational risk is the chance of a loss due to damage to or a decline in the Groups reputation.
Management style does not encourage effective control over business units.
Poor customer outcomes result in a high level of complaints.
Effective corporate governance provides business oversight and control.
Independent monitoring for example market surveys and mystery shopping.
Strategic and Business Risk Strategic risk would arise from poor business decisions substandard execution of decisions inadequate resource allocation andor from failure to adapt sufficiently to changes in the business environment.
Acquisitions result in stretching resource beyond capability.
The recruitment process is highly automated. and efficient.
Inadequate
A full Committee governance structure is in place.
Failure to maintain the Companys competitiveness across the markets it serves or plans to serve.
Detailed strategic planning and oversight is implemented alongside horizon scanning.
Pursuit of an expansion strategy that overstretches managements resources.
Committeebased corporate governance structure operates with Board oversight.
Wider credit market perceptions and contagion that impacts the Company.
Trade association membership and lobbying.
Principal Risks and Uncertainties Strategic Report Morses Club PLC 26 Type of Risk Definition Impacts Mitigation
Risk
This describes the risk of loss arising from inadequate or failed procedures systems or policies employee errors system failures fraud other criminal activity indeed any event which disrupts business processes.
Insufficient safety and protection of agents and staff in the home collect environment.
Failure to recruit and retain key staff.
All agents and staff participate annually in a personal safety review and follow our home remote working policy.
The Group ensures that effective recruitment retention and incentive programmes are in place.
The Group has a comprehensive suite of policies and procedures covering its operational activities that are subjected to regular review and revision.
Liquidity
Risk
Liquidity risks arise when a Company is unable to meet its current and future financial obligations on time.
Funding is not available to achieve growth targets.
The Group currently has a debt facility in the form of a 25m revolving facility secured by a debenture on the assets of the business.
This facility expires in March 2019 and it is the Groups policy to renew such a facility well in advance of this date.
This is sufficient to fund modest business growth.
The Directors are also actively engaged in securing additional facilities in order to exploit business opportunities in the future.
IT Risk Cyber risks.
IT systems and networks can be damaged andor information can be lost owing to third party actions.
The Group has an ongoing programme to conduct regular vulnerability assessments against our core infrastructure services.
Penetration testing of our external and internal networks helps to identify new or emerging security concerns.
The potential that a given threat will exploit vulnerabilities of an asset or group of assets causing harm to the organisation.
The risk of an event is measured in terms of its probability and its consequences.
Business continuity plan fails to maintain customer service.
A comprehensive business continuation policy and procedure are in place.
Service level agreements and business continuation plans are verified and tested with outsourced suppliers.
Integration risk that arises on the acquisition of a business that may have a significant impact on the risk exposure and risk management strategies.
Data protectioninformation security issues occur ie data is lost.
We have a dedicated information security resource and full penetration testing is undertaken.
Strategy and architecture risk arising from inadequate requirements gathering and business analysis.
Major change impacts on daily business andor results in poor quality delivery.
The business change team closely monitors demand and resource plans.
Outsourced supplier risk arising from the use of external IT platforms.
Material breach or complete loss of key outsourced service.
Supplier management accounts and the supplier failure matrix are closely monitored.
This Strategic Report was approved by the Board on 27 April 2017 and signed on its behalf by Paul Smith
Chief Executive Officer
27 April 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 27 Chairmans Introduction to Governance Board of Directors As part of the process leading to the Companys Initial Public Offering IPO and in order to strengthen our governance arrangements three new NonExecutive Directors were appointed to the Board on 14 April 2016 prior to the Groups admission to AIM on 5 May 2016.
The Board currently comprises five NonExecutive Directors and two Executive Directors whose biographies are presented on pages 30 and 31.
The Board considers four of the NonExecutive Directors myself Joanne Lake Patrick Storey and Sir Nigel Knowles to be independent in character and judgement because while we each own shares in the Company we all have significant other business interests and activities.
The Board as a whole considers the NonExecutive Directors minor shareholdings in the Company to be advantageous to shareholders as in addition to our fiduciary duties our interests are aligned with shareholders in general.
NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to share options and there are no crossdirectorships between Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The Board comprises five NonExecutive Directors and two Executive Directors.
Peter Ward has been appointed by Perpignon Limited and so is not considered to be independent.
Sir Nigel Knowles has been appointed as the Senior Independent Director.
Much work was done during 2016 to build a Board equipped with the experience and expertise to drive the Groups future direction strategy and culture.
All five NonExecutive Board members were appointed for an initial oneyear term of office.
Following a review of their effectiveness and commitment both individually and collectively by the Nominations Committee which I chair all have been recommended to the Board for an extension of their appointments for the remaining two years subject to annual review and to election by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting on 20 June 2017 .
All Directors have access to the Company Secretary Dave Belmont who is responsible for ensuring that Board procedures are observed.
Any Director wishing to do so may take independent advice at the Groups expense.
Committed to a high standard of corporate governance from the date of the IPO the Directors have adopted the provisions of the September 2014 edition of the UK Corporate Governance Code although being AIM listed the Group is not obliged to comply with this.
The only exception is the Directors Remuneration Report which has been prepared in accordance with AIM Rule 19.
The Directors believe that this approach is a firm foundation for good governance and clarifies not only the appropriate allocation of duties authority and responsibilities but also the way the Group meets its legal and regulatory obligations.
Stephen Karle
Governance
Morses Club PLC 28 Board Meetings The Board is responsible to the shareholders for the Groups proper management.
A Directors Responsibilities Statement in respect of the financial statements appears on page 42 of this Annual Report.
The Board is scheduled to meet 10 times during the year.
All Directors receive the timely and appropriate information and briefing papers they need to enable the Board to discharge its duties.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Board.
Certain items are delegated to specific committees as set out on pages 34 to 36.
The formal schedule of matters reserved for the Board includes the determination of strategy approval of the budget and major capital expenditure.
The Board meeting agenda normally comprises a review of monthly management accounts a CEO review of activity a review of potential acquisitions and other growth opportunities together with an update on the progress of the Groups other strategic objectives.
The April Board meeting covers the approval of the preliminary results and the yearend financial statements whilst the October meeting approves the interim results.
The November meeting is dedicated to annual strategy and is held in partnership with the executive management team.
Board Evaluation As Independent Chairman I carried out an informal and internal Board evaluation process between November 2016 and January 2017 .
My performance as Chairman was evaluated by the NonExecutive Directors and led by the Senior Independent Director Sir Nigel Knowles with input from the executive team.
The requirement for more formalised succession planning was actioned during the year.
The quality of management information produced to the Board on a monthly basis was also further enhanced during the year as a result of ongoing feedback.
Stephen Karle
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 29 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Paul Smith
Chief Executive Officer
Date of Appointment 20 January 2015 Background and Career Paul has experience in mobile payment technology as Managing Director of EZPay Limited a prepaid MasterCard organisation.
Beginning his career in the global software market he later joined Phones4U in 1998 where he became MD and was an integral member of the management team until the firms sale for 1.4 billion in 2006.
Areas of Expertise Paul has been responsible for growing the Company organically and by acquisition.
His expertise in software and technology has been invaluable in driving efficiencies while maintaining excellent customer service levels.
Stephen Karle Chairman and NonExecutive Director Date of Appointment 20 January 2015 Background and Career Stephen is a Director of Karle and McCleery Limited a strategic advisory and executive coaching business operating across and beyond the financial services sector.
For four years to 2015 he served as Chairman of BCRS Business Loans Limited an SME lending company supporting regional business growth.
He is a former CEO of West Bromwich Building Society and a nonpractising solicitor.
Areas of Expertise Stephens financial services sector experience includes executive general management and Board roles.
He represents Morses Club PLC on the Executive Committee of the Consumer Credit Association.
Board of Directors Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer Date of Appointment 1 March 2009 NonExecutive Finance Director 1 March 2016 CFO Background and Career After graduating from Warwick University accounting and financial analysis and qualifying as a chartered management accountant at Cadbury Schweppes and Tesco Andy held a variety of senior finance roles in SMEs where he has been the most senior finance professional continuously since 1996.
Involved in the RCapital acquisition of Morses Club in March 2009 he remained on the Board as a NonExecutive Director with responsibility for financial management.
Andy led the finance function during the acquisition and integration of Shopacheck Financial Services in 201415 before his appointment as fulltime CFO in 2016.
Areas of Expertise Instrumental in shaping the Morses culture to focus on growth controlled by debt quality Andys analytical skills are key in the rapid identification of and response to financial challenges.
Committee Membership Risk and Compliance
Audit
Committee
Remuneration and Corporate Social
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Disclosure
Committee
Stephen Karle M M M C C Paul Smith M M Andy Thomson M M Sir Nigel Knowles M M M M Joanne Lake M M C M M Patrick Storey C C M M Peter Ward M M M M M C Chairman M Member
Morses Club PLC 30 Peter Ward NonExecutive Director Date of Appointment 1 March 2015 Background and Career Peter is the CoFounder of RCapital Partners LLP and retired as an active Partner in 2016.
In 2001 he cofounded his own corporate advisory business Three V Corporate Venturing LLP to provide fundraising and interim management services.
He had previously held senior management positions within the UK commercial and banking division of Royal Bank of Scotland Group for 23 years.
Areas of Expertise Peter has extensive experience of working with management teams across a broad range of business sectors.
Joanne Lake Independent NonExecutive Director Date of Appointment 14 April 2016 Background and Career A chartered accountant with over 30 years experience in accountancy and investment banking Joanne has worked at Panmure Gordon Evolution Securities Williams de Broe and Price
She is Chairman of wealth management and employee benefits specialists Mattioli Woods PLC Deputy Chairman of main market listed Henry Boot PLC and a NonExecutive Director of Gateley Holdings PLC and Accrol Group Holdings PLC.
Areas of Expertise Joannes financial services experience includes Board level roles focusing on strategy and governance as well as lead advisory corporate finance roles on listings other public market transactions and continuing obligations.
Sir Nigel Knowles Senior Independent Director Date of Appointment 14 April 2016 Background and Career Sir Nigel is a solicitor  a former global coChairman and previously global coCEO and managing partner for nearly twenty years at DLA Piper one of the worlds largest business law firms the companys annual turnover exceeding USD 2.5 billion.
Areas of Expertise Sir Nigel has immense experience of building and leading a worldwide regulated services business.
Since retiring as a partner of DLA Piper he has taken on several roles and is the Chairman of Sheffield City Region Local Enterprise Partnership and a council member of The Princes Trust.
Patrick Storey Independent NonExecutive Director Date of Appointment 14 April 2016 Background and Career Patrick is a chartered accountant and founding member and former senior partner of Grant Thorntons Financial Services Group.
Before retiring from partnership in 2016 Patrick had accumulated 30 years experience with Grant Thornton focusing principally on regulation in the financial services sector.
Areas of Expertise Patrick is a recognised specialist in helping financial services firms to achieve their strategic goals by embedding robust and sustainable management governance and culture frameworks while complying with financial regulations and delivering good outcomes for customers.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Corporate Governance Report From the date of the IPO the Directors have adopted the provisions of the September 2014 edition of the UK Corporate Governance Code although being AIM listed the Group is not obliged to comply with this.
The only exception is the Directors Remuneration Report which has been prepared in accordance with AIM Rule 19.
Membership of Board Committees In the course of this first year since the Companys admission to AIM the Board has agreed that all NonExecutives should participate in the Audit Risk and Compliance Nominations and Disclosure Committees in order to gain a full appreciation and understanding of the Company.
Details of Board Meeting attendance since the Groups listing on AIM on 5 May 2016 are shown in the table on the right.
During the period until 5 May 2016 Stephen Karle was Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee.
On 1 January 2017  the Audit and Risk Committee was split into the Audit Committee and the Risk and Compliance Committee.
The Boards role is to provide entrepreneurial leadership of the Group within a framework of prudent and effective controls which enables risk to be assessed and managed.
The
Board sets the Groups strategic aims ensuring that the necessary financial and human resources are in place for the Group to meet its objectives and reviews management performance.
As part of their role as members of a unitary board NonExecutive Directors constructively challenge and help develop proposals on strategy.
The Board has established a subcommittee structure comprising Nominations Risk and Compliance Audit Disclosure and Remuneration and Corporate Social Responsibility committees and has appointed a Senior Independent Director Sir Nigel Knowles.
The Executive Management Committee comprising all of the Executive Managers and the Executive Directors reports to the full Board.
Board
Risk and
Committee
Audit
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Remuneration and Corporate
Responsibility
Committee
Disclosure
Committee
Executive
Management
Committee
Risks and
Executive
Committee
Credit
Committee
Health and
Committee
Position
Meetings
Attended
Considered
Independent
Stephen Karle NonExecutive Chairman 88 Paul Smith Chief Executive Officer 88 Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer 88 Sir Nigel Knowles Senior Independent and NonExecutive Director Joanne Lake NonExecutive Director 78 Patrick Storey NonExecutive Director 88 Peter Ward NonExecutive Director 78
Morses Club PLC 32 Leadership During the period since the Groups shares were listed on the AIM Market the Group has been controlled through a Board of Directors comprising two Executive and five NonExecutive
The Chairman is mainly responsible for the running of the
He has to ensure that all directors receive sufficient relevant information on financial business and corporate issues prior to meetings.
The
Board has a formal schedule of matters reserved to it and currently meets at least 10 times per year.
It is responsible for overall Group strategy acquisition and divestment policy approval of major capital expenditure projects and consideration of significant financing matters.
It monitors the exposure to key business risks and reviews the strategic direction of the business.
This includes its code of conduct its annual budgets its progress towards achievement of those budgets and its capital expenditure programmes.
The
Executive Directors are responsible for all matters affecting the performance of the Group and for the implementation of strategy policies budgets and the financial performance of the Group.
Effectiveness
Prior to the Groups admission to AIM the Nominations Committee conducted a formal rigorous and transparent process to identify and recruit three additional NonExecutive Directors.
The search for candidates was conducted and appointments made on merit using objective criteria and with due regard for the benefits of diversity for the Board including gender.
The three appointees Sir Nigel Knowles Joanne Lake and Patrick Storey bring a wealth of experience covering compliance financial services legal accounting investment banking and general business matters.
There has been an induction plan for each of the new NonExecutive
The Board has been briefed by the Groups lawyers on the subject of the Market Abuse Regulations.
Further briefings are planned on the subjects of General Data Protection Regulation and the Senior Managers Certification
In addition Directors are updated with developments in corporate governance requirements.
The Groups CEO is appraised every six months by the Chairman.
The Chairman has been evaluated by the Non Executive Directors led by the Senior Independent Director.
During this first year as an AIMlisted company the Chairman has undertaken an informal and internal evaluation of the Directors the Board and the Boards committees.
All of the Directors have been considered able to allocate sufficient time to the Company to discharge their responsibilities.
The Company Secretary is available to provide advice and services to all Board members and is responsible for ensuring Board procedures are followed.
All directors are able to take independent advice in furtherance of their duties if necessary.
Accountability
Financial Reporting Reviews of the performance and financial position of the Group are included in the Strategic Report within pages 12 to 27  and present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups position and prospects.
The Directors responsibilities in respect of the financial statements are described on page 42 and those of the auditor on page 48.
Internal Control and Risk Management Systems The Board acknowledges that it is responsible for the Groups system of internal control and risk management and for reviewing its own effectiveness on an annual basis.
Such a system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure in pursuit of the Groups overall business objectives and can only provide reasonable not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Groups internal control systems are reviewed regularly with the aim of continuous improvement.
Whilst the Board acknowledges its overall responsibility for internal control it believes strongly that senior management within the Groups operating businesses should also contribute in a substantial way and this has been built into the process.
The Board discharges or intends to discharge its duties in this area through the review of financial performance including budgets KPIs and forecasts on a monthly basis the receipt of regular reports which provide an assessment of key risks and controls and how effectively they are working scheduling annual Board reviews of strategy including reviews of the material risks and uncertainties facing the business the receipt of reports from senior management on the risk and control culture within the Group the presence of a clear organisational structure with defined hierarchy and clear delegation of authority and ensuring that there are documented policies and procedures in place.
Through the Risk and Compliance Committee the Board reviews the risk management framework and the key risks facing the business.
The finance department is responsible for preparing the Group financial statements and ensuring that accounting policies are in accordance with International Financial Reporting
All financial information published by the Group is subject to the approval of the Audit Committee.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 33 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements The Board. identify manage and evaluate risks.
This process has been in place for the year under review and up to the date of approval of the report and financial statements.
The process is regularly reviewed by the Board and accords with the guidance in the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Board intends to keep its risk control procedures under constant review particularly as regards the need to embed internal control and risk management procedures further into the operations of the business and to deal with areas of improvement which come to managements and the Boards attention.
Relations with Shareholders The Group communicates with institutional and private investors and responds quickly to all queries received verbally or in writing.
All Shareholders will have at least 20 working days notice of the Annual General Meeting at which all Directors will be present and available for questions.
The
Board is aware of the importance of maintaining close relations with investors and analysts for the Groups market rating.
Twiceyearly road shows are conducted by the CEO and CFO when the performance and future strategy of the Group is discussed with larger shareholders.
Queries from all shareholders are dealt with by the CFO in addition members of the Board obtain regular feedback from major shareholders and discuss this at Board meetings.
Board Committees The terms of reference of all of the Board committees are available from the Groups registered office and on its website at site Copies of the service contracts and letters of agreement of each of the Directors are available at the Groups registered office during business hours and will be available for inspection at the AGM for at least 15 minutes prior to and until the conclusion of the AGM.
Remuneration and Corporate Social Responsibility Committee The Remuneration and Corporate Social Responsibility Committee comprises three NonExecutive Directors of whom two Joanne Lake and Stephen Karle are independent.
The members of the Committee are Joanne Lake Chairman Stephen Karle and Peter Ward.
The Remuneration and Corporate Social Responsibility Committee meets at least twice a year and on other occasions as deemed appropriate by the Committees Chairman.
The Committee Chairman is appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Nominations Committee.
A full Remuneration and Corporate Social Responsibility Committee report appears on pages 37 to 39.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee meets at least four times each year.
The Audit Committee comprises all of the Groups NonExecutive Directors namely Patrick Storey Chairman Stephen Karle Sir Nigel Knowles Joanne Lake and Peter Ward.
The Committee monitors and reviews the Groups financial reporting from information provided by management and the auditor.
The Committee reports to the Board on the Groups full and half year results having examined the accounting policies on which they are based and ensured compliance with relevant accounting standards.
External Audit The Groups external auditor is Deloitte LLP.
The Committee is responsible for reviewing the objectivity independence and cost effectiveness of the external auditor.
The Committee also reviews the performance of the auditor taking into account the services and advice provided to the Group and the fees charged for these services.
Details of the auditors total fees for the year can be found on page 60.
The Group does not currently have a formal nonaudit work policy but the Committee maintains regular scrutiny of the auditors activities and charges.
Corporate Governance Report continued
Morses Club PLC 34 Deloitte LLP was first appointed as auditor of Morses Club Limited with effect from 1 March 2009.
Since then Morses Club Limited acquired Shopacheck Financial Services and the resulting Group was listed on AIM in May 2016.
During this period of change the Group has valued the continuity of the existing auditors appointment.
On the basis of its review of the performance of the auditor since the IPO last year  the Committee has recommended to the Board that Deloitte be proposed for reappointment at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Deloitte has indicated its willingness to continue in office.
The Committee confirms that there are no contractual obligations that restrict the Committees choice of external auditor in the future.
Internal Audit Function During the Autumn of 2016 we established an internal audit function and appointed a suitably qualified and experienced internal audit manager who reports directly to the Audit Committee Chairman.
The internal audit function objectively reviews the Groups internal control processes against the riskbased internal audit plan and audit charter approved by the
The plan is based primarily on output from the risk management process but it is flexible and may include adhoc investigations and other assurance work agreed by the Committee.
Specialist technical knowledge and resource is externally sourced if and when required.
Meetings of the Committee The Audit Committee meets with the external auditor without the presence of executive management at least once each year to discuss matters relating to its remit and any issues relating to the audit.
The Committee has direct and unrestricted access to both internal and external audit functions.
The Chairman also has regular contact with the external auditor the Chief Financial Officer and the internal audit manager outside the formal meetings to ensure that any areas for discussion are dealt with in a timely manner.
The work undertaken by the Committee included the following activities a review of the fullyear results including the Annual Report and Accounts preliminary results statement and the external auditors report.
In reviewing these documents and determining whether they were fair balanced and understandable the Committee also considered the work and recommendations of management an interim results statement review a consideration of the appropriateness of accounting policies and critical accounting estimates and judgements including a review of information from the
Chief Financial Officer and reports
We acknowledge that the external auditor has reviewed the significant areas of judgement and subjected them to robust challenge.
Significant areas of judgement considered by the Committee included
The Group makes judgements in relation to identifying objective evidence of impairment and calculates the provision by reference to historical payment performance to estimate the amount and timing of expected future cash flows.
These estimates are revised annually and approved by the Board.
Revenue Recognition Under IAS 39 interest income should be recognised on the shorter of the expected life or the contractual life of the loan.
Under IAS 39 the Committee has judged that interest income should be recognised over the contractual life of the loan based on historical loan book performance.
Acquisitions
During the period the Group has made a number of acquisitions.
Management has made judgements as to whether each of the acquisitions constitute a business and therefore is required to be accounted for as a business combination in accordance with IFRS 3.
Customer lists have been allocated a fair value on acquisition as the relationships are an important influence on the revenuegenerating capacity of the business.
Agent networks have also been identified and capitalised as an intangible asset.
The amount of goodwill initially recognised as a result of an acquisition is dependent on the allocation of the purchase price to the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
The determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities is based to a considerable extent on managements judgement.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 35 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Corporate Governance Report continued Risk and Compliance Committee The Risk and Compliance Committee is scheduled to meet four times each year.
The Morses Club strapline is Putting You First customers are at the heart of the Groups culture vision and values.
In recent years the level of public and regulatory scrutiny of the Groups marketplace has grown.
The Board recognises the importance to the business of risk and compliance and the need to devote time and energy to these vital areas.
In January 2017  the Board therefore divided the Audit and Risk Committee into two separate committees the Audit Committee and the Risk and Compliance Committee.
The Risk and Compliance Committee comprises all of the NonExecutive Directors of the Group namely Patrick Storey Chairman Stephen Karle Sir Nigel Knowles Joanne Lake and Peter Ward.
In addition the following executives are also Committee members
Paul Smith Chief Executive Officer
Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer Ian Cooper Risk and Compliance Director and Barrie Grimshaw Business Change and IT Director.
The Risk and Compliance Committee is responsible for reviewing and reporting to the Board on a number of topics including the Groups risk appetite the extent and categories of risk regarded by the Board as acceptable for the Group to bear the Groups risk management and internal controls framework its principles policies methodologies systems processes procedures and people the arrangement for the identification assessment monitoring management and oversight of risk with regard to processes and procedures the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls compliance monitoring and risk management systems and the Groups procedures for preventing and detecting money laundering and fraud.
A section covering the Groups risks can be found on pages 24 to 27 .
Nominations Committee The Nominations Committee is responsible for ensuring that the Board has a formal and transparent appointments procedure.
It also has primary responsibility for reviewing the Boards balance and effectiveness identifying the Boards skills gaps and those individuals who might best fill them.
Committee policy will ensure that appointments are made on merit and with respect for the benefits of the Boards diversity.
The Nominations Committee comprises all of the Groups NonExecutive Directors Stephen Karle Chairman Sir Nigel Knowles Joanne Lake Patrick Storey and Peter Ward.
The Group recognises the importance of diversity both at Board level and throughout the whole organisation.
The
Board and the Nominations Committee are committed to increasing diversity and the Group is determined to recruit outstanding candidates with diverse backgrounds skills ideas and culture.
In future the Nominations Committee will take responsibility for arranging formal Board appraisals.
During this first year the Board made an assessment that it was appropriate for the Chairman and Senior NonExecutive Director to conduct an informal internal evaluation.
The Nominations Committee meets at least once each year.
Disclosure Committee The Disclosure Committee comprises Stephen Karle Chairman Sir Nigel Knowles Joanne Lake Patrick Storey Peter Ward
Paul Smith Chief Executive Officer
Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer.
The Company is required to make timely and accurate disclosure of all information required to meet the legal and regulatory obligations and requirements arising from its listing on the London Stock Exchange under the Market Abuse Regulations.
The Disclosure Committee exists to help the Company meet these requirements.
The Committees responsibilities include determining the timely disclosure of material information and assisting in the design implementation and periodic evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures.
The first meeting of the Committee was on 21 February 2017 .
Executive Committee The Group has established an Executive Committee which is chaired by the Chief Executive Officer and meets each week on which there is not a Board meeting.
The Executive Committee is accountable to the Board and its responsibilities include the daily management of the Groups affairs.
Members of the Executive Committee meet regularly with the Board and are frequently invited to attend Board meetings.
The Executive Committee has three longstanding committees a Credit Risk Committee a Health and Safety Committee and a Risk and Compliance Executive Committee in order to assist its supervision of these important areas.
Governance
Morses Club PLC 36 The Directors Remuneration Statement deals with the remuneration for those Directors in place when the Company was listed on AIM in May 2016.
During the year a number of Directors in the Company resigned prior to the Companys securities being listed on AIM.
The
Directors Remuneration Report only
Companys securities have been listed on AIM.
The aggregate remuneration of the Directors who served prior to IPO but subsequently resigned was 0.1m.
Remuneration and Corporate Social Responsibility Committee The Board has appointed a Remuneration Committee the Committee which is chaired by Joanne Lake Independent NED and comprises Peter Ward NED and Stephen Karle Independent
Dave Belmont Company Secretary also attends all meetings.
The Committee was established as a direct consequence of the Companys successful listing on the AIM Market in May 2016.
The terms of reference for the Committee are available from the Companys Support Centre in Birstall.
The Committee has studied Section B of the Best Practice provisions annexed to the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority and has voluntarily disclosed the information given below.
This Committees principal function is to determine the Companys policy on executive remuneration.
No Director plays any part in formal decisions about their own remuneration.
The HR and Communications Director and Chief Financial Officer provide relevant updates on financial and general Company remuneration matters as invited individuals only.
The Committee meets periodically when it has proposals to consider  generally three times a year.
In any event the Committee would meet no less than twice a year.
The Committees policy aims primarily to attract retain and motivate high calibre individuals via a competitive remuneration package designed to suit the market taking account of regulatory requirements and the need to create an appropriate mix between fixed and variable rewards both short and longterm for Directors.
Executives remuneration comprises basic salary performancerelated bonus pension benefits other benefits in kind and a deferred share bonus scheme granted pursuant to the Morses Club PLC Group.
The Remuneration Policy is due for renewal at the AGM in 2017  and the Committee will conduct a full review of the policy this year.
As part of the Companys preparation for listing on AIM in May 2016 Morses Club had external assistance in developing its approach to Directors remuneration.
Executive Remuneration Policy The incentive arrangements currently in place include a salary bonus contributions to a defined contribution pension scheme and a deferred share bonus scheme which together sit within the lower quartile of market expectations against other financial companies of a similar size.
As the organisation grows we expect that the remuneration policy will be reviewed.
However the Executive team and the Committee are both committed to prudence during the early period postlisting and to deliver shareholder value as well as embedding the Companys strategy.
Executive remuneration was reviewed as a consequence of the IPO listing taking account of the need to balance executive remuneration with that of the rest of the organisation.
Our remuneration policy is underpinned by core principles as outlined below.
Remuneration is determined within the Companys risk appetite and is subject to oversight and approval by the Remuneration Committee.
Directors Remuneration Statement The approach to Directors remuneration has been undertaken taking account of the regulatory environment shareholder needs and market requirements as well as individual team roles.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 37 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Key FCA principles including the principles of Treating Customers Fairly apply throughout.
Although all employees should contribute towards a commercial result remuneration is designed to drive a balanced scorecard approach based on responsible lending principles and outstanding individual performance.
Delivery of good customer outcomes is central to the Companys remuneration approach.
Remuneration structures will be developed in line with the appropriate regulatory environment and the Companys values.
A blend of shortterm and longterm incentives will support the longterm security of the Company and its employees.
For key roles remuneration will take account of pay structures in the external market.
Remuneration structures will reflect the size and the scope of any given role.
Remuneration will be driven by Company as well as individual performance with a foundation of fairness and ability to pay.
We will communicate policies clearly and in a timely manner.
Business Context and Committee Decisions on Remuneration The Company successfully listed on AIM in May 2016.
As detailed in the report key elements of the Companys business strategy with regard to technology acquisitions and targeted financial performance have been delivered.
We have also made significant progress in developing new products and services for our customers.
Directors Remuneration This section is subject to audit Name Role
Salary
Allowances and
Pension contribution Bonus
Share Plan Expenses Total Paul Smith CEO 212500 42725 4250 75000 26223 24139 384837 Andy Thomson CFO 170000 12000 2267  19813 6870 210950 NonExecutive Directors This section is subject to audit Name Role Base Salary
Expenses and
Stephen Karle Independent Chairman 91667  7222 Sir Nigel Knowles Independent NED 37500 6250 13500 Joanne Lake NED and Chair of Remuneration Committee 37500 6250 12212 Patrick Storey NED and Chair of Audit and Risk and Compliance Committees 37500 12500 1718 Peter Ward NED 37500 NonExecutive Directors do not participate in any of the Companys share incentive plans nor do they receive any benefits or pension contributions.
Directors Remuneration Policy Service Contracts All Executive Directors were reissued with a revised service contract as part of the arrangements for the IPO.
Service contracts cover a continuous period ie not a fixedterm and a notice period of six months applies to both the Company and to individuals.
There are no compensation payments for loss of office.
Letters of Appointment NonExecutive Directors do not have service contracts but are appointed under letters of appointment.
Appointments are intended to be for a threeyear term with a review after the initial 12 months.
All new appointments would be made following recommendations by the Nominations
No compensation is payable in the event of early termination except during the notice period.
Salaries and Fees The level of remuneration for both executive and NonExecutive Directors in FY17 was reviewed as part of the process of the IPO.
This process was completed in May 2016.
Allowances and Benefits Taxable benefits received in the period include company cars or car allowances fuel allowances and private medical insurance.
Housing Allowance As the CEO relocated to the area to undertake the role a housing allowance of 14k was made available until 30 April 2017 .
This allowance will lapse after that date.
No other relocation compensation was payable.
Life Assurance In line with all employees Executive Directors are entitled to life assurance equivalent to four years salary.
Holidays
Executive Directors are entitled to 30 days paid holiday in addition to UK public bank holidays.
The holiday year runs from January to December.
Pension
Executive Directors are enrolled into the Company pension scheme.
Personal contributions are matched by the Company up to a maximum of 7%.
Annual Bonus The annual bonus is the value of the bonus earned within the year and can be up to 100% of salary based on the performance conditions outlined below.
Any earned bonus is payable in August following the year end in February conditional on independent audit and confirmation by the Committee.
The actual bonus paid in the year to 25 February 2017 is outlined in the table above.
Directors Remuneration Statement continued
Morses Club PLC 38 Performance Bonus Conditions The performance bonus is payable if the Executive Director has delivered key objectives including targeted adjusted profit before tax promoting goodquality customer outcomes ie treating customers fairly maintenance of headline customer satisfaction scores completing key strategic projects and acquisitions all underpinned by regulatory compliance.
Deferred Share Plan This section is subject to audit Executive Directors may participate in a deferred share plan a threeyear plan commencing 201617 awarded through an annual deed of grant subject to the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
Awards under the DSP may be in the form of A conditional right to acquire Ordinary Shares at no cost to the participant or an option to acquire Ordinary Shares at no cost to the participant or a right to receive a cash amount relating to the value of a certain number of notional Ordinary Shares.
Share awards will be subject to performance conditions which are delivery of targeted adjusted profit before tax total shareholder return measured over a period of one year from Admission satisfactory audits and compliance training and individual executive performance.
Awards will be granted on an annual basis.
The issue price of the shares in May 2016 was 1.08.
The maximum earnings from the deferred share bonus scheme are outlined in the table below.
Name Role Percentage of Salary Share Award Paul Smith CEO 100 208333 Andy Thomson CFO 100 157407 Awards will vest on the third anniversary following the grant date unless determined otherwise by the Remuneration
Awards will lapse should an individual leave employment and are not transferable.
Directors Shareholdings The table below details the shareholdings and other share interests of the directors as at 25 February 2017 .
Name Role Number of Ordinary Shares Percentage Shareholding Paul Smith CEO 655000 0.51 Andy Thomson CFO 5676939 4.38 Stephen Karle Chairman 227991 0.18 Peter Ward NED 400000 0.31 Sir Nigel Knowles Ind NED 23148 0.02 Joanne Lake Ind NED 23148 0.02 Patrick Storey Ind NED 23148 0.02 All Employee Remuneration In setting the Remuneration Policy for Directors the pay and conditions of other employees are considered along with any increases in salary.
The Committee is provided with data on the remuneration structure for those management level tiers below the Executive Directors it uses this information to ensure a consistent approach to remuneration throughout the Company.
There is no formal consultation with employees regarding the remuneration of Executive Directors.
All employees have the opportunity to participate in our key benefits such as life assurance private health and the Company pension scheme.
Relative Importance of Spend on Pay Shown below is the total pay including performance bonuses for all Morses Club PLC employees for FY17 .
Total employee remuneration 17 500504.
Corporate Social Responsibility The Company has not undertaken any significant CSR programmes during FY17 .
Based on our business model as a community lender we are now planning our approach for FY18.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 39 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Dividend The Directors have declared their intention to pursue a progressive dividend policy.
Subject to Shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting on 20 June 2017  the Board proposes to pay a final dividend of 4.3p per ordinary share payable on 21 July 2017 to Shareholders on the register at close of business on 23 June 2017 .
This would represent a total dividend of 6.4p per ordinary share for 2017 .
Directors
The Directors of the Company who served during the year ended 25 February 2017  and up to the date of this report unless otherwise stated are Stephen Karle Independent NonExecutive Chairman Paul Smith
Chief Executive Officer
Andy Thomson Chief Financial Officer Peter Ward NonExecutive Director Sir Nigel Knowles appointed 14 April 2016 Senior Independent Director Joanne Lake appointed 14 April 2016 Independent NonExecutive Director  and Patrick Storey appointed 14 April 2016 Independent NonExecutive Director.
The following were Directors until they resigned on 13 April 2016 in preparation for the Companys admission on to AIM Myron Burlak Finance Director Ian Cooper Risk and Compliance
Leslie Easson Operations Director Barrie Grimshaw Business Change and IT Director and Tracey Mulligan HR and Communications
The Directors present their report and audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 25 February 2017.
All of these Executives remain employed by the Group as at the date of this report and together with the Chief
Executive Officer and the Chief
Financial Officer they form the Companys Executive Management Committee.
Details of the remuneration service agreements and interests in the share capital of the company of the Directors who have served since the Groups shares were admitted to AIM on 5 May 2016 are given in the Remuneration Report on pages 37 to 39.
Biographical details of the current Directors who are standing for reappointment at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting are given on pages 30 and 31.
Share Capital As at 25 February 2017  the Company had 129500000 ordinary shares of one pence each in issue 2016 129500000.
The Companys issued ordinary share capital comprises a single class of ordinary share.
The rights attached to the ordinary shares are set out in the
Each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings of the Company.
Information Contained in Other Sections The Groups principal risks and uncertainties and future developments which are required to be included within the Directors Report can be found within the Strategic Report on pages Antibribery and Corruption The corporate policies reflect the requirements of the Bribery Act 2010 and a corporate hospitality register is maintained using a riskbased approach.
Although the risks for the Group arising from the Bribery Act 2010 continue to be assessed as low the Directors are nevertheless required Directors Report The Corporate
Governance Statement
36 forms part of this report.
Governance
Morses Club PLC 40 to undergo appropriate training and instruction to ensure that they have effective antibribery and corruption policies and procedures in place.
Compliance is regularly monitored by the Executive Risk and Compliance Committee and is subject to periodic review by the group internal audit function.
Directors and Officers Insurance The Group maintains Directors and Officers liability insurance to cover appropriately for any legal action brought against the Directors.
Important Events Since the End of the Financial Year 25 February 2017 There have been no important events since the end of the financial year.
Employees
It is our policy to make adequate provision for the wellbeing health and safety of our employees.
We are committed to offer equal opportunities for all employees irrespective of age gender ethnicity race religion belief sexual orientation disability marital status and civil partnership.
All employees are treated fairly and equally.
We encourage our employees to engage with the development of our organisation.
To promote this the
Chief Executive Officer and the
We regard employee involvement as essential to the healthy development of the business.
Morses Club treats applications for employment from disabled persons in the same way as those from non disabled applicants and selects on the basis of individual ability experience and role requirements.
Substantial Interests in Shares As at 24 April 2017 the latest practicable date before the publication of this report the Company has been notified of the following substantial interests of 3% or more in its ordinary shares
Perpignon Limited 66045000 51.00% Schroder Investment Management 11391823 8.80%
Investment
Management 10175704 7.86% Miton Investment Management 9672489 7.47% JO Hambro Capital Management 6630250 5.12% Andy Thomson 5676939 4.38%
Investment
Management 4614976 3.56% Relationship with Our Majority Shareholder As a result of the IPO on 5 May 2016 the shareholding of the majority shareholder in the Company Perpignon Limited reduced from 100% to 51%.
Perpignon Limited has entered into a relationship agreement which contains provisions to ensure that inter alia there is no interference with the independent operation of the Board and that the Companys transactions with Perpignon Limited are effected at arms length and on a normal commercial basis.
Perpignon Limited can subject to applicable laws and regulation appoint one Director to the Board for as long as it holds more than 20% of the rights to vote at a general meeting of the Company.
The first such Director appointed under this right is Mr Peter Ward.
The Board confirms that since the admission of the Companys shares on to AIM the Company has complied with the independence provisions included in the relationship agreement and that so far as the Company is aware Perpignon Limited and its associates have also complied with such provisions.
Political Donations The Group made no political donations during the year ended 25 February 2017 .
Going Concern The Directors have considered the appropriateness of the going concern basis in preparation of these financial statements.
They are satisfied that the Group has sufficient resources to continue its operations for the foreseeable future.
They therefore continue to adopt a going concern approach in preparing the condensed financial statements.
A separate viability statement see page 25 is contained in the Strategic Report.
Disclosure of Information to the Auditor The Directors confirm that so far as each Director is aware the auditor is aware of all relevant audit information and the Directors have taken all necessary steps that they ought to have taken as Directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Our Auditor A resolution will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting to reappoint Deloitte LLP as the Groups auditor and to give the Directors the authority to determine the auditors remuneration.
AGM Notice The notice convening the Annual General Meeting to be held on 20th June 2017  together with an explanation of the resolutions to be proposed at the meeting is contained in a separate circular to shareholders and on the Companys website at site By order of the Board Dave Belmont Company Secretary 27 April 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 41 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under the law the Directors are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and have also chosen to prepare the parent Company financial statements under IFRS as adopted by the EU.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and of the profit or loss of the company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that Directors properly select and apply accounting policies present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRS are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance and make an assessment of the companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors Responsibility Statement We confirm that to the best of our knowledge The financial statements prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole The strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole Directors Responsibilities together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and The annual report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the companys position and performance business model and strategy.
This responsibility statement was approved by the Board of Directors on 27 April 2017 and is signed on its behalf by Paul Smith
27 April 2017 Andy Thomson
27 April 2017
Morses Club PLC 42 Opinion on financial statements of Morses Club PLC In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 25 February 2017 and of the Groups profit for the 52 weeks then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
The financial statements that we have audited comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Group and Parent Company Balance Sheets the Group and Parent Company Statements of Changes in Equity the Group and Parent Company Cash Flow Statements and the related notes 1 to 26.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Summary of our audit approach Key risks The key risks that we identified in the current year were Impairment provisioning and Revenue recognition.
Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 0.95m which was determined on the basis of 7 .5% of adjusted pretax profit.
Pretax profit was adjusted for Initial Public Offering IPO costs of 2.2m as this is a oneoff cost and would distort the materiality level.
Scoping The Group is made up of Morses Club PLC which is the main trading entity and its two subsidaries being Shopacheck Financial Services Limited and Shelby Finance Limited.
All entities in the Group are within our audit scope and the audit of these entities are performed directly by the Group audit team.
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of Morses Club PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 43 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Going concern and the Directors assessment of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation on page 25 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages 2627 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors statement in note 1 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties as to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements and the Directors explanation on page 25 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We confirm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Independence
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also confirm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
Our assessment of risks of material misstatement The assessed risks of material misstatement described below are those that had the greatest effect on our audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of Morses Club PLC continued Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 44 Risk description How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Key observation Impairment provisioning The assessment of the Groups calculation of the 34.8m provision for impairment losses against loans and receivables is complex and requires management to make significant judgements being the identification of loss events the Impairment Trigger the estimation of future cash flows used to determine the provision required and the level of incurred but not reported IBNR risk in the element of the book that has not reached the Impairment Trigger.
Changes to these assumptions can have a material impact on the impairment provision.
We therefore focus our work on assessing the appropriateness of these assumptions.
Managements associated accounting policies are detailed on pages 5458 with detail about judgements in applying accounting policies and critical accounting estimates on pages 5758 and within the Audit Committee report on page 35.
The quantum of the provision is set out in note 14 to the financial statements.
We first understood managements process and key controls around impairment provisioning by undertaking a walkthrough.
Following identification of the key controls we evaluated the associated design and implementation of such controls.
Specifically we assessed the implementation of controls that the Group has in place to manage the risk of inappropriate assumptions being used within impairment provisioning.
We used internal IT specialists to test the general IT controls over the loan administration systems.
We performed design and implementation testing over the manner in which data is extracted from these systems to determine impairment and completed walkthrough testing of the models to confirm that they are working as intended.
We used data analytics to test the mechanical accuracy and completeness of the models on which impairments are calculated by using our IT specialists to test the extraction of source data from the lending systems and recalculating the provision in accordance with the approved provisioning policy.
We challenged the appropriateness of the key management assumptions used in the impairment calculations for loans and receivables including specifically the estimation of future cash flows and the identification of impaired accounts.
This involved analysis of the Groups historical cash collection experience and benchmarking the key assumptions to external economic and industry data.
We concluded that the impairment models were working as intended and our IT specialists work around the completeness and accuracy of data identified no significant issues.
The estimation of future cash flows within the models were reasonable albeit with a measure of conservatism applied.
We found the assumptions relating to the identification of impaired accounts within the incurred loss models to be appropriate.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 45 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Risk description How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Key observation Revenue recognition Revenue recognition and specifically the application of the requirement in IAS 39 Financial Instruments IAS 39 to recognise revenue on loans using an effective interest rate method is a complex area.
It requires management to make a judgement relating to the expected life of each loan to determine the effective interest rate.
Changes to these assumptions could significantly impact the level of revenue recognised in any given period.
We therefore focus our work on assessing the appropriateness of estimated behavioural lives and the validity and accuracy of the deferred revenue balance.
Managements associated accounting policies are detailed on pages 5458 with detail about judgements in applying accounting policies and critical accounting estimates on pages 5758 and within the Audit Committee report on page 35.
We first understood managements process and key controls around revenue recognition by undertaking a walkthrough.
Following identification of the key controls we evaluated the associated design and implementation of such controls.
Specifically we assessed the implementation of controls that the Group has in place to manage the risk of inappropriate assumptions being used within the effective interest rate models.
We used internal IT specialists to test the general IT controls over the loan administration systems.
We performed design and implementation testing over the manner in which data is extracted from these systems to determine the effective interest rate and completed walkthrough testing of the models to confirm that they are working as intended.
We tested the mechanical accuracy of the models which are used to determine revenue by agreeing a sample of model inputs back to underlying source data.
We used internal IT specialists to independently create an expectation of the gross loan originations and associated revenue to recalculate the level of deferred revenue to be held on the balance sheet.
The effective interest rate was also recalculated for a sample of loans.
We challenged managements key assumptions including the expected life of each loan by reference to the Groups historical experience and assessed whether the revenue recognition policies adopted were in compliance with IAS 39.
We found the models to be working as intended and our IT specialists work around the recalculation of the gross loan originations identified no significant issues.
The underlying assumptions applied within the models specifically in respect of the expected life of each loan used to create the products effective interest rate were found to be reasonable.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of Morses Club PLC continued Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 46 Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group materiality 0.95m.
Basis for determining materiality 7 .5% of adjusted pretax profit.
Rationale for the benchmark applied We determined materiality using adjusted pretax profit as we considered this to be the most appropriate measure to assess the performance of the Group.
Pretax profit was adjusted for Initial Public Offering IPO costs of 2.2m as this is a oneoff cost and would distort the materiality level.
PBT
Group materiality Component materiality range 0.475m to 0.9m Adjusted PBT Audit Committee reporting threshold 0.0475m Group materiality We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 47 500 as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
The Group is made up of the main trading and parent entity of Morses Club PLC and two subsidaries being Shopacheck Financial Services Limited and Shelby Finance Limited.
These companies account for 100% of the Groups net assets 100% of the Groups revenue and 100% of the Groups pretax profit.
We performed testing over the consolidation which is prepared at the parent entity level only.
All entities in the Group are within our audit scope and the audit of these entities is performed directly by the Group audit team.
These audits are executed at levels of materiality applicable to each individual entity which were lower than Group materiality and ranged from 0.475m to 0.9m.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 47 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Our duty to read other information in the Annual Report Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the annual report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited financial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the directors statement that they consider the annual report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the annual report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We confirm that we have not identified any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and
We also comply with the International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are effective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups and the parent companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the annual report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Matthew Perkins Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor Birmingham United Kingdom 27 April 2017
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of Morses Club PLC continued Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 48 Consolidated Income Statement For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017
52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February
Existing operations 96242 84750 Acquisitions during the period 23 3336 5816 99578 90566 Cost of sales 46695 38042 Gross profit 52883 52524 Administration expenses 40737 41535 Operating profit before amortisation of intangibles and exceptional items 17988 16779 Amortisation of acquisition intangibles 11 3663 5408 Exceptional costs 3 2179 382 Operating profit Existing operations 10917 8983 Acquisitions during the period 1229 2006 12146 10989 Gain arising on acquisitions 23  32 Finance costs 5 927 647 Profit before taxation 4 11219 10374 Taxation 6 2620 2458 Profit after taxation 8599 7916 Earnings per share 25 February
27 February
Basic 8 6.64 6.11 Diluted 8 6.61 6.11 All results derive from continuing operations.
A Statement of Comprehensive Income is not included as there is no other income or losses other than those presented in the Income Statement.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 49 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Balance Sheets As at 25 February 2017 Registered number
Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 10 2834 1326 2642 1326 Other intangible assets 11 7058 9052 4082 3710 Investment in subsidiary 13   2011 1321 Property plant and equipment 12 763 1182 763 1182 Trade and other receivables 1tel679 11050 12239 9893 8218 Current assets Trade and other receivables 14 62852 57706 62845 57706 Cash and cash equivalents 3985 3755 3983 3755 66837 61461 66828 61461 Total assets 77887 73700 76721 69679
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 15 5892 7452 7562 8773 5892 7452 7562 8773 Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 16 10000 9000 10000 9000 Deferred tax 18 617 1879 70 840 10617 10879 10070 9840 Total liabilities 16509 18331 17632 18613 Net assets 61378 55369 59089 51066
Called up share capital 19 1295 1295 1295 1295 Group reconstruction reserve 20   9276 9276 Retained earnings 20 60083 54074 67070 59047 Total equity 61378 55369 59089 51066 The Parent Companys profit for the financial period was 10612965 2016 16621360.
The consolidated and company financial statements of Morses Club PLC were approved by the Board of Directors on 27 April 2017 .
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the income statement of the parent company is not presented as part of these financial statements.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors Paul Smith Andy Thomson Director Director Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 50 Statements of Changes in Equity For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 Group Notes Called up share capital
Retained
Earnings
Total
Equity
As at 28 February 2015 74000 5612 16470 96082 Profit for period   7916 7916 Total comprehensive income for the period   7916 7916 Capital reduction 20 72705 5612 78317 Dividends paid   48629 48629 As at 27 February 2016 1295  54074 55369 Profit for period   8599 8599 Total comprehensive income for the period   8599 8599 Deferred tax adjustment   4 4 Share based payments charge   126 126 Dividends paid   2720 2720 As at 25 February 2017 1295  60083 61378 Company Notes Called up share capital
Share premium
Earnings
Total
Equity
As at 28 February 2015 74000 9276 5612 12738 83074 Profit for the period    16621 16621 Total comprehensive income for the period    16621 16621 Capital reduction 20 72705  5612 78317 Dividends paid    48629 48629 As at 27 February 2016 1295 9276  59047 51066 Profit for the period    10613 10613 Total comprehensive income for the period    10613 10613 Deferred tax adjustment    4 4 Share based payments charge    126 126 Dividends paid    2720 2720 As at 25 February 2017 1295 9276  67070 59089 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 51 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Cash Flow Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017
Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Net cash inflow from operating activities 1 9726 14810 10125 14810 Net cash outflow from financing activities 2 2647 9147 2647 9147 Net cash outflowinflow from investing activities 2 6849 10558 7250 10558 Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 230 4895 228 4895 Reconciliation of decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents to movement in net debt Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 230 4895 228 4895 Change in cash and cash equivalents resulting from cash flows 230 4895 228 4895 Movement in cash and cash equivalents in the period 230 4895 228 4895 Cash and cash equivalents beginning of period 3755 8650 3755 8650 Cash and cash equivalents end of period 3985 3755 3983 3755 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 52 Notes to the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 1 Reconciliation of profit before taxation to net cash inflow from operating activities Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Profit before exceptional costs 13398 10756 15904 20400 Exceptional costs 2179 382 2179 382 Profit before taxation 11219 10374 13725 20018 Dividend from subsidiary    68599 Depreciation charges 54telGain on acquisition  32  32 Impairment of goodwill  42  42 Amortisation of intangibles 4412 5683 1948 1137 Impairment of investment    63501 Loss on disposal of fixed assets  146  146 Loss on disposal of intangibles 134  134 Increasedecrease in receivables 1918 27532 1459 27532 Dividend in specie to Perpignon Limited  31129  31129 IncreaseDecrease in payables 1640 2548 1742 2548 Interest paid included in financing activities 92telShare based payments charge 126  126 2585 6173 478 3471 Taxation paid 4078 1737 4078 1737 Net cash inflow from operating activities 9726 14810 10125 14810 2 Analysis of cash flows for headings netted in the cash flow statement Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Financing activities Dividends paid 2720 17500 2720 17500 Proceeds from additional longterm debt 1000 9000 1000 9000 Repayment of longterm debt Interest paid 927 647 927 647 Net cash outflow from financing activities 2647 9147 2647 9147 Investing activities Purchase of intangibles 1029 2523 930 2523 Purchase of property plant and equipment 125 1152 125 1152 Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment  500  500 Additional investment in subsidiary   500 Acquisitions 5695 7383 5695 7383 Net cash outflowinflow from investing activities 6849 10558 7250 10558 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 53 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 1 Accounting Policies General Information The Company is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The address of its registered office is Kingston House Centre 27 Business Park Woodhead Road Birstall Batley West Yorkshire WF17 9TD.
Accounting Convention The financial statements have been prepared under International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS adopted by the European Union and therefore the Group financial statements comply with Article 4 of the EU lAS Regulation.
The Company financial statements have also been prepared in accordance with IFRS endorsed by the European Union.
These financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention.
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries for the period ended 25 February 2017 .
The Group has adopted the amendments to IAS 1 Disclosure Initiative for the first time in the current year.
The amendments clarify that an entity need not provide a specific disclosure required by an IFRS if the information resulting from that disclosure is not material and give guidance on the bases of aggregating and disaggregating information for disclosure purposes.
However the amendments reiterate that an entity should consider providing additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRS is insufficient to enable users of financial statements to understand the impact of particular transactions events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance.
The adoption of these amendments has not resulted in any impact on the financial performance or financial position of the Group.
New and Amended Standards Adopted by the Group and Company IAS 1 Disclosure Initiative IFRS 11 Acquisition of an Interest in a Joint Operation IAS 16 and 38 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation IFRS 10 IFRS 12 and IAS 28 Sale of Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture IAS 27 Separate Financial Statements Annual Improvements to IFRS 20122014 Cycle At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following standards and interpretations which have not been applied in these financial statements were in issue but not yet effective IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment amendments IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements amendments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 16 Leases IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows amendments IAS 12 Income Taxes amendments IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures amendments The adoption of IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 may have a material impact on the financial assets reported by the Group.
It is not practical to provide a reasonable estimate of the effect of these standards until a more detailed review is undertaken.
Implementation of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments In July 2014 the International Accounting Standards Board IASB issued the final IFRS 9 Financial Instruments which will become mandatory for the Group as of 1 March 2018.
The standard reflects the classification and measurement impairment and hedge accounting phases of the IASBs project to replace the International Accounting Standard IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
IFRS 9 requires all financial assets except equity instruments to be classified at amortised cost fair value through other comprehensive income OCI or fair value through profit or loss on the basis of the entitys business model for managing financial assets and its contractual cash flow characteristics.
If a financial asset meets the criteria to be measured at amortised cost or at fair value through OCI it can be designated at fair value through profit or loss under the fair value option if doing so would significantly reduce or eliminate an accounting mismatch.
Equity instruments that are not held for trading may be accounted for at fair value through OCI with no subsequent reclassification of realised gains or losses to the income statement while all other equity instruments will be accounted for at fair value through profit or loss.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 54 IFRS 9 classification and measurement requirements for liabilities are unchanged except that any gain or loss arising on a financial liability designated at fair value through profit or loss that is attributable to changes in the issuers own credit risk own credit is presented in OCI and not recognised in the income statement.
IFRS 9 further introduces a revised impairment model which will require entities to recognise expected credit losses based on unbiased forwardlooking information.
This replaces the existing IAS 39 incurred loss model which only recognises impairment if there is objective evidence that a loss is already incurred and would measure the loss at the most probable outcome.
The IFRS 9 impairment model will be applicable to all financial assets at amortised cost lease receivables debt financial assets at fair value through OCI loan commitments and financial guarantee contracts.
In addition IAS 39 requires the impairment to be based on the fair value loss for available for sale debt rather than estimated future cash flows.
The measurement of expected loss will involve increased complexity and judgement including estimation of probabilities of defaults loss given default a range of unbiased future economic scenarios estimation of expected lives estimation of exposures at default and assessing increases in credit risk.
The adoption of IFRS 9 may have a material impact on the financial assets reported by the Group as a result of the expected credit loss approach for impairment assessment.
It is not practical to provide a reasonable estimate of the effect of this standard until a more detailed review is undertaken.
A project team will be formed over the coming months with a view to determine the financial impact on the business for disclosure in the 2018 financial statements.
The implementation of all other standards is not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
Basis of Consolidation The Group financial statements consolidate the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings drawn up to 25 February 2017 .
Revenue Recognition Interest income is recognised in the income statement for all loans and receivables measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method EIR.
The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash flows of the loan back to the present value of the advance.
Under IAS 39 credit charges on loan products continue to accrue at the EIR on all impaired capital balances throughout the life of the agreement irrespective of the terms of the loan and whether the customer is actually being charged arrears interest.
This is referred to as the grossup adjustment to revenue and is offset by a corresponding gross up adjustment to the loan loss provisioning charge to reflect the fact that this additional revenue is not collectable.
See Critical Accounting Judgements and Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty on pages 57 to 58 for more information.
Net Loan Book All customer receivables are initially recognised at the amount loaned to the customer.
After initial recognition the amounts receivable from customers are subsequently measured at amortised cost.
The Directors assess on an ongoing basis whether there is objective evidence that a loan asset or group of loan assets is impaired and requires a deduction for impairment.
A loan asset or a group of loan assets is deemed to be impaired only if there has been a trigger event.
A trigger event is defined as when the cumulative amount of two or more contractual weekly payments have been missed in the previous 13 weeks.
Impairment is calculated using models which use historical payment performance to calculate the estimated amount and timing of future cash flows from each arrears stage.
Impairment is then calculated by estimating the future cash flows for such impaired loans discounting the cashflows to a present value using the original EIR and comparing this figure with the balance sheet carrying value.
All such impairments are charged to the income statement.
For all accounts which are not impaired a further incurred but not reported IBNR provision is calculated and charged to the income statement based on managements estimates of the propensity of these accounts to default from conditions which existed at the balance sheet date.
Key assumptions in ascertaining whether a loan asset or group of loan assets is impaired include information regarding the probability of any account going into default and information regarding the likely eventual loss including recoveries.
These and assumptions for estimating future cash flows are based upon observed historical data and updated as management considers appropriate to reflect current and future conditions.
All assumptions are reviewed regularly to take account of differences between previously estimated cash flows on impaired debt and the eventual losses.
Business Combinations Acquisitions are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The consideration transferred in a business combination is measured at fair value.
At the acquisition date the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date except that deferred tax assets or liabilities are recognised and measured in accordance with IAS 12 Income Taxes.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 55 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 1 Accounting Policies continued
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of business combinations representing any excess of fair value of the consideration given over the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired is capitalised and reviewed for impairment at least annually.
Gains on acquisition arising on the purchase of a business are recognised directly in the income statement.
Other Intangible Assets Other intangible assets include acquisition intangibles in respect of customer relationships and agent networks as well as software servers and licences.
The fair value of customer relationships on acquisition has been estimated by discounting the expected future cash flows from the relationships over their estimated useful economic lives of 10 years such estimate being based on previous experience of similar acquisitions.
The assets will be amortised over their estimated useful lives in line with the realisation of their expected benefits.
Due to the behavioural profile of our customers this will naturally result in a greater amortisation charge in the early years with a corresponding reduction in later years.
The fair value of agent networks on acquisition is calculated based on the estimated cost of developing a similar network organically.
The assets are amortised over their estimated useful economic lives of 10 years such estimate being based on previous experience of similar acquisitions in line with the realisation of the expected benefits arising from the customer relationships associated with the agent network.
Software servers and licences are stated at cost net of amortisation and any provision for impairment.
Amortisation is provided at the following annual rates in order to write off the cost less estimated residual value of each asset over its estimated useful life.
Software  20% on cost Servers and licences  20% on cost Amortisation is included within administration expenses.
Property Plant and Equipment Tangible fixed assets are stated at cost or valuation net of depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is provided at the following annual rates in order to write off the cost less estimated residual value of each asset over its estimated useful life.
Computers and PDAs  20%33% on cost Fixtures and fittings  20% on cost Investment in Subsidiaries Subsidiaries are entities over which the Company has power to govern the financial and operating policies so as to obtain benefits from such entities activities.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the
They are deconsolidated from the date on which control ceases.
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less any provision for impairment.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at bank and in hand.
Bank overdrafts are presented in current liabilities to the extent that there is no right of offset with cash balances.
Pension Costs and Other Postretirement Benefits The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme.
Contributions payable to the Groups pension scheme are charged to the income statement in the period to which they relate.
Going Concern The Directors have considered the appropriateness of adopting the going concern basis in preparing these financial statements.
The Group has prepared a threeyear business plan which is a continuation of its strategy of generating growth through organic and acquisitive means.
In addition to standard internal governance the Group is also monitored against key financial covenants tied in with the current funding facilities.
These are produced and submitted on a monthly basis with key schedules included in the monthly Board
The Group is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties which arise as a result of the current economic environment.
In determining that the Group is a going concern these risks which are described in the principal risks and uncertainties section have been considered by the Directors.
The Directors have considered these risks in the Groups forecasts and projections which highlight continued profitability for the foreseeable future.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 56 After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Taxation
Current tax including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is recognised on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit.
It is recognised at the prevailing rate at which it is expected to unwind.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences.
Deferred tax assets are generally recognised for all deductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which those deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such deferred tax assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
In addition deferred tax liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill.
Leases
Rentals under operating leases are charged on a straightline basis over the lease term even if the payments are not made on such a basis.
Borrowing Costs Borrowing costs are recognised in the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Leasehold
Costs incurred in refurbishing or fitting out leasehold properties are capitalised and depreciated over the length of the relevant lease.
At period end these assets had a nil carrying value having been fully depreciated during the period.
Sharebased Payments The Company operates an equitysettled sharebased compensation scheme.
The fair value of the share options granted is recognised over the vesting period to reflect the achievement of performance conditions over time.
The charge relating to grants to employees of the Company is recognised as an expense in the profit and loss account.
The fair value of the share options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions is calculated using established option pricing models principally Monte Carlo simulation.
The probability of meeting nonmarket vesting conditions which include profitability targets is used to estimate the number of share options which are likely to vest.
Exceptional Items Exceptional items are items that are unusual because of their size nature of incidence and which the Directors consider should be disclosed separately to enable a full understanding of the Groups results.
Segment Reporting IFRS 8 Operating Segments requires segments to be identified on the basis of internal reports that are regularly reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM.
The Chief Operating Decision Maker is the Executive Committee ExCo.
All results are viewed as one segment by the CODM for the purposes of management decisions.
This is because all operations are conducted within the UK and all material operations are of the same nature and share the same economic characteristics including a similar customer base and nature of products and services ie consumer credit.
As a result the Group only has one reportable segment being consumer credit.
Due to the size of Shelby Finance Limited relative to the Group it has not been considered to be a separate cash generating unit CGU in the current period.
Shelby Finance Limited is an instalment loan business and so is not integrated within the operation of the Company.
Critical Accounting Judgements and Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty The following areas are the critical judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty that the Directors have made in applying the Groups accounting policies Critical Accounting Judgements Business Combinations During the period the Company has made a series of acquisitions.
Management has made judgements as to whether each of the acquisitions constitutes a business and therefore is required to be accounted for as a business combination in accordance with IFRS 3.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 57 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 1 Accounting Policies continued
The amount of goodwill initially recognised as a result of a business combination is dependent on the allocation of the purchase price to the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
The determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities is based to a considerable extent on managements judgement most notably the fair value assigned to the acquired loan book and the acquired intangible assets.
Allocation of the purchase price affects the results of the Group as intangible assets with finite lives are amortised whereas intangible assets with indefinite lives including goodwill are not amortised and could result in differing amortisation charges based on the allocation to intangible assets with finite lives and those with indefinite lives.
Revenue Recognition Under IAS 39 interest income should be recognised on the shorter of the expected life or the contractual life of the loan.
Under IAS 39 management has judged that interest income should be recognised over the contractual life of the loan based on historical loan book performance.
Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty
The Group reviews its portfolio of loans and receivables for impairment at each balance sheet date.
For the purpose of assessing the impairment of customer loans and receivables customers are categorised into arrears stages as this is considered to be the most reliable indication of payment performance.
The Group makes judgements to determine whether there is objective evidence which indicates that there has been an adverse effect on expected future cash flows.
Once a loan is deemed to be impaired the Group is required to estimate the quantum and timing of cash flows that will be recovered which are discounted to present value based on the EIR of the loan.
Receivables are impaired when the cumulative amount of two or more contractual weekly payments have been missed in the previous 13 weeks since only at this point do the expected future cash flows from loans deteriorate significantly.
Impairment is calculated using models which use historical payment performance to generate the estimated amount and timing of future cash flows from each arrears stage.
Management use a combination of historical cash performance curves to estimate future cash flows.
These estimations are revised annually and approved by management.
In addition to this provision a further provision is made for receivables that have not yet missed two or more payments in the previous 13 but may have the propensity to become impaired in the near future.
The impairment provision is a key estimation that is calculated based on collection curves derived from a threeyear average of actual performance.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows CGUs.
Upon acquisition the activities of the acquired entities are closely aligned to those of the Company and are deemed to have been integrated rather than remain as separate CGUs.
Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the discounted future cash flows of the Company using a discount rate of 10% and a terminal value based on a minimum future growth rate of 2%.
Other Intangible Assets  Customer Lists Customer lists have been allocated a fair value on acquisition as the relationships are an important influence on the revenue generating capacity of the business.
The customer lists have been valued based on the present value of expected future cash flows.
The calculation of the customer list intangible asset reflects a number of key judgements and estimates which have a material effect on the carrying value of the asset.
These include cash flow forecasts have been produced following acquisitions which involves a number of judgements and estimates particularly in respect of future business volumes from acquired customers collections performance and an appropriate discount rate and the customer list intangible assets are amortised in line with the realisation of their expected benefits.
The nature and inherent uncertainty relating to the above judgements and estimates means that the forecast cash flows may be materially different from actual cash flows.
A material future reduction in forecast surplus cash flows from customer lists would necessitate a full impairment review and the possibility of a material impairment charge in future periods.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 58 2 Staff costs 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Wages and salaries 15218 14231 Social security costs 1892 1989 Other pension costs note 21 391 377 17501 16597 The average monthly number of employees during the period was as follows 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Management 138 131 Clerical and field staff 49telRedundancy costs included in administration expenses total 283188 2016  782920.
These are a combination of postacquisition integration costs and business as usual restructuring costs see note 3.
The table above excludes the network of selfemployed agents.
3 Exceptional and nonoperating costs 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Exceptional Costs Flotation costs 2179 382 NonOperating costs included within Administration Costs Restructuring costs 283 783 Nonrecurring costs 282 744 Total exceptional and nonoperating costs 2744 1909 4 Profit before taxation Profit before tax is stated after charging 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Depreciation  owned assets 544 736 Amortisation of intangibles 4412 5683 Impairment of goodwill  42 Operating lease rentals  motor vehicles 1967 1715 Operating lease rentals  property 1110 1259 Restructuring costs note 3 283 783 Directors remuneration including key management personnel 858 967 Directors pension contributions to money purchase schemes 8 16 The number of directors former and current to whom retirement benefits were accruing was as follows Money purchase schemes 6 6 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 59 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 4 Profit before taxation continued Information regarding the highest paid Director is as follows 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Emoluments 330 209 Pension contributions to money purchase schemes 4 3 The analysis of auditors remuneration is as follows 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks
27 February Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Groups Financial statements 156 123 Fees payable to the Companys auditor and their associates for other services to the Group Subsidiary audit fee  2 Total audit fees 156 125 Audit related assurance services  1 Taxation compliance services 42 19 Other taxation advisory services  11 Other assurance services 25 10 Corporate finance services 517 382 Other services 4 32 Total nonaudit fees 588 455 5 Finance Costs 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Other interest payable 927 647 Total interest payable 927 647 6 Taxation Analysis of the tax charge The tax chargecredit on profit before tax for the period was as follows 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Current tax UK corporation tax 3499 3367 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing differences 1562 1050 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 654 147 Effect of change of tax rates 29 6 Total deferred tax 879 909 Tax on profit on ordinary activities 2620 2458 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 60 Factors Affecting the Tax Charge The tax assessed for the period is higher 2016  lower than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK.
The difference is explained below 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Profit on ordinary activities before tax 11219 10374 Profit on ordinary activities before exceptional items multiplied by the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 2016  20.25% 2244 2101 Effects of Ordinary expenses not deductible for tax purposes 70 239 IPO exceptional expenses not deductible for tax purposes 436 Gain on acquisition  7 Effect of changes in tax rate 30 6 Movement in amounts not provided in deferred tax 8 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 167 197 Tax losses surrendered by Perpignon Group  66 Tax on profit on ordinary activities 2620 2458 The standard rate of corporation tax applicable for the period ended 25 February 2017 is 20% 2016 20.25%.
Finance No.2 Bill 2015 provides that the tax rate will reduce to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and Finance Bill 2016 provides that the tax rate will further reduce to 17% with effect from 1 April 2020.
The effect of these proposed tax rate reductions will be reflected in future periods.
7 Dividend per share Dividend per share 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks
27 February Dividends paid 000 2720 48629 Weighted average number of shares 000s 129500 129500 Dividend per share pence 2.10 38.00 Subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting on 20 June 2017  the Board proposes to pay a final dividend of 4.3p per ordinary share payable on 21 July 2017 to all shareholders on the register at the close of business on 23 June 2017 .
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 61 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 8 Earnings per share 52 weeks ended 25 February 52 weeks ended 27 February Earnings 000 8598 7916 Number of shares Weighted average number of shares for the purposes of basic earnings per share 000s 129500 129500 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares through share options 000s 598 Weighted average number of shares for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 000s 130098 129500 Basic per share amount pence 6.64 6.11 Diluted per share amount pence 6.61 6.11 Diluted earnings per share calculates the effect on earnings per share assuming conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
Dilutive potential ordinary shares are calculated for awards outstanding under performance related share incentive schemes such as the Deferred Share Plan.
The number of dilutive potential ordinary shares is calculated based on the number of shares which would be issuable if the performance targets have been met.
On 25 February 2016 the Company cancelled 72705000 shares and divided the remaining into 129500000 1p shares.
This transaction changed the number of ordinary shares outstanding without a corresponding change in total equity.
For the 2016 financial period the Earnings per Share calculation has been adjusted retrospectively in accordance with IAS 33 26 increasing the weighted average number of shares by 55500000.
9 Profit of parent company As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the income statement of the parent company is not presented as part of these financial statements.
The parent companys profit for the financial period was 10612965 2016 16621360.
10 Goodwill
Company
Cost
At 28 February telAdditions 1074 1074 At 27 February 2016 1659 1659 Additions 1508 1316 At 25 February 2017 3167 2975
At 28 February 2015 291 291 Impairment charge for the period 42 42 At 27 February 2016 333 333 Impairment charge for the period At 25 February 2017 333 333 Net book value At 25 February 2017 2834 2642 At 27 February 2016 1326 1326 At 28 February telFinancial Statements Morses Club PLC 62 Allocation of goodwill to cash generating units Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows CGUs.
Upon acquisition the activities of the acquired entities are closely aligned to those of the Company and are deemed to have been integrated rather than remain as separate CGUs.
Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the discounted future cash flows of the Company using a discount rate of 10% and a terminal value based on a minimum future growth rate of 2%.
The Group has conducted a sensitivity analysis on the goodwill impairment assessment.
The Group believes that there are no reasonably possible changes to the key assumptions in the next year which would result in the carrying value of goodwill exceeding the recoverable amount.
The carrying value of goodwill at each period end was as follows 25 February 27 February Shelby Finance Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 192 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 192 Pearlmans Finance Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 389 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 389 Portwood Finance Company Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 251 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 251 Carson Finance Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 112 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 112
Stanley Hull Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 271 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 271 Deebank Financial Services Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 140 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 140 Universal Trading Company Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 153 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 153 KDS Finance Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 959 959 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 959 959 Lagans Finance Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 115 115 Less impairment Carrying value of goodwill 115 115 MandM Finance Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 39 43 Less impairment  4 Carrying value of goodwill 39 39 Naughton Finance Limited Carrying value of goodwill before impairment charge 213 251 Less impairment  38 Carrying value of goodwill 213 213 Total carrying value 2834 1326 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 63 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 10 Goodwill continued Key assumptions used in goodwill impairment review Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
For the purposes of this impairment review the Company is deemed to be a single CGU and there was no impairment in the reporting period.
11 Other intangible assets
Software
Servers and
Customer
Lists
Agent
Networks
Totals
Cost
At 28 February 2015 1633 17552 720 19905 Additions 2523   2523 Acquisitions  1757 64 1821 At 27 February 2016 4156 19309 784 24249 Additions 1029 1457 66 2552 Disposals 144   144 At 25 February 2017 5041 20766 850 26657 Accumulated amortisation At 28 February 2015 1129 8055 330 9514 Charge for period 275 5195 213 5683 At 27 February 2016 1404 13250 543 15197 Charge for period 749 3517 146 4412 Disposals 10   10 At 25 February 2017 2143 16767 689 19599 Net book value At 25 February 2017 2898 3999 161 7058 At 27 February 2016 2752 6059 241 9052 At 28 February 2015 504 9497 390 10391
Software
Servers and
Customer
Lists
Agent
Networks
Totals
Cost
At 28 February 2015 1633   1633 Additions 2523   2523 Acquisitions  1757 64 1821 At 27 February 2016 4156 1757 64 5977 Additions 930 1457 66 2453 Disposals 144   144 At 25 February 2017 4942 3214 130 8286 Accumulated amortisation At 28 February 2015 1129   1129 Charge for period 275 829 34 1137 At 27 February 2016 1404 829 34 2267 Charge for period 749 1150 48 1947 Disposals 10   10 At 25 February 2017 2143 1979 82 4204 Net book value At 25 February 2017 2799 1235 48 4082 At 27 February 2016 2752 928 31 3710 At 28 February 2015 504   504 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 64 12 Property plant and equipment
Computers and PDAs
Leasehold
Motor
Vehicles
Totals
Cost
At 28 February 2015 2082 36 3  2121 Additions 847 76   924 Disposals 1199   706 1904 Acquisitions    706 706 At 27 February 2016 1730 113 3  1846 Additions 95 30   125 At 25 February 2017 1825 143 3  1971
At 28 February 2015 1172 11 3  1185 Charge for period 499 23  214 736 Disposals 1044   214 1258 At 27 February  664 Charge for period 480 64   544 At 25 February 2017 1107 98 3  1208 Net book value At 25 February 2017 718 45   763 At 27 February 2016 1104 78   1182 At 28 February 2015 910 26   936
Computers and PDAs
Motor
Vehicles
Totals
Cost
At 28 February 2015 1674 26  1700 Additions 847 76  924 Disposals 1199  706 1904 Acquisitions   706 706 At 27 February 2016 1322 102  1424 Additions 95 30  125 At 25 February 2017 1417 132  1549
At 28 February 2015 764   764 Charge for period Disposals 1044  214 1258 At 27 February 2016 219 23  242 Charge for period 480 64  544 At 25 February 2017 699 87  786 Net book value At 25 February 2017 718 45  763 At 27 February 2016 1104 79  1182 At 28 February 2015 910 26  936 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 65 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 13 Investment in subsidiaries
Cost
At 28 February 2015 64822 Impairment 63501 At 27 February 2016 1321 Additions 690
At 25 February 2017 2011 Investments in subsidiary undertakings are stated at cost less any provision for impairment.
On 28 February 2015 the Company acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of Shopacheck Financial Services Ltd SFS from its immediate parent company Perpignon Limited.
On 10 January 2017 the Company acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of Shelby Finance Limited.
As a result the Company owns 100% of the ordinary share capital of the following subsidiary undertakings which are included in the Groups consolidation Shopacheck Financial Services Limited SFS a Company registered in England and Wales Company number with Registered Office Kingston House Centre 27  Woodhead Road Birstall Batley West Yorkshire WF17 9TD whose principal activity was the provision of consumer credit and is currently nontrading.
Shelby Finance Limited a Company registered in England and Wales Company number  with Registered Office Kingston House Centre 27  Woodhead Road Birstall Batley West Yorkshire WF17 9TD whose principal activity is the provision of consumer credit.
During the prior period SFS paid a dividend in specie of 68599000 to the Company which resulted in a reduction in the intercompany balance to 1321416 with a corresponding reduction in SFS net assets by this amount.
As a result the Companys investment in SFS was reduced to its recoverable amount which was deemed to be the revised net assets of SFS resulting in an impairment of 63500887 .
Shopacheck Financial Services Limited and Shelby Finance Limited both qualify for an exemption to audit under the requirements of Section 479A of the Companies Act 2006.
As such no audit has been conducted for these companies in the current financial year.
14 Trade and other receivables Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Amounts falling due within one year Net receivable from advances to customers 60833 56152 60833 56152 Amounts falling due after one year Net receivable from advances to customers 39telNet loan book 61228 56831 61228 56831 Amounts owed by Perpignon Group undertakings  75  75 Other debtors 48telPrepayments 1530 1241 1523 1241 63247 58385 63240 58385 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 66 Amounts receivable from customers Group and Company 25 February 27 February Amounts receivable from customers 61228 56831 Analysis by future date due due within one year 60833 56152 due in more than one year 395 679 Amounts receivable from customers 61228 56831 Analysis by security Other loans not secured 61228 56831 Amounts receivable from customers 61228 56831 Analysis of overdue Neither past due nor impaired 42990 38568 Past due not impaired 224 277 Impaired 18014 17986 Amounts receivable from customers 61228 56831 The credit risk inherent in amounts receivable from customers is reviewed under impairment as per note 1 and under this review the credit quality of assets which are neither past due nor impaired was considered to be good.
The above analysis of when loans are due is based upon original contractual terms which are not rescheduled rather than payment performance over the last 13 weeks.
The carrying amount of amounts receivable from customers whose terms have been renegotiated that would otherwise be past due or impaired is therefore nil 2016 nil An analysis of movements on loan loss provisions is provided below Group and
At 28 February 2015 40782 Charge for period 22588 Amounts written off during period 21741 Unwind of discount 9203 Provision subsequently recognised for customers acquired during the period 3660 At 27 February 2016 36086 Charge for period 21058 Amounts written off during period 22526 Unwind of discount 2601 Provision subsequently recognised for customers acquired during the period 2737 At 25 February 2017 34754 There has been no material change in the average effective interest rate used for consumer credit during the period to 25 February 2017 .
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 67 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 15 Trade and other payables amounts falling due within one year Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Trade creditors 1054 1922 952 1922 Amounts owed to group undertakings   1776 1321 Tax 2153 2078 2153 2078 Social security and other taxes 45telOther creditors 55telAccrued expenses 1684 2456 1679 2456 Deferred consideration   100 Bank loans payable 5892 7452 7562 8773 16 Trade and other payables amounts falling due after one year Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Bank loans 10000  9000 10000  9000 The bank loan is a revolving credit facility held with Shawbrook Bank PLC.
Under the terms of the loan covenant the loan book is held as collateral against the funds borrowed.
17 Operating lease commitments The following operating lease payments are committed to be paid as follows Group and Company Other operating leases Land and buildings 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February
Within one year 123telBetween one and five years 206tel329telLand and building operating lease commitments relate to the future rental payments until first break of the Support Centre property at Kingston House Birstall and the network of regional branches.
Other operating lease commitments relate to the fleet of company cars.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 68 18 Deferred tax Group Company 25 February 27 February 25 February 27 February Fixed asset temporary differences 123 1681 123 643 Other temporary differences 74telDeferred tax liability 617 1879 70 840
Company
Balance as at 28 February 2015 2614 636 Credit for the period 1057 118 Arising on acquisition 174 174 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 147 147 Balance as at 27 February 2016 1879 840 Credit for the period 714 222 Arising on acquisition 274 274 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 822 822 Balance as at 25 February Called up share capital Authorised allotted issued and fully paid Number Class
Value
25 February 27 February 129500000 Ordinary 0.01 1295 1295 20 Reserves
Retained
Earnings
Share premium
At 28 February 2015 16470 5612 22082 Profit for the period 7916  7916 Capital reduction 78317 5612 72705 Dividends paid 48629  48629 At 27 February 2016 54074 Profit for the period 8599  8599 Deferred tax adjustment 4  4 Sharebased payment charge 126  126 Dividends paid 2720  2720 At 25 February 2017 60083  60083 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 69 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 20 Reserves continued
Group reconstruction reserve
Share premium
At 28 February 2015 9276 12738 5612 9074 Profit for the period  16621  16621 Capital reduction  78317 5612 72705 Dividends paid  48629  48629 At 27 February 2016 9276 59047  49771 Profit for the period  10613  10613 Deferred tax adjustment  4  4 Sharebased payment charge  126  126 Dividends paid  2720  2720 At 25 February 2017 9276 67070  57794 21 Retirement benefit schemes Defined contribution schemes The Group operates defined contribution retirement benefit schemes for all qualifying employees.
The assets of the schemes are held separately from those of the Group in funds under the control of the trustees.
Where there are employees who leave the schemes prior to vesting fully in the contributions the contributions payable by the Group are reduced by the amount of forfeited contributions.
The total costs charged of 390952 2016 377 019 represent contributions payable to these schemes by the Group at rates specified in the rules of the plans.
Contributions payable to the schemes at the year end were 62162 2016 55986.
22 Ultimate parent company The Company is a 51% subsidiary of Perpignon Limited.
Perpignon Limiteds shareholding reduced during the year due to the IPO.
Perpignon Limited continues to hold a controlling majority in the Company.
At 25 February 2017  the smallest Group of undertakings into which these financial statements are consolidated is Perpignon Limited registered in England and Wales and the largest Group of undertakings into which these financial statements are consolidated is FCAP Four Limited registered in England and Wales.
Copies of these financial statements are available from the Registrar of Companies Companies House Crown Way Maindy Cardiff CF14 3UZ.
The ultimate controlling party of the Company is FCAP Four Limited.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 70 23 Acquisitions During the period the Company made a number of acquisitions.
For each of the acquisitions detailed below the Company has undertaken an analysis of the fair value of the receivables acquired compared with the gross contractual amounts of the receivables book and the contractual cash flows not expected to be collected.
As the financials for each of the acquisitions detailed below were not available for the period prior to acquisition it is not possible to disclose the impact on profit before tax and amortisation of acquisition intangibles had the acquisitions been completed on the first day of the financial period.
None of the goodwill recognised in relation to acquisitions made during this reporting period are expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
Deebank Financial Services Limited On 18 April 2016 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Deebank Financial Services Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of Deebank Financial Services Limited for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 13000 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  453 451 Tangible fixed assets 130  130 Current assets Debtors 788  788 Total assets 918 453 1371 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax  81 81 Total liabilities  81 81 Net assets 918 372 1290 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 1430 Net assets acquired 1290 Goodwill 140 Universal Trading Company Limited On 20 July 2016 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Universal Trading Company Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of Universal Trading Company Limited for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 12000 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  87 87 Current assets Debtors 285  285 Total assets 285 87 372 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax  16 16 Total liabilities  16 16 Net assets 285 72 356 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 509 Net assets acquired 356 Goodwill 153 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 71 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 23 Acquisitions continued
Stanley Hull Limited On 10 August 2016 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of H.
Stanley Hull Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of H.
Stanley Hull Limited for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 11200 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  197 197 Current assets Debtors 428  428 Total assets 428 197 625 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax  36 36 Total liabilities  36 36 Net assets 428 162 590 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 861 Net assets acquired 590 Goodwill 271 Pearlmans Finance Limited On 15 September 2016 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Pearlmans Finance Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of Pearlmans Finance Limited for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 13270 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  545 545 Current assets Debtors 678  668 Total assets 678 545 1223 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax  98 98 Total liabilities  98 98 Net assets 678 447 1125 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 1514 Net assets acquired 1125 Goodwill 389 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 72 Portwood Finance Company Limited On 28 September 2016 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Portwood Finance Company Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of Portwood Finance Company Limited for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 11290 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  145 145 Current assets Debtors 488  488 Total assets 488 145 633 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax  26 26 Total liabilities  26 26 Net assets 488 119 607 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 858 Net assets acquired 607 Goodwill 251 Carson Finance Limited On 10 October 2016 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Carson Finance Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of Carson Finance Limited for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 12735 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  95 95 Current assets Debtors 274  274 Total assets 274 95 369 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax  17 17 Total liabilities  17 17 Net assets 274 78 352 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 464 Net assets acquired 352 Goodwill 112 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 73 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 23 Acquisitions continued Shelby Finance Limited On 10 January 2017  the Group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Shelby Finance Limited via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired Shelby Finance Limited for the purpose of enabling a diversification of its product range and reduce the time to market.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of nil were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Tangible fixed assets 5 5 Current assets Debtors 67 64 3 Total assets 72 69 3
Accruals and other liabilities 5  5 Total liabilities 5  5 Net assets 67 69 2 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 190 Net assets acquired 2 Goodwill 192 The following acquisitions occurred in the comparative period KDS Finance On 26 March 2015 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of KDS Finance via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of KDS Finance for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 170000 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  852 852 Tangible fixed assets 546  546 Current assets Debtors 1984  1984 Total assets 2530 852 3382
Accruals and other liabilities 229  229 Total liabilities 229  229 Net assets 2302 852 3153 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 4112 Net assets acquired 3153 Goodwill 959 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 74 Sunniside Finance On 17 June 2015 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Sunniside Finance via a cash purchase.
The
Company acquired the assets of Sunniside Finance for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 12000 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  82 82 Current assets Debtors 348  348 Total assets 348 82 430 Current liabilities Deferred tax  15 15 Total liabilities  15 15 Net assets 348 67 415 Gain arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 383 Net assets acquired 415 Gain on acquisition 32 Lagans Finance On 25 September 2015 the Company acquired the loan book and certain assets of Lagans Finance via a cash purchase.
The Company acquired the assets of Logans Finance for the purpose of increasing its customer base.
The costs incurred in relation to this acquisition of 17 000 were expensed to the Income Statement.
Book value Fair value adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  888 888 Tangible fixed assets 159  159 Current assets Debtors 1886  1886 Total assets 2045 888 2933 Current liabilities Deferred tax  160 160 Total liabilities  160 160 Net assets 2045 728 2773 Goodwill arising on acquisition 000 Consideration 2889 Net assets acquired 2773 Goodwill 115 Shopacheck Financial Services Limited and Shelby Finance Limited both qualify for an exemption to audit under the requirements of Section 479A of the Companies Act 2006.
As such no audit has been conducted for these companies in the current financial year.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 75 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 24 Financial Instruments The Group and the Companys principal financial instruments are amounts receivable from customers cash bank overdrafts and bank loan.
The Group and the Companys business objectives rely on maintaining a wellspread customer base of carefully controlled quality by applying strong emphasis on good credit management both through strict lending criteria at the time of underwriting a new credit facility and continuous monitoring of the collection process.
As at 25 February 2017  the Company and Groups indebtedness amounted to 10000000 2016 9000000.
Currency risk The Group has no exposure to foreign currency risk.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that the Group will suffer loss in the event of a default by a customer or a bank counterparty.
A default occurs when the customer or bank fails to honour repayments as they fall due.
The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk on amounts receivable from customers as at 25 February 2017 is the carrying value of amounts receivable from customers of 61227 412 2016 56831014.
Credit risk is managed using a combination of lending policy criteria credit scoring including behavioural scoring policy rules individual lending approval limits central underwriting and a home visit to make a decision on applications for credit.
The loans offered to customers are shortterm typically a contractual period of between 20 and 52 weeks with an average value of approximately 500.
The loans are underwritten in the customers home by an agent with emphasis placed on any previous lending experience with the customer and the agents assessment of the credit risk based on a completed application form and the home visit.
Once a loan has been made the agent visits the customer weekly to collect repayments.
The agent is well placed to identify signs of strain on a customers income and can moderate lending accordingly.
Equally the regular contact and professional relationship that the agent has with the customer allows them to manage customers repayments effectively even when the household budget is tight.
This can be in the form of taking partpayments allowing missed payments or occasionally restructuring the debt in order to maximise cash collections.
Agents are primarily paid commission for what they collect and not for what they lend so their main focus is on ensuring loans are affordable at the point of issue and then on collecting cash.
Affordability is reassessed by the agent each time an existing customer is reserved.
This normally takes place within 12 months of the previous loan because of the shortterm nature of the product.
Arrears management is a combination of central letters central telephony and field activity undertaken by field management.
This will often involve a home visit to discuss the customers reasons for nonpayment and to agree a suitable resolution.
The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk on bank counterparties as at 25 February 2017 was 3984553 2016 3755291.
Counterparty credit risk arises as a result of cash deposits placed with banks.
Counterparty credit risk is managed by the Board which ensures that the Groups cash deposits are only made with high quality counterparties with the level of permitted exposure to a counterparty firmly linked to the strength of its credit rating.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will have insufficient liquid resources available to fulfil its operational plans andor to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
Liquidity risk is managed by daily monitoring of expected cash flows and ensuring that the group maintains headroom on its committed borrowing facilities to fund growth and contractual maturities for at least the following 12 months.
Funding is available through a 25000000 revolving asset based credit facility.
The Groups liquidity risk is shown in the following tables which measure the cumulative liquidity gap.
Most of the Groups financial assets are repayable within one year which results in a positive liquidity position.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 76 Group At 25 February 2017 Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years No fixed maturity date
Financial assets 60833 395    61228 Other assets 2019    10655 12674 Cash at bank and in hand 3985     3985 Total assets 66837 395   10655 77887 Shareholders funds     61378 61378 Other liabilities 5892 10000   617 16509 Total liabilities and shareholders funds 5892 10000   61995 77887 Cumulative position 60945 51340 51340 51340
At 27 February 2016 Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years No fixed maturity date
Financial Assets 56152 679    56831 Other Assets 1479    11635 13114 Cash at bank and in hand 3755     3755 Total assets 61386 679   11635 73700 Shareholders funds     55369 55369 Other liabilities 7452 9000   1879 18331 Total liabilities and shareholders funds 7452 9000   57248 73700 Cumulative Position 53934 45613 45613 45613
At 25 February 2017 Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years No fixed maturity date
Financial Assets 60833 395    61228 Other Assets 2012    9498 11510 Cash at bank and in hand 3983     3983 Total assets 66828 395   9498 76721 Shareholders funds     59089 59089 Other liabilities 7562 10000   70 17632 Total liabilities and shareholders funds 7562 10000   59159 76721 Cumulative position 59266 49661 49661 49661
At 27 February 2016 Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years No fixed maturity date
Financial Assets 56152 679    56831 Other Assets 1478    7615 9093 Cash at bank and in hand 3755     3755 Total assets 61385 679   7615 69679 Shareholders funds     51066 51066 Other liabilities 8773 9000   840 18613 Total liabilities and shareholders funds 8773 9000   51906 69679 Cumulative position 52612 44291 44291 44291 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 77 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 24 Financial Instruments continued Interest rate risk The Groups activities do not expose it to significant financial risks of changes in interest rates.
There is considered to be no material interest rate risk in cash trade and other receivables trade and other payables.
Capital risk management The Board of Directors assess the capital needs of the Group on an ongoing basis and approve all capital transactions.
Fair values of financial assets and liabilities The fair values of amounts receivable from customers bank loans and overdrafts and other assets and liabilities are considered to be not materially different from their book values.
Fair values which are recognised or disclosed in these financial statements are determined in whole or in part using a valuation technique based on assumptions that are supported by prices from observable current market transactions in the same instrument ie without modification or repackaging and based on available observable market data.
The fair value hierarchy is derived from Level 3 inputs in accordance with IFRS 13 as the instruments are not traded in an active market and the fair value is therefore determined through discounting future cash flows.
The following table sets out the carrying value of the Groups financial assets and liabilities in accordance with the categories of financial instruments set out in IAS 39.
Assets and liabilities outside the scope of IAS 39 are shown within nonfinancial assetsliabilities
25 February 2017 Loans and receivables
Nonfinancial assets liabilities
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 3985   3985 Amounts receivable from customers 61228   61228 Trade and other receivables 489  1530 2019 Property plant and equipment   763 763 Goodwill   2834 2834 Other intangible assets   7058 7058 Total assets 65702  12185 77887
Bank and other borrowings  10000  10000 Trade and other payables  3288  3288 Current tax liabilities   2604 2604 Deferred tax liabilities   617 617 Total liabilities  13288 3221 16509
25 February 2017 Loans and receivables
Nonfinancial assets liabilities
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 3983   3983 Amounts receivable from customers 61228   61228 Trade and other receivables 489  1523 2012 Property plant and equipment   763 763 Goodwill   2642 2642 Investment in subsidiary   2011 2011 Other intangible assets   4082 4082 Total assets 65700  11021 76721
Bank and other borrowings  10000  10000 Trade and other payables  4958  4958 Current tax liabilities   2604 2604 Deferred tax liabilities   70 70 Total liabilities  14958 2674 17632 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 78 Group 27 February 2016 Loans and receivables
Nonfinancial assets liabilities
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 3755   3755 Amounts receivable from customers 56831   56831 Trade and other receivables 313  1241 1554 Property plant and equipment   1182 1182 Goodwill   1326 1326 Other intangible assets   9052 9052 Total assets 60899  12801 73700
Bank and other borrowings  9000  9000 Trade and other payables  4964  4964 Current tax liabilities   2488 2488 Deferred tax liabilities   1879 1879 Total liabilities  13964 4367 18331
27 February 2016 Loans and receivables
Nonfinancial assets liabilities
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 3755   3755 Amounts receivable from customers 56831   56831 Trade and other receivables 313  1241 1554 Property plant and equipment   1182 1182 Goodwill   1326 1326 Investment in subsidiary   1321 1321 Other intangible assets   3710 3710 Total assets 60899  8870 69679
Bank and other borrowings  9000  9000 Trade and other payables  6285  6285 Current tax liabilities   2488 2488 Deferred tax liabilities   840 840 Total liabilities  15285 3328 18613 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 79 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 24 Financial Instruments continued The tables below summarise the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities based on contractual undiscounted payments.
Group
At 25 February 2017 Repayable on demand Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years
Trade and other payables  1604    1604 Tax liabilities  2604    3221 Accruals and deferred income  1684   617 1684 Bank loans   10000   10000 At 25 February 2017  5892 10000  617 16509
At 25 February 2017 Repayable on demand Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years
Trade and other payables  3179    3179 Tax liabilities  2604   70 2674 Accruals and deferred income  1779    1779 Bank loans   10000   10000 At 25 February 2017  7562 10000  70 17632
At 27 February 2016 Repayable on demand Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years
Trade and other payables  2508    2508 Tax liabilities  2488   1879 4367 Accruals and deferred income  2456    2456 Bank loans   9000   9000 At 27 February 2016  7452 9000  1879 18331
At 27 February 2016 Repayable on demand Less than 1 year More than 1 year but not more than 2 years More than 2 years but not more than 5 years More than 5 years
Trade and other payables  3829    3829 Tax liabilities  2488   840 3328 Accruals and deferred income  2456    2456 Bank loans   9000   9000 At 27 February 2016 8773 9000  840 18613 Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 80 25 ShareBased Payments The Deferred Share Plan DSP The Company introduced this share option plan on 26 April 2016.
1002310 share options were issued under the plan on admission to AIM and subsequent share options are granted to Executive Directors and senior managers on a rolling annual basis at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
The initial awards granted to the Companys senior management team on Admission will be subject to three performance conditions.
The first of these conditions will be measured over a period of one year from Admission assessing the Companys absolute total shareholder return TSR.
25 per cent of the initial Awards will vest for 7 .5 per cent annual TSR growth rising on a straightline basis to 100 per cent vesting for 12.6 per cent annual TSR growth subject to the other performance conditions referred to below.
Notwithstanding the satisfaction of the TSR performance condition referred to above any vesting of these initial awards will be subject to the satisfaction of two further performance conditions measured up to the end of the financial year ending February 2019 ie the full threeyear performance period.
In order for these awards to vest the Company will have to achieve the budgeted level of profit before tax for each of the financial years ending in February 2017  2018 and 2019.
The vesting of the initial awards is also conditional on the Remuneration Committee determining that over the period finishing at the end of the financial year ending in February 2019 the Companys internal and external audits and compliance training delivery have been satisfactory the Company has obtained and retained all relevant FCA authorisation for the carrying on of its business and the participant has not been subject to any disciplinary action and their personal performance has been satisfactory.
For any subsequent annual grants the Remuneration Committee will set any performance conditions by reference to the Companys longterm strategy which may include total shareholder return andor financial metrics andor key strategic goals to support longterm value creation.
It is the Remuneration Committees current intention that the vesting of any Awards granted to the Companys senior management team in respect of the financial years ending February 2018 and 2019 will at least in part be subject to the Companys TSR performance.
Any performance condition may be amended or substituted if one or more events occur which cause the Remuneration Committee to consider that an amended or substituted performance condition would be more appropriate and not materially less difficult to satisfy.
Awards will not be granted to a participant under the DSP over Ordinary Shares with a market value as determined by the Remuneration Committee in excess of 100 per cent of salary in respect of any financial year.
As of the balance sheet date the estimated market value of each share option granted is 1.15.
No share options lapsed were forfeited during the year.
This has resulted in a charge to the profit and loss account of 126159 during the year.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 81 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements For the 52 week period ended 25 February 2017 continued 25 Share Based Payments continued The market value of the shares at the grant date is calculated using a Monte Carlo simulation.
The assumptions used in the calculation are set out below
Grant date 8 May 2016 Expected volatility 0.26 Expected term 1 Risk free rate 0.34% Dividend yield 0%
Weighted average exercise price Outstanding at 27 February 2016 Awardedgranted 1002310
Exercised
Outstanding at 25 February 2017 1002310 For the share options outstanding at 25 February 2017  the weighted average remaining contractual life is 2 years.
Financial Statements Morses Club PLC 82 26 Related Party Transactions Perpignon Limited is the immediate parent company of Morses Club PLC.
FCAP Four Limited is the ultimate parent undertaking.
The Company undertook the following transactions with its parent and subsidiary during the period
Management fees
52 Weeks ended 25 February 2017 FCAP Four Limited Perpignon Limited 1387 120 Shopacheck Financial Services Limited Shelby Finance Ltd 1387 120 52 Weeks ended 27 February 2016 Perpignon Limited 48629 941 374 Shopacheck Financial Services Limited 68599 At the periodend the following balances were outstanding 25 February 27 February FCAP Four Limited Perpignon Limited Shopacheck Financial Services Limited 1321 1321 Shelby Finance Ltd 455 Amounts owed fromto Related Parties 1776 1321 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 83 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Morses Club PLC Information for Shareholders Financial Calendar 2017  2018 20 June 2017 Annual General Meeting 22 June 2017 Exdividend date 21 July 2017 Final dividend paid October 2017 Half year results announced January 2018 Interim dividend payable April 2018 201718 year end results announced Company Information Registered Office and Website Kingston House Centre 27 Business Park Woodhead Road
Batley
West Yorkshire WF17 9TD Website site Company Registration Number Independent Auditor Deloitte LLP Four Brindley Place
B1 2HZ Nominated Adviser Numis Securities Limited 10 Paternoster Square
EC4M 7LT
Numis Securities Limited 10 Paternoster Square
EC4M 7LT Panmure Gordon UK Limited One New Change
EC4M 9AF
Eversheds Sutherland International LLP Bridgewater Place Water Lane
LS11 5DR Financial Communications Camarco Limited 107 Cheapside
EC2V 6DN
Capita Registrars Limited The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
