TRANSFORMING
THE SKIES Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Performance highlights Acquisitions support longterm growth plans
17.2%
Jets performed strongly in
US
Record
JetCard performance with utilisation up 41%
Training division delivered 10% of
Clear longterm strategy in place Gross transaction value 2.4% 2017 215.8m 2016 210.8m Gross profit 16.3% 2017 31.7m 2016 27 .3m Underlying profit before tax 17.2% 2017 5.1m 2016 4.3m Statutory profit before tax 38.6% 2017 4.3m 2016 3.1m Underlying basic EPS 10.2% 2017 6.5p 2016 5.9p Basic EPS 45.9% 2017 5.4p 2016 3.7p Final dividend 6.0% 2017 3.6p 2016 3.4p Total dividend 7.2% 2017 5.2p 2016 4.9p
Strategic report
04 Chairmans statement 05 Explaining our business 06 Group at glance 08 Market overview 10 Business model and strategy 12 People 14 Technology 15 Expanding our services 18 Principal risks and uncertainties 2017 performance 24 Chief
28 Financial review 30 Key performance indicators 32 Divisional reviews
Jets
Private
Jets
Freight
Consulting and
Corporate governance 42 Board of directors and senior management 44 Chairmans introduction to governance 45 Corporate governance report 50 Nomination
51 Audit and
Committee report 54 Directors remuneration report 66 Directors report
Financial statements 72 Independent auditors report 80 Financial statements 86 Notes to the financial statements Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 1 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 freight.
We have incorporated aircraft remarketing and safety consultancy and training through our acquisitions of
Aviation and
Simmons and have recently added the dynamic skills of
Research with its innovative approach to fatigue management.
The
Group remains committed to expanding the range of services we offer to our customers as we aim to fulfil our longterm aims.
Alongside this we are reconfiguring and reinvigorating our brand as well as investing in our infrastructure to facilitate this change.
At the heart of this are people our customers and our staff.
We continue to attract and retain the best people those capable of and dedicated to providing our customers with the highest levels of knowledge expertise and customer service.
This creates value both for our shareholders and our stakeholders and gives purpose and distinctiveness to our brand.
Moving into and beyond we are creating the platforms and the infrastructure that are leading the value.
Air
Partner is on journey an exciting journey of transformation to become worldclass aviation services group.
Something to be reckoned with in the world of aviation.
Overview 2 Air Partner plc
Report and
Overview
Transforming the skies
2016.
But the skies are increasingly busy and our balance of services means we have much to offer. times.
The challenges we have all faced this year are sufficiently well known not to have to itemise them here.
Yet the so.
Air
Partner with our balance of aircraft charter and consulting and training services is in many ways configured to counter the ups and downs of world events.
Economic uncertainty may pose challenges to our standard broking business but we can balance that by meeting outoftheordinary commercial requirements helping support disaster relief and of course offering the safety management services without which aeroplanes could not fly.
Our
Air
Partner is in demand.
Wevehadagreatyear beingpartofaplcgives usgreatercredibility.
TONY WHITTY Managing Director Air Partner Remarketing formerly Cabot Aviation 2016hasbeenayearofdeliveringa profitablefirstfullyearwiththeGroup.
JUSTIN SCARBOROUGH Interim Managing Director Baines Simmons dtreistosavelives.
BOB SIMMONS Founder Baines Simmons ourbrandtohighlightourstrengths.
JULIA TIMMS Group Marketing Director ourlongtermsuccess.
RACHEL THRIPP Group Head of Human Resources infrastructureofAirPartnerthisyear.
LEE PYLE Group Head of Technology Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 3 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 3 Air Partner plc
Report and
Itsbeenagoodyearand
MARK BRIFFA Chief Executive Officer
Ahighlightof2016wasflying theHillaryClintoncampaignand buildingourpresenceintheUS.
RICHARD SMITH Head of Product Air Partner Broking politicalbackdrop.
NEIL MORRIS Chief Financial Officer 4 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chairmans statement
The
Group has clear longterm strategy to become worldclass global aviation services group.
Great progress has been made since we began this transformation in and the period under review has been no exception.
Indeed
Air
Partner. am pleased to report strong performance for the year ended
2017.
Gross profit rose by 16.3% to underlying profit before tax increased by 17.2% to and reported profit before tax by 38.6% to ahead.
As part of that process we undertook an extensive programme of engagement with our staff and customers to understand not only their needs but their expectations of us.
No stone was left unturned and we looked far into the future to assess what we wanted to be where we wanted to be and just as importantly where we did not want to be.
We formed longterm strategy that places the customer first and has the power to transform our business model reducing volatility and improving the overall quality of our earnings.
This year the results of this longterm strategy are beginning to emerge.
Maintaining a progressive dividend
7.2% and equivalent to times dividend cover.
Our
Cover this year is below that range due to prior year oneoff adjustment for tax.
Subject to approval at the
June we expect to pay the final dividend on
June.
Board changes
Board to reflect the direction of our longterm strategy.
Accordingly we welcomed
Wills
CBE
Shaun
Smith and
Jackson to the
April
May and respectively.
Having overseen these changes we announced on
Chairman at the next
June after years as nonexecutive director.
Peter
Saunders our current
Independent
Director will replace me as
AGM.
Peter has played an important role in our transformation and trust will continue to both support and challenge the ahead.
Thank you
Partner is unique company.
Our
Over
Chairman it has been my privilege to witness the development of
Partner from pure broking business to the vibrant diverse aviation services company it is today.
People are at the heart of our business and it remains for me to thank my colleagues on the
Group for their support and hard work not only in delivering great set of results for our shareholders this year but also in creating strong platform for growth. beyond.
Richard Everitt
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 5 Air Partner plc
Report and
Explaining our business 6 Air Partner plc
Report and
Explaining our business Group at a glance
Partner is global aviation charter specialist and an expert in safety consulting and training.
On the aircraft charter side clients include corporate customers such as sports teams and tour operators governments and high net worth individuals who require our skills and expertise to solve often complex aviation requirements.
For our
Training business clients include airlines defence organisations and aviation authorities globally.
Only
7 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 B ROK I NG 82% CO N S U LTI N G and TRAI N I N G 18 % COMMERCIAL JETS PRIVATE JETS
CLOCKWORK RESEARCH 57% BAINES SIMMONS 100% 4% 39%
Commercial Jets 57% operators.
Also includes
Partner
Remarketing and shortterm aircraft leasing services.
Private Jets 39% leisure.
Bespoke service and prepaid jets.
Freight 4%
Learjets to the giant couriers.
Consulting and Training Baines Simmons 100% organisations.
Clockwork Research acquired December 2016 sectors.
Percentages represent that companys or products proportion of the divisions overall gross proft.
Clockwork
Research was acquired just before the year end so its contribution was negligible.
8 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business Market overview years.
The market both aviation and the wider market has changed significantly during that time.
With history in aircraft broking centred on the group.
A steadily growing global aviation market
God but the longerterm trend is positive.
The
International
Air
Transport
Association
ATA predicts passenger traffic to increase to billion passengers in near doubling of the billion air travellers in
2035.
The message is clear the aviation market is growing and as it does so the demand for aviation services will also increase.
We are therefore adding new service lines to complement our core broking offering strengthening our customer proposition and extending our global reach.
Our unique position in the market
Air
Partners strategy is different.
We dont own aircraft rather our main assets are our people brands and reputation see our business model on pages and we aim to grow on this basis.
Meeting our clients needs is at the heart of everything we do.
By offering more services in the two broad categories of broking and consultingtraining not only do we increase the chance of retaining our customers we have the opportunity to crosssell services to strengthen our relationships further.
Environment
Our
Accordingly we have investigated the environmental performance of the aircraft types we offer and uniquely among our competitors we share this data with our customers right from the start so they can factor this into their choices.
Unlike other providers who may or often may not offer just standard carbon offset scheme based on their own limited fleet which could be illsuited to the mission in any case
Partner offers totally bespoke solution every time.
Then we offer to neutralise the calculated impact of these emissions.
The market for broking
Air
Partner broking encompasses commercial jets private jets freight emergency planning our bespoke disaster response service and aircraft remarketing.
The global air charter market is highly fragmented with low barriers to entry and little or no regulation.
Other
Other
Optimistictel 2035 Base case
Passenger traffic growth scenarios
Source
IATA.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 9 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
JetCard or complete service that our competitors cannot offer such as charter service with safety audit of the carrier reputation in market where competitors come and go our 55year heritage demonstrates stability safety quality and financial performance our people in our experience technology cannot replace people.
We invest in technology to improve the customer experience and drive efficiencies but the key to our success is genuine service by our aviation experts for customers who want bespoke personal service.
Material geopolitical events andor natural disasters can cause shortterm downturns in demand for aircraft charter for example or the
Emergency
Planning
Division is often called on at such times for example providing aid to disaster zone or arranging troop transfers or evacuations in times of war.
Moreover our vision to supply greater range of services across broader geographic area should help mitigate local challenges.
The market for consulting and training accidents.
This is increasing pressure on safety results and management.
Furthermore the aviation safety world has evolved over the past five years from one where it seeks to understand how safety management systems performance.
Unlike broking consulting and training services exist in highly regulated environment and one in which regulations are constantly changing.
Indeed
Baines
Simmons and
Research see page Civil aviation
PBR.
This is now standard practice for the
Civil
Aviation
Organization
CAO and the
Aviation
Safety
Agency
EASA.
By moving to
SMS or fatigue risk management.
This move is providing opportunities for both
Simmons and
Research to take their services beyond the
Europe to
Australia and
America.
Defence
In the defence market bodies such as the
Defence
Agency
EDA have committed to the principles of harmonisation of airworthiness requirements.
Through its longterm relationship with various military authorities around the world
Simmons is well positioned to benefit from the opportunities that will arise.
Forecast of numbers and value of aircraft in operation Aeroplanes in service 2015 to 2035 Demand by size 2016 totel
Value bn
1640 3690 3470 1250
2660 6060 5100 1350
14870 32280 28140 3000
2600 2510 2380 110 Total 22510
Boeing.
10 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business Business model and strategy service.
Growth by acquisition is core to our strategy.
What we offer Our customers Aircraft charter needs.
Profit is largely generated through commissions although some fee income is generated through the provision of professional services or in the case of our
Planning
Division subscriptions.
Charter customers requirements.
Projects range from oneoff charters to much longer or more complicated projects spanning many months or multiple rotations.
Aircraft remarketing Air Partner Remarketing formerly
Aviation provides comprehensive remarketing programmes across the globe for all types of commercial and corporate aircraft.
Projects involve selling or leasing aircraft selling aircraft with leases attached or arranging sale and leasebacks acquisition mandates for lessors and airlines wet leasing consultancy and aircraft technical services.
Profit is largely generated through commissions attached to mandates as well as through retainers.
Remarketing customers wide range of international customers drawn from the airline and financial services sectors including banks lessors and liquidators.
Consulting and training Baines Simmons is world leader in aviation safety consulting specialising in aviation regulation compliance and safety management and partnering.
Through our bespoke consultancy programmes and practical training services we help to bridge gaps of knowledge competence skills and understanding between regulated organisations and their employees and regulatory authorities and their inspectors.
Our
Isle
Man
Aircraft
Registry.
Clockwork Research acquired in industry.
Clockwork
Researchs approach is based on scientific understanding of fatigue on safetycritical operations.
Consulting and training customers
OEMs.
Strategic priorities
Optimise our core
Customer
First initiative as described to the right.
Enhance and extend our offer
Partners aim is to become global aviation services provider.
To mitigate the inherent risks in our core broking business we therefore have embarked on strategy of increasing the range of services the provides.
Creating value by putting our customers first
Customer
First programme.
Ultimately it will enable us to provide an unrivalled customer experience enhancing our brand and differentiating us.
Our
Customer
First is deeply embedded in everything we do while our technology strategy will provide the infrastructure to roll out this approach quickly to new services.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 11 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 What differentiates us Our people expect.
Sourcing retaining and motivating our people is therefore critical to maintaining the service levels our customers demand.
Our
Our brand competitive.
Differentiating our brands is therefore essential for our current and future success.
Maintaining and enhancing brand identity requires consistently excellent customer experience and in the long run we aim to build an unrivalled proposition by offering the full range of aviation services our customers want.
Our technology group.
To fulfil our
First ethos we must invest in infrastructure that enables us to understand our customers and crosssell our services.
And as we increase the number of services we provide that infrastructure must be scalable to manage costs.
Our capital resources
Air
Partner from our competitors.
It helps us support and retain key customers by providing credit terms while enabling us to offer additional aviation services through judicious acquisitions.
Our plc status
Partner is the only listed company in its sector and this coupled with the fact the business has existed for over years provides our customers with level of financial transparency and assurance that our competitors cannot offer.
Read more on page
Read more on page Developing and retaining our people business.
We invest in our people and give them an environment in which they feel included valued empowered and able to reach their full potential.
Having team of skilled and motivated brokers trainers and consultants with the experience to deliver the service required by
First is critical to our ongoing success.
We recognise their dedication by linking remuneration to performance and actively encouraging personal development by offering training to build capabilities and encourage the right behaviours.
Maintain and enhance our brand identity
Air
Partner is wellknown in the aviation industry.
Our
Group has extended beyond the original
Partner brand.
Baines
Simmons and
Research are both well respected businesses in their own sector and collectively our brand is stronger through the addition of these businesses.
12 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business business model and strategy continued People the fuel of our business people.
We have always been lean organisation able to adapt quickly to reflect changes in the industry and having an experienced motivated and engaged team is critical.
As we grow and offer our customers new aviation services this only becomes more important.
An open progressive culture
Partner is developing business.
Part of the challenge as we grow and take on people from new acquisitions is to integrate everyone so that they feel part of the
Partner
Group.
Key to this is our peoplecentred culture.
Our
We have flat structure enhanced by genuine opendoor policy.
Proof of this is the fact that our headquarters is entirely openplan with the exception of our
CFOs offices.
And even our most senior leaders make sure they connect with employees on daytoday basis.
We encourage twoway conversation supported by initiatives like our engagement survey our employee forum and the attended.
We offer flexible working and advocate healthy lifestyle through initiatives such as providing fresh fruit and healthy snacks for our team and subsidising gym memberships.
Recruitment and retention
Air
Partner for good length of time.
The average stay is five years and some of our staff have been with us or years plus.
We have initiatives to ensure we are successful at retaining our key people.
With our recent acquisitions we want to ensure that this continues.
We are keen to ensure that people remain engaged and challenged in their roles and aim to reach their full potential.
To underscore the importance of this we are working towards engagement as key performance indicator
Employee
Engagement survey which we carry out every two years.
The most recent survey was launched in report.
Integrating new businesses merger.
Integrating
Cabot
Aviation now
Partner
Remarketing.
Bringing on board an entirely new type of business as we did with
Simmons is more challenging but as shown by the profitability of the business this year we are well on the way to succeeding in winning hearts and minds.
Our
Clockwork
Research has like
Aviation been very straightforward and we look forward to working more closely with and learning from our new businesses as they integrate into the
Equal opportunities and human rights discrimination.
Full consideration is given to employees with disability and should an employee become disabled while working for us we would make every effort to enable them to continue to work for the
As at
Air
Partner had seven directors including one woman.
Of
Air
Partner has responsibility to conduct business in an ethical way and accordingly has in place internal policies to support recognised human rights principles.
These include policies on nondiscrimination health and safety environmental issues and bribery and corruption.
We maintain zero tolerance approach to bribery and corruption and programme of internal training is in place to ensure that all staff are aware of the policies.
IhavebeenwithAirPartner
10yearsandthebusiness hasgrowninmanyways butwehavemaintainedthe corevaluesthathavealways beencentraltoAirPartner.
RACHEL THRIPP Group HR Director Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 13 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Employees by gender
Women
54% men 46% women 56% men 44% women
FTEs for the year rather than the number of employees at the year end as disclosed here.
Employees by division
Consulting and Training Employee turnover
Group during the financial year and are replaced by new employees.
25% 54% 46% 82% 18% 14 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business business model and strategy continued Getting technology right business.
Ramping up our investment has seen
Partner investing significantly in technology as necessary counterpart to efficient longterm growth.
During the year we appointed new
Head of
Lee
Pyle to lead an expanded business.
Group
T systems and during the year we introduced an upgraded financial system which will make the gathering and reporting of data faster and more efficient.
We also began the development of new customer relationship management
2017.
This is essential to enable us to understand our customer base better across the divisions especially now that our
First programme is well under way.
It is also key platform for growth we need to be able to integrate our acquisitions easily into our systems and also be able to get picture of our customers across the whole
This will enable us to identify opportunities for crossselling which are an integral part of our strategy.
Looking ahead
2017.
First we aim to introduce customers.
Second we are significantly enhancing our digital communications platforms in partnership with the marketing team whose remit has been to refresh our brand and raise the profile of the
Technology is essential to these developments and both teams have been working closely together over the past year towards the shared goal of standout brand with an agile and responsive digital capability.
Technologyisakey platformforgrowth weneedtobeableto integrateouracquisitions easilyintooursystems.
LEE PYLE Group Head of Technology Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 15 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Expanding our services global.
In doing so we aim to take our existing customers with us.
We are extending our product range and our geographic presence through carefully targeted acquisitions which should in time offer mutual benefits to our core broking business.
The key to success in this area is integration and the acquisition of
Aviation now
Partner
Remarketing enabled us to test the water.
Baines
Simmons added safety consulting and training to our offer.
The addition of
Research at the end of with the safety benefits of fatigue risk management will help add depth to the consulting and training side of the business.
Each new acquisition not only broadens our product offering it broadens our geographic reach as well since each has trading partners in different territories.
In addition it gives us the ability to offer total aviation service to customers which becomes increasingly attractive across all markets.
Strong finances management.
Capital allocation is key and low risk is of paramount importance every pound we spend must generate the highest possible return.
Eachnewacquisitionhelps usofferatotalaviation servicetocustomers.
MARK BRIFFA Chief Executive Officer
As part of that we need robust integration plan and we have learned many lessons from the acquisitions of
Aviation and
Simmons particularly the importance of communication and culture which will help us integrate
Research and other potential new businesses.
We are pleased that under the first full year of our management both
Aviation and
Simmons have delivered profits to the
Clockwork
Research team.
Looking ahead
Group continues to assess investment opportunities both organic and acquisitions in line with our stated strategic objective to become worldclass global aviation services group.
Racing safely
Commercial
Jets division was presented with typical enquiry from wellknown automotive company comprising the customers required flight route number and profile of passengers.
At this point our
Charter team identified synergy of safety culture between
Partner and our client.
As result
Jets liaised with
Simmons and asked them to carry out an audit of the two operators that our client would be using.
Commercial
Jets and
Simmons winning combination 16 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business business model and strategy continued Air Partner Remarketing Cabot Aviation clients.
Expanding our services continued Triple 777 success
Cabot
Aviation now
Partner
Remarketing win the mandate from
Airways to remarket four
Air
Partners longstanding relationship with major independent carrier.
Baines Simmons world leader in aviation safety consulting specialising in aviation regulation compliance and safety management.
Clockwork Research leading fatigue risk management consultancy.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 17 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Air Partner Remarketing Cabot Aviation  a sure first step
May aircraft remarketing specialist
Aviation we were dealing with an ad hoc business with the same essential quality of earnings as our aircraft charter divisions.
It was therefore fairly sure step with which to test our integration capabilities while giving us valuable foothold in new territories.
Cabot had very profitable first full year as part of
Partner and is now being brought more closely into the fold as
Partner
Remarketing.
Air Partner Remarketing Cabot Aviation  key facts
One of the leading specialist aircraft remarketing brokers in the world
Acts as agent and broker to airlines and airline owners Diversifying our offer with Baines Simmons
August of safety consulting and training experts
Simmons was fundamental step forward in our strategy adding brand new area of expertise to the
Partner offer.
As such the integration has taken more time and work than
Aviation but despite the challenges
Simmons has also had profitable first full year with the
Our
Baines Simmons  key facts
Leading authority in aviation safety consultancy for civil and military markets
Clients include aviation organisations and aviation authorities permanent employees Expanding our specialist skills with Clockwork Research
Clockwork
Research we are investing further in safety management and consulting and expanding our offer alongside the core consulting and training services of
Simmons.
Cofounder
Dr
Alexandra
Holmes discusses joining
Partner.
Considerable mutual benefit says.
What we offer is almost unique.
We do sometimes come up against universities but they wouldnt for instance repeatedly go to the system.
Were very hands on and spend lot of time with clients building relationships.
We tend not to lose them.
We werent looking to sell necessarily but could see that there was much larger need for our service with the increasing awareness of performance safety and health.
Joining
Air
Partner will help us grow and meet that need.
There are huge opportunities and along with
Simmons and other complementary acquisitions we will help move the space.
Were looking forward to working with
Partners existing clients and also introducing them to ours we see considerable mutual benefit.
My team has really embraced becoming part of
Partner which has made the integration process really straightforward.
Clockwork Research  key facts
Recognised leader in fatigue risk management systems
Core team of scientists based in the
US
Europe
Middle
East and
Five people 18 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business Principal risks and uncertainties
Board has carried out robust assessment of the principal risks facing the liquidity.
Risk management process
Board defines the risk appetite and monitors the management of significant risks to ensure that the nature and extent of the significant risks taken by the objectives.
Our
The
Operating
Board supports the business.
Annual risk analysis
Groups overall risk profile continued to evolve.
The
Board and the
Board performed further analysis to prioritise these risks with focus on those considered to pose the greatest risk to achieving our objectives.
During the year there has been change to our legal and regulatory risks following the potential uncertainties arising from
US
Presidential election.
However both of these political events could present opportunities and we are continuing to evaluate the situation.
Our principal risks and uncertainties
Groups business stems from the general economic conditions in which our clients operate affecting their willingness and ability to charter or contract consulting services.
Ad hoc charters are likely to continue to be affected by serious economic instability in the major world markets.
The pervasive risk to
Partners chartering business is the fact that lead times for ad hoc bookings are measured in days or weeks rather than months.
Forward bookings can be impacted very suddenly by changes in financial markets political instability and natural events affecting the movement of people or cargo from one country to another.
Economic uncertainty affects corporate government and individual clients and affects the quality of aircraft supply as operators consolidate or leave the market.
Contractually this risk is mitigated in that we sell capacity on aircraft owned and operated by third party and contracts with our customers are normally placed as mirrored transactions.
The
Group does not have any contractual arrangements with any significant individual or company which are essential to continuation of the business.
General business risks faced by the characteristics.
Those listed here are the principal risks considered by the
Group not achieving its longterm strategic objectives.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 19 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Change in risk assessment
Potential impact Controlsprocesses to mitigate Market conditions cost structure another.
Customers
Maintaining brand value conditions.
Extension of the offering following the acquisition of
Aviation
Services and particularly
Simmons has enhanced the stability of earnings by adding more predictable revenue streams to the
Further diversification of the client base of the aircraft chartering business across governments and nongovernmental organisations commercial enterprises and individuals as well as across geographic regions allows for some smoothing when there are seasonal or sectorial changes in demand.
We continue to focus on overheads to ensure they are appropriate to the level of business and appropriate action is taken if necessary.
Retaining developing and expanding the Groups customer base entry.
Customers The affected.
Rollout of the
First programme which underpins the capabilities.
Attraction retention and motivation of staff staff.
Customers
Developing and retaining our people
Extending and enhancing our offer earnings.
Investment
Cranfield
University to improve performance.
Elements of remuneration are tied to individual and performance.
Regular review of remuneration and other incentives to ensure we remain on par with our competitors.
20 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Explaining our business
Change in risk assessment
Potential impact Controlsprocesses to mitigate Financial counter party risk operators.
Customers Loss of earnings.
When selecting which operator to use we assess reputation and financial strength in order to mitigate the risk of making payments to businesses that may fail.
In addition where possible we use thirdparty bank guarantees instead of cash deposits.
Nonfinancial counter party risk clients.
Operator
Customers
Maintaining brand value
Air
Partner.
We always choose highquality aircraft and carriers for every charter.
Air
Partner maintains nonowned aircraft liability insurance which can also be extended to clients.
All flights are watched in operation by the inhouse operations team.
In addition there is both an internal audit and external audit process the latter performed as part of the accreditation.
Competitor risk effectiveness.
Creating value
Loss of customers.
Rollout of the
First programme across the delivery.
We also undertake regular client surveys to ensure we remain responsive to competitor activity and client demands within acceptable price levels for the quality and standards of service provided.
Legal and regulatory requirements.
Customers
Maintaining brand value
Groups brand.
Management reviews policies and processes at
Board level.
The business has range of policies to minimise these risks and reviews and updates them on regular basis.
Principal risks and uncertainties continued Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 21 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Change in risk assessment
Potential impact Controlsprocesses to mitigate Business growth
Air
Partner offer following recent acquisitions.
Customers
Extending and enhancing our offer damage.
We have dedicated integration team to ensure that benefits arising from an acquisition are maximised while maintaining control over operations.
Reputational risk
Air
Partners reputation following incident or inappropriate action.
Customers
Maintaining brand value
Groups brand could result in loss of clients or impair its ability to expand the customer base.
Our
Discretion is key to our customer service and its importance is communicated to all members of the team.
Business interruption management.
Customers
Maintaining brand value interruption.
Business continuity and disaster recovery plans are in place to mitigate this risk.
22 Air Partner plc
Report and
2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 23 Air Partner plc
Report and
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance
Chief Executives review
On the quieter stage of aviation our skies get busier and business gets more challenging but
Partner has completed the year with set of results to make us proud and give our shareholders confidence in our strategy.
Mark Briffa
Executive
Officer
The
Group has made great progress during the year delivering an underlying profit before tax of 17.2% increase yearonyear.
As ever these results reflect the dedication and drive of all our staff who continue to put our customers first providing an unrivalled and differentiated service in our sector.
One Group two divisions
Group is structured into two complementary divisions
Consulting and sector.
Both divisions operate internationally servicing highquality customer base.
Both divisions will play important roles in delivering our longterm strategy to become worldclass global aviation services group with balanced business mix between the two.
Broking performance
Broking division has performed well this year achieving gross profit of and an underlying operating profit of which compare to and respectively in the prior year.
This masks better underlying performance with some significant new business wins replacing contract we expected not to be renewed as we entered the year.
These wins were result of some excellent teamwork creativity and innovation by our people delivering solutions to some of our customers most complex and technical needs.
Our
Customer
First approach is delivering and helping us measure better levels of service and partnership with our most valued customers.
As result we are seeing increased customer loyalty and with greater portfolio of products we are seeing the breadth of our activity with valued customers expand.
During the year we took steps to further enhance our
Jet and
JetCard in the years ahead to reflect the lifestyle needs of our customers in partnership with
Nicholsons
International.
Since they have been synonymous with the worlds leading yachts and today are global leaders in all luxury yachting activities specialising in their charter sale purchase marketing management and construction.
This partnership Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 25 Air Partner plc
Report and
Highlights of the year
Underlying profit before tax
EPS
Dividend per share
Commercial
Jets
Consulting and
Record
JetCard performance customersfirst. needs.
Other
JetCard and hope to be able to report to you in the future about some innovative work we are doing to make our customer experience the very best it can be.
Air
Partner remarketing formerly
Aviation also completed some significant projects in the year and the pipeline for the year ahead looks good.
The team under the strong leadership of
Whitty is responsible for all remarketing activity at
Partner globally and during the period we took the decision to consolidate all our shortterm leasing activities under better.
The results from both the rebranding and the combination have been outstanding and believe the longterm outlook for our remarketing operation is excellent as we work with more international customers and add scale.
Remarketing will be beneficiary of organic investment and focus and while we will not rush anything we hope to have significantly larger remarketing business in three to five years than we do today.
Consulting and Training performance
Consulting and
10% of our underlying profits. success.
Almost all of this comes from
Simmons our leading aviation safety consultants specialising in aviation regulation compliance and safety management which has performed well and is in strong position to grow and develop in the years ahead.
In
December seven weeks before the end of the financial year and months after the completion of the
Simmons acquisition we acquired
Research leading fatigue risk management consultancy.
Integration
Clockwork
Research was carried out on time and as planned.
Similar to
Partner
Remarketing
Clockwork
Research will be beneficiary of future organic investment and focus as we 26 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance assist them to scale the business.
As we work better together across the business.
A common platform for growth controls.
Our
Project
Connect began in and got us fit to compete globally.
It enabled our latest upgrades which began in
2017.
The scale of the programme cannot be understated as it puts in place solid foundation for future growth and is core enabler to successfully carrying out our longterm strategy.
We are introducing new platforms from which we can share data across the board.
This will give us greater consistency and flexibility.
We introduced new
February and will be moving all our companies onto common
2017.
Transforming the business mix
Group.
We have identified the services and capabilities we need to add or enhance and also identified the geographies where we need to develop presence or add scale.
In the years ahead we will address these strategic gaps by either building marketleading position organically or acquiring suitable businesses and platforms.
It sounds straightforward and as an idea it is.
The challenge lies in execution.
We recognise that every acquisition carries risk as it does reward and opportunity.
We will judge risk and reward in detail before committing to acquisitions and deploying our capital.
We are able to quickly assess businesss strategic fit on various criteria but alongside the analysis of its financial statements the due diligence of financial track record and performance and the assessment of future economic returns all speak to value we spend huge amount of time getting comfortable with the non financial components of business predominantly the people and culture.
The most important question we ask ourselves when we evaluate potential acquisition is
Air
Partner company.
The acquired business will from day one carry our brand or an association with our brand and indeed may adopt our brand in due course so we need to get comfortable with lot more than just the numbers.
The strategy product or service capital scale customer base operating ethos and methodologies are all important but they are brought to life by the people and the organisations culture.
If
The aviation industry has many passionate and dedicated people who are delivering great products and services.
Over
There are plenty of acquisition opportunities but we are selective looking for complementary businesses.
In nearly every instance we are dealing direct with the owners or managers and their decision to sell can be triggered by variety of business or life events.
In advance of that decision we develop mutual trust and our understanding of the business.
We are delighted to have acquired three great businesses over the past two years
Aviation and
Simmons in and
Research in 2016.
These businesses are all run by passionate and dedicated people and deliver an exceptional service to their customers.
As well as the financial contribution they bring new services and capabilities to the organisation.
Previous reports introduced the acquisitions of
Aviation and
Simmons and this year am pleased to introduce
Research.
Clockwork
Research brings new services and capability in the specialist field of fatigue risk management.
Chief Executives review continued toaddscale.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 27 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Research uses systems models to measure monitor and reduce fatigue in pilots and other key personnel ensuring they get the necessary sleep to carry out their tasks effectively and safely.
Founded by
Paul
Jackson and
Alexandra
Holmes the business is leader and innovator in its field.
Both
Paul and face.
Great people it.
Enhancing our brand is as much about our internal audience as it is about the external and accordingly we are working to articulate our vision and values and enhance our internal communications by engaging our staff across the organisation more frequently.
We can do lot better but we are starting from strong base with rich heritage and globally recognised brand.
We have clear longterm strategy and are becoming an exciting place to work with services and capabilities that add value and enable us to compete beyond price and that will offer steady career progression.
We aim to reward good performance and exceptional behaviour and as we grow key aim is to retain our existing culture that keeps people at its heart.
In
January we hired
Pyle as
Head of
Under his leadership we are making considerable investment in technology in order to create solid and sustainable basis for growth.
In
June we hired
Timms as
Marketing
Director.
During the latter part of the year she set in motion an overhaul of the
Partner brand which will become the umbrella brand for all our product offerings including any future acquisitions.
This is really important lever of transformation in that it will project clear unified identity to the world enhancing our ability to crosssell our services.
Finally in
David
McCown who was formerly our
Business
Development for the
States as
US business key focus for organic growth for and beyond.
Outlook
Were on journey of transformation and has been an encouraging year on number of fronts.
The path ahead is exciting but as we always state in the world of aviation and most especially in the charter industry we must be cautious when managing expectations.
The charter business has always been and will continue to be volatile industry.
Despite this over nearly six decades we have developed our business and adapted to grow and succeed.
We are confident we have successful and very clear long term strategy.
We manage our operations for longterm success aligning what we do with our customers and aiming to exceed their most complex and technical needs.
We aim to become balanced business with two market leading divisions
Consulting and shareholders.
This will add value to our customers and staff and build real value to the owners of our business.
Broking still accounts for 90% of our profits but in the future we expect our business mix to evolve significantly driven by organic growth and suitable acquisitions.
Our
Our
Group.
We will continue to build relationships with the owners and managers of the many suitable businesses we have identified as potential acquisitions but we will remain patient and keep to our strict evaluation criteria.
Weaimtobecomeabalancedbusiness withtwomarketleadingdivisionsdelivering exceptionalserviceandvaluetoour customersandincreasinglyvisibleearnings toourshareholders.
Mark Briffa
Executive
Officer
April
2017 28 2017 performance Air Partner plc
Report and
Financial review
Air
Partners financial transparency as result of being the only listed company in this sector and balance sheet strength are key in supporting two of the offering.
A strong balance sheet date.
In addition we have expanded our service offering to pursue the strategy of becoming global aviation services company through the acquisition of complementary businesses using cash or debt.
Subsequent to the balance sheet date the loan outstanding at
Group with 9m of facilities in addition to nonJetCard cash.
Financial overview
Air
Partner primarily uses gross profit as its key indicator of business performance given the potential for revenue as determined under agent.
The reduction in revenue of to is due to the nonrepeat of specific oil and gas contract which ended early in 2017.
Underlying operating profit underlying operating profit increased by 16.6% to with the majority of the increase being attributable to the improved performance of the
Training division.
Excluding the impact of
Partner
Remarketings results from the
Jets segment our legacy businesss performance increased by or 2.9% on likeforlike basis.
Other items other items comprise restructuring costs amortisation of intangible assets arising on acquisition acquisitionrelated costs and noncash acquisitionrelated costs being the
Air
Partner
Remarketing.
The overall reduction in other items of to is due to the lower amount incurred in respect of restructuring of following the major restructuring of the
Board that took place in the year ended
Clockwork
Research.
Amortisation of intangibles arising from acquisitions of and noncash acquisition related costs of were consistent with the prior year.
Operating profit operating profit increased by to due to combination of the increased trading performance of at an underlying operating profit level combined with reduction in other items of Finance charges the
Groups loan and interest receivable on cash balances.
Neil Morris
Financial
Officer Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 29 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 toofferfavourablecredittermsonlargeprojects.
Taxation
The
Groups underlying effective tax rate for the year was 33% 30% and has been affected by an adjustment in respect of prior years totalling
25%.
The change arose primarily due to an adjustment in respect of research and development claim made in the year ended
2015.
The statutory effective tax rate for the year was 35% 39%.
The lower rate being due to reduction in amounts disallowable for tax purposes included within other items.
Financial position JetCard cash the reduction of is as result of record utilisation in the year outstripping the pace of new cards and renewals.
Subsequent to the balance sheet date the
JetCard funds into segregated accounts as further assurance to our customers.
NonJetCard cash net of borrowings the net debt position has improved as result of the improved trading position increasing net cash inflow from operating activities of less outflows for the investment in
Research of dividends paid of and repayment of borrowings of but benefiting from foreign exchange gain of
Groups bank loan which stood at at the balance sheet date was refinanced with new revolving credit facility which has total availability of provided by
Partners main bankers.
The facility expires in
2020.
Other net current assets and liabilities with cash excluded the
JetCard product exceeding other current assets.
Foreign exchange
Group uses natural hedging to minimise its foreign exchange exposure for example matching
US dollars with the respective deferred income.
In addition the policy.
The fair value of these instruments at the balance sheet date was liability of an asset of and the loss recognised through the income statement as result in the change in fair value was charge of gain of 186000.
While
Brexit has caused degree of volatility in currency markets during the year given our geographical reach with profits arising in the
Europe in euros the date.
In its
Broking division in the
Groups internal policy on hedging when necessary.
Overall
Groups net foreign exchange gain through the income statement for the year was loss of gain of 2000.
Neil Morris
Financial
Officer
April
The Groups financial position can be summarised as follows
1086 1281
Net deferred tax liability
11541 11723
15886 16776
Net assets 14934 13854 30 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance Key performance indicators business.
This year we have introduced set of strategic indicators to help us measure progress against our strategy.
Financial KPIs Gross transaction value customers.
NonJetCard cash
JetCard cash.
Return on equity % assets.
29.5% Underlying earnings per share
Being
EPS derived from underlying operating profit which excludes other items.
Dividends per share
As adjusted for the share split which took effect on
2017.
Basic earnings per share
Being
EPS derived from operating profit including other items.
Total cash
JetCard cash and nonJetCard cash.
Total shareholder return % price.
50.4% 50.4 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 31 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 high percentage of the customers. prospects.
Strategic KPIs group.
This year we identified four nonfinancial.
The financial
Air
Partner broker business enhance the contribution made by the
Group underlying profit.
Our
KPIs measure our two most important assets our customers and our people customers net promoter score people employee turnover.
These
KPIs may be amended or added to as we continue to transform.
Financial
KPIs are for the last five financial periods being the financial years ended
January and the financial years ended
January and
2017.
All financial share.
Detailed segmental reporting is set out in note to the financial statements.
Gross profit business.
Underlying profit before tax % business.
ENHANCE
Acquisition contribution to underlying operating profit customers.
CUSTOMERS
Net Promoter Score %
Net
Promoter
Score is calculated by taking the percentage of customers who are detractors score the
Groups service greater than out of 75%
Employee turnover %
Group during the financial year and are replaced by new employees.
25%
Legacy business increase in gross profit
Customer
First programme to drive customer loyalty.
The net increase from year end is modest since the prior year benefited from oneoff contract.
5.1 32 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance divisional reviews decades.
Air
Partners
Commercial
Jets team offers logistical excellence value for money and dependability.
Performance
The period under review saw
Jets deliver strong performance in both
US.
Gross profit increased by 5.0% to and underlying operating profit improved to an increase of 30.3%
Air
Partner
Remarketing formerly
Aviation for full year while strong performances by tour operations sports and government clients in
UK.
In the
Hillary for campaign.
In the
Premiership football teams.
Emergency Planning
Emergency
Planning product whereby we map out evacuation contingencies for blue chip companies with personnel stationed in volatile regimes is subscriptionbased service and provides recurring income stream.
The division typically serves companies operating in unstable parts of the globe but also assists charities with civil emergency evacuation and disaster relief.
Emergency
Planning met expectations for the year and given the uncertainties in the geopolitical environment we believe this business is well placed for future growth.
A strong year for Air Partner Remarketing formerly Cabot Aviation
Partner
Remarketing had profitable year in its first full year of ownership and goes into with strong pipeline of mandates.
Key sales successes included the sale of three
B777s to operator.
During the year we also moved shortterm leasing
Air
Partner
Remarketing and as result it had its strongest year over the last fiveyear period.
The integration of
Partner
Remarketing into our offices at successful.
Our
Commercial
Jets team serves customers Commercial Jets
Air
Partner
Remarketing
Highlights of the year
Underlying profit
Europe and the
Air
Partner
Remarketing profitable in first full year of ownership Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 33 Air Partner plc
Report and
On the campaign trail
Clinton with
Moore of
Partner
Key fact REMARKETING sold Key facts COMMERCIAL JETS national football teams football clubs 34 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance divisional reviews continued Private Jets
Private
Jets team has the experience relationships and aviation expertise to tailor solutions to meet our customers exacting needs.
Performance
Overall
Private
Jets has fared well this year.
Mixed results from ad hoc business with corporate customers flying less often was offset by year.
Gross profit increased by 9.3% to and underlying operating profit rose by 4.4% to
UK though ad hoc flying tailed off somewhat in the second half of the year while conversely in the finish.
Private
Jets in
Germany.
JetCard utilisation has increased 41% on fantastic achievement.
Card numbers have increased by to although year.
Customer First gives us an edge
Customer
First strategy which delivers an unrivalled level of service particularly for proposition.
We have some exciting initiatives under way which we believe will further extend our services in this area and deliver exceptional services to our customers.
We continue to monitor technology platforms in the private jet space but we fundamentally believe and our customers seem to agree that until technological capabilities have further developed complex travel scheduling is better handled by people rather than machines.
Our
Customer
First programme remains pivotal to our operations and we believe it accounts for large proportion of our continuing success.
By putting our customers first we continue to provide an unrivalled service together with value for money proposition.
This formula is proving to be good for everyone who uses our services as well as all our stakeholders.
As part of our strategy to grow in the
New
York with the aim of growing our market share by highlighting our products flexibility and service offering.
Increased
US dollars will we believe help to offset the
UK.
Developing our offer
Europe where we already have solid foothold.
We have also started to offer additional services like controlled catering and have received enthusiastic feedback from our customers who in this class are extremely discerning and used to high standards.
Furthermore and as discussed we went into partnership with
Nicholsons the luxury yacht specialists in
2017.
Pete
Tong
British
DJ disembarking from one of our
Jets charters Highlights of the year
Underlying profit
New
York
Record
JetCard utilisation 15.9m
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 35 Air Partner plc
Report and
222 JetCards Key facts PRIVATE JETS 36 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance divisional reviews continued
Air
Partners
Freight team delivers bespoke air freight solutions to meet the most demanding schedules reliably and at the best possible rates.
Performance
Air
Partner is primarily passenger business but we see customers.
From small base we can add value good example being the business.
The years performance in that particular market was buoyant and complements our service offering from
Jets in the automotive sector.
However overall renewed.
The downturn in the oil and gas industry where
The division is always subject to the unpredictability of justintime logistics from moving aircraft or automotive spares to mobilising at moments notice to assist in disaster recovery.
Our
Freight team ensures secure time critical delivery of cargo all over the world Highlights of the year
Underlying profit
Remains strategic service offering to our customers Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 37 Air Partner plc
Report and
Key facts FREIGHT
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 performance divisional reviews continued
Simmons is worldleading aviation safety consultancy which specialises in aviation regulation compliance and safety management.
Clockwork
Research is leading fatigue risk management consultancy.
Performance
In its first full year of operation our
Training division delivered gross profit of and an underlying operating profit of equivalent to 10.3% of the total.
Baines
Simmons delivered good results in its first full year of ownership while in
Clockwork
Research strengthened our
Training proposition.
Over
SMARRT
MAP
Safety
Management and
Reduction
Tool
Measurement and services.
Integrating Baines Simmons
Customer
First into
Simmons has established strong foundations for the future.
By standardising many of our processes we can ensure the consistent high quality delivery of our products and services.
We constantly review these products and services to ensure they are aligned to our customers needs.
The integration of shared
HR and year.
Baines
Simmons continued to benefit from number of large and longterm customer programmes which cut across both consulting and training products and services while our
Safety
Academy experienced its best ever monthly performance in
Outsourced services
April we announced that we had been successful in securing further 10year contract to provide aviation support services to the
Man
Aircraft
Registry
IOMAR.
In
January
MAR was named
Global
Aviation
Registry in
Commerce
Review
Magazines awards.
MAR will celebrate its 10year anniversary in
Registry which is now the sixth largest privatecorporate aircraft registry in the world.
Welcoming Clockwork Research
Research with its smart innovations in fatigue management is natural fit with
Simmons in terms of safety control and risk management.
It strengthens our offering and the opportunities are good.
Headed up by small team of enterprising academics
Research is very well respected by major operators across the world.
The business uses systems models to ensure that pilots and other essential personnel are getting the necessary sleep to carry out their tasks effectively and safely.
The pipeline of future projects is encouraging and includes large project with fleet operator in system.
This is first for the region.
The
Baines
Simmons team is driven by our passion to make the skies safer for all Consulting and Training
Simmons and
Research
Highlights of the year
Underlying profit
Isle
Man
Aircraft
Registry contract for years in
Acquisition of
Research completed in
Customer
First programme rolled out across
Simmons 635000 miles flown by consultants Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 39 Air Partner plc
Report and
Key facts BAINES SIMMONS 467 surveys 4 continents Directors approval statement
Strategic report was reviewed and approved by the
April
2017.
Neil Morris
Financial
Officer 40 Air Partner plc
Report and
2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 41 Air Partner plc
Report and
Corporate governance 42 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board of directors Richard Everitt Independent nonexecutive Chairman ARC RC NC
BAA plc before being appointed
Executive of
Air
Traffic
Services in and chief executive of the
London
Authority from to 2014.
He joined the
Chairman in 2012.
He was appointed as commissioner of
Harbour and chairman of the
Harbour
Board in 2016.
Richard will stand down from the
AGM in
Mark Briffa
Chief Executive Officer
Mark has an extensive knowledge of air charter broking and of the aviation industry worldwide with nearly years experience working within the aviation sector.
Before joining
Partner he held commercial roles at
All
Leisure.
He started his career with
Partner in as
Jets broker and joined the
Chief
Operating
Officer
Chief
Executive
Officer
April
2010.
Neil Morris Chief Financial Officer
Deloitte
LLP where he spent years primarily working in the aviation and travel sector.
Prior to joining
Partner he was group finance director of
Leisure
Group plc an operator.
He was appointed
Financial
Officer
Air
Partner in
Chief
Financial
Officer
April and
Financial
Controller prior to that.
Peter Saunders Independent nonexecutive directorChairman designate ARC RC
Board in
Chairman of the
Committee in
Senior
Independent
Director in
2016.
Peter has wealth of experience in marketing and customer service.
He is lead director of
Chocolatier
NV nonexecutive director of
Wines and
Chief
Executive
Officer
Body
Shop
International
2008.
Past board experience includes
Tire
Corporation
Jack
Wills and
Cup.
As reported in the
Peter will formally take over as
AGM in
Richard Jackson Independent nonexecutive director ARC RC
Board on
2016.
He served at the
Aviation
Authority for years as group director of consumer protection where he was instrumental in the introduction of new regulations.
Richard began his career with the sector.
Richard also acts as consultant to number of aviation and travelrelated clients.
Shaun Smith Independent nonexecutive director ARC RC NC
Board on
2016.
He began his career in retail management and corporate treasury at
Spencer plc.
He joined
Rangemaster
Group plc formerly
International
2015.
He is qualified corporate treasurer and has an economics degree.
Shaun is also group finance director of plc.
He was appointed
Audit and
Committee in
2016.
Amanda Wills Independent nonexecutive director ARC RC NC
Board on
2016.
Amanda began her career with
CEO of
Holidays
Travel
Group from to 2014.
Amanda is currently non executive director of eDreams
S. global online travel agencysite digital startup business catering for the high net worth and luxury sector.
She was awarded
Queens
New
Year
Honours list for services to the charity.
ARC
Member of the
Risk
Committee
RC
Member of the
Committee
NC
Member of the
Committee 43 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Senior management Lee Pyle Group Head of Technology Justin Scarborough Interim Managing Director Baines Simmons Sally Chandler Group Company Secretary Tony Whitty Head of Aircraft Remarketing and ACMI Julia Timms Group Marketing Director Richard Smith Head of Product Air Partner Broking Rachel Thripp Group HR Director Mark Briffa
Chief Executive Officer
Neil Morris Chief Financial Officer opposite.
Ourplcstatusisaunique
RICHARD EVERITT
44 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chairmans introduction to governance UK Corporate Governance Code
Board supports the principles and provisions set out in the
Corporate
Governance
Code issued by the
Reporting
Council in
Code.
Our
Group in accordance with the
Company applied the main principles of the provisions.
We have structured our corporate governance report in line with the section.
Leadership see page
Nomination
Committee report on page
Audit and
Committee report on page
Directors remuneration report pages to Relations with shareholders see page Dear Shareholder
February will be stepping down after five years as
Chairman guiding the years.
Our focus this year
Board has been spent scrutinising proposals and due diligence necessary to ensure that proposed acquisitions meet the high standards our shareholders expect.
Clockwork
Research leaders in fatigue risk management to the
Another key area of focus has been
The
Board has approved investment in technology platforms that will significantly enhance our current operations while also setting up our systems to enable us to integrate our acquisitions seamlessly.
A new programme of Board visits
Group for the first time this year we decided to hold two
UK one in
Fort
Lauderdale
Florida.
Visiting our sites and meeting our people is enormously valuable what we learn about the boardroom.
Board changes
Shaun
Smith and
Wills to the directors.
We also said farewell to
Wood at our
Peter
Saunders replaced him as our
Independent
Director.
Later in the year on
Richard
Jackson to the
Richard served at the
Aviation
Authority for years as group director of consumer protection and was instrumental in the introduction of new
ATOL
Protection
Contribution and oversaw the restructuring of number of major tour operators.
Richard began his career with the
Defence in before joining the financial services sector.
Richard also acts as consultant to number of aviation and travelrelated clients.
Following my decision to stand down as
AGM in
Nomination
Committee conducted selection process as set out on page am pleased that
Saunders will take up the role as
AGM on
We have once again undertaken exercise.
Because of the changes in the
Air
Partner with renewed team. report.
Richard Everitt
April
2017 45 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Corporate governance report
UK Corporate Governance Code
Leadership
A.1 The role of the Board
Boards role is to provide entrepreneurial leadership to the managed.
The
Board sets the aims.
The
Board met formally eight times during the year.
There is clear schedule of matters reserved for the
Group.
A.2 Division of responsibilities
Chairman and the
Executive
Officer
The
Chairman
Richard
Everitt is responsible for the leadership and effectiveness of the
The
Chief
Executive
Officer
Mark
Briffa is responsible for leading the daytoday management of the
Board.
Roles and responsibilities of key
A.3 The role of the Chairman
Chairman sets the agendas for the
Company
Secretary and promotes open and constructive debate between executive directors and nonexecutive directors during meetings.
A.4 The role of nonexecutive directors
Chairman actively invites the nonexecutive directors views.
They scrutinise the performance of management against agreed goals and provide objective and constructive challenge to the executive directors.
They attend an annual strategy day with the
Board and help develop proposals on strategy.
If
Company or proposed action they would ensure that their concerns were recorded in the minutes.
The nonexecutive directors have discussions without the executive directors present.
Mark
Briffa and
Morris are not members of the
Risk
Committee or
Committee but attend meetings when appropriate by invitation.
Other
Board meetings
Board meetings and relevant meetings.
Number of meetings Board
Risk
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Executive directors
Briffa 8
Morris 8 Nonexecutive directors
Everitt Richard
Peter
Saunders Shaun
Amanda
Wills
Andrew
Wood
Amanda
Wills
Shaun
Smith and
Jackson were appointed as directors on
May and appointments.
Andrew
Wood resigned as director on
2016.
Role of the Board
Boards role to ensure the effective direction and control of the shareholders.
The application of standards of corporate governance appropriate to the role.
The
Board sets the strategic aims of the year.
The
Boards activities during the year have included the consideration of proposals in line with its acquisition strategy and the approval of the appointment of new members to the
The
Board meets formally at least five times year with additional meetings as necessary.
Board decision including formulation and development of strategy major acquisitions or disposals significant bank borrowings assessment.
The
Board receives reports at each meeting from the
Executive
Officer
Chief
Financial
Officer
Board committees from their respective chairmen.
46 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance report continued Governance structure Board and committees Operating Board Responsibilities
Briffa
Chair
Neil
Morris
Lee
Pyle
Justin
Scarborough
Richard
Smith
Julia
Timms
Rachel
Thripp
Tony
Whitty
The
Operating
Board has collective responsibility for running the
Chief
Executive
Officer
Implementing
Groups strategy approved by the
Recommending capital expenditure and investment budgets for
Monitoring financial operational and service performance
Board
Planning and delivering major programmes
Remuneration Committee
Saunders
Chair
Richard
Everitt
Richard
Jackson
Shaun
Smith
Amanda
Wills
Responsibilities
Determining and agreeing with the
Chief
Executive
Officer
Chief
Financial
Officer
Reviewing the ongoing appropriateness and relevance of the remuneration policy in comparison with industry benchmarks and levels of remuneration in the business as whole
Read more on page Audit and Risk Committee
Smith
Chair
Richard
Everitt
Richard
Jackson
Peter
Saunders
Amanda
Wills
Responsibilities
Reviewing financial reporting focusing on the appropriateness of accounting policies and judgements and inclusion of relevant disclosures
Reviewing the scope and effectiveness of internal audit processes
Read more on page Nomination Committee
Everitt
Chair
Peter
Saunders
Responsibilities
Considering the composition of the
Planning and carrying out appropriate succession as deemed necessary
Read more on page Chief Executive
Briffa
The Board Responsibilities
Everitt
Chairman
The
Board carries ultimate responsibility for the effective direction and control of the
Group.
This is achieved through setting the strategic objectives of the
Group and divisional budgets ensuring that the year.
Leadership continued 47 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements UK Corporate Governance Code
Effectiveness
B.1 The composition of the Board
Board the
Nomination
Committee consider the wide range of skills knowledge experience and independence required to maintain an effective
B.2 Board appointments
Board is responsible for the appointment of executive directors.
Succession planning and the appointment of new nonexecutive directors to the
Nomination
Committee.
The
Nomination
Committee report is on page and gives details of the recruitment process and appointment of
Jackson as independent nonexecutive director on
2016.
As the
Nomination
Committee conducted the
Board that
Saunders be appointed as the new
The
Board approved the recommendation and the appointment of
Saunders as
AGM on
B.3 Commitment them.
Companys registered office during normal business hours and at the
B.4 Development
Board members receive full and tailored induction.
Following this induction meetings are arranged with key executives and managers within the business to provide ongoing education and information about the business and each nonexecutive director attends one
Board meeting each year.
All directors attend an annual
Day with the
Board and other senior managers.
B.5 Information and support
Chairman in conjunction with the
Secretary ensures that all information.
The
Board ensures that all directors have access to independent professional advice at the directors.
All directors have access to the advice and services of the
Secretary.
B.6 Board evaluation
Board and its committees undertook an evaluation of their performance.
The nonexecutive directors are responsible for performance evaluation of the directors.
B.7 Reelection of the directors
AGM after their appointment and to annual reelection thereafter.
Composition of the Board
Board is shown on page Board changes
Annual
Report
Andrew
Wood resigned as nonexecutive director of the
AGM on
2016.
During the year the following appointments were made to the
Amanda
Wills on
Shaun
Smith on
Richard
Jackson on
2016.
Following
Andrews retirement from the
Peter
Saunders was appointed as
Independent
Director and
Smith was appointed
Audit and
Committee.
After years on the
Chairman
Richard
Everitt has decided to step down as
AGM.
Full details regarding the process to select his successor together with the appointment of the new nonexecutive directors are set out in the
Committee report on page Independence of nonexecutive directors
Board considers all the nonexecutive directors to be independent.
Given their relatively small shareholdings the
Richard
Everitt
Peter
Saunders or
Smith.
Board performance evaluation
Company continues each year to evaluate the performance of the committees.
Because of the changes in the exercise.
Therefore the
Board members.
The responses to the questionnaires were evaluated by the
Company
Secretary and report was prepared for the
The
Board confirms its belief that all directors bring significant value to the business are effective in roles.
Election and reelection of directors
Board on
Richard
Jackson will stand for election at this years
The
Board recommends the election of
Jackson as listed in the separate
Annual
General
Meeting.
In accordance with best practice all other directors will resign at the
Richard
Everitt who as previously explained is standing down from the
Effectiveness 48 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance report continued UK Corporate Governance Code
Accountability
C.1 Financial and business reporting
Board is responsible for preparing fair balanced and understandable financial information.
The strategic report is set out on pages to inclusive and this provides information about the performance of the
Groups business.
C.2 Risk management and internal control systems
Board sets out the nature and extent of the significant risks and maintains sound risk management and internal control systems.
Further information on risk management and internal control systems is set out in the
Risk
Committee report on pages to C.3 The role of the Audit and Risk Committee
Audit and
Committee which assists the
Audit and
Committee report on pages to
Audit and
Committee are available online at site
Audit and
Committee as whole has competence relevant to the sector in which the operates.
Risk management and internal control
Board was responsible for the
Audit and
Committee by the
Financial
Officer.
The
Board has established an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing significant risk.
This process is reviewed regularly by the
The key internal procedures in place for the year ended
Annual
Report are as follows detailed and comprehensive annual budget is produced and formally approved by the
Board maintains schedule of key matters reserved for its approval which include financing and changes to banking arrangements all significant capital expenditure and all acquisitions and disposals both the
Operating
Board receive monthly financial reports showing the performance of each division and country with relevant commentaries to highlight variance from budget or particular areas of concern business performance reports are circulated to the
Board on weekly basis for sales bookings and monthly to monitor overall performance clearly defined authority limits and controls are in place over contract signing limits purchasing commitments and the extension of credit to clients in particular brokers operate within individual preset limits of authority and only those staff who have successfully completed sixmonth probationary period can sign charter commitments on behalf of the
Adherence to these limits and controls are tested on an ongoing basis as part of the internal audit process each of the
Company has robust risk management process that follows sequence of risk identification assessment of probability and impact and assigns an owner to manage mitigation activities.
Audit and
Committee.
The risk register and the methodology applied is the subject of continuous review by senior management and updated to reflect new and developing areas which might impact business strategy.
The
Audit and
Committee actively reviews the risk register and assesses the actions being taken by senior management to monitor and mitigate the risks.
Those risks which are considered to be the principal risks of the
Group does not trade speculatively in derivatives.
Other
Group does not use complex treasury instruments in the normal course of business and any specific projects that may involve such instruments require approval.
The
Board confirms that it has complied with the controls.
The directors reviewed the effectiveness of the year.
In their review which covered all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls the directors considered the nature of the them.
However such system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance.
Whistleblowing whistleblowing policy is in place across the
Company.
Accountability 49 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements UK Corporate Governance Code
Relations with shareholders E.1 Shareholder contact
Board values opportunities to meet with shareholders and is kept informed of shareholder views.
E.2 Annual General Meeting
Board welcomes the opportunity to engage with shareholders at the
General
Meeting.
All directors attend the meeting.
The
Board recognises the importance of effective communication with shareholders analysts and the financial press and is keen to gain an understanding of the views of both institutional and private individual shareholders.
This is conducted primarily through meetings of the
Executive
Officer
Chief
Financial
Officer
Group and the
Senior
Independent
Director are available if requested.
Feedback of shareholder meetings is provided via the stockbroker.
The
Board exercises care to ensure that all information including that which is potentially price sensitive is released to all shareholders at the same time in accordance with applicable legal and regulatory requirements.
Annual General Meeting
Company welcomes the participation of shareholders at its
General
Meeting.
The
Chairmen of the
Committees will be available at the arise.
During the year under review the
June and each member of the questions.
All shareholders are entitled to vote on the resolutions put to the
Notice of
The results of the votes on the resolutions including the number of votes for and against each resolution and the number of shares for which the vote was directed to be withheld are given at the meeting.
They are made public by means of an announcement through
News
Service and published on the website.
The
AGM will be held at 11am on
June at
Place
Beehive
Ring
Road
Gatwick
RH6
0PA.
The
Company confirms that it will send the
AGM and related documentation to shareholders at least working days before the meeting either by post to those shareholders who prefer paper copy or by email to those shareholders who have agreed that the electronically.
Both the
AGM and the
Investors
Companys website.
Website information
AGM documentation regulatory news and other information about
Partner in the
Companys website site queries.
Relations with shareholders 50 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear Shareholder
Nomination
Committee the
Board.
Membership will vary but the terms of reference for the
Board and are available online at site
Committee is made up of three directors including one executive director.
When proposing appointments of nonexecutive directors the
Board as it currently stands.
Selection of candidates also takes into consideration the breadth of knowledge that the management.
Changes to nonexecutive roles
Annual
Report the
Committee made up of myself
Saunders and
Briffa recommended to the
Amanda
Wills be appointed as nonexecutive director.
Amanda was appointed to the
April
2016.
Following
Andrew
Woods decision to step down as non executive director after the
Committee also sought nonexecutive director with the appropriate expertise to replace
Chairman of the
Risk
Committee.
Following consultation with its advisers number of recommendations were put forward and after careful consideration of candidates against criteria and interviews by each member of the
Chief
Financial
Officer
Committee recommended to the
Shaun
Smith be appointed as nonexecutive director.
Shaun joined the
May and was appointed
Audit and
Committee on
2016.
Later in the year the
Committee made up of myself
Saunders and
Briffa made decision to seek further nonexecutive director with expertise in the aviation sector to assist the strategy.
The
Committee consulted with its advisers to obtain recommendations for suitable candidates.
After consideration of candidates against criteria and interviews with each member of the
Board the
Board that
Jackson be appointed as nonexecutive director.
Richard was appointed to the
September
2016.
Chairman succession
February will stand down from the
AGM in
2017.
The
Nomination
Committee appointed subcommittee to conduct process to select new
It comprised our independent nonexecutive directors
Smith and
Wills who appointed external search consultants
Partners to support them.
The subcommittee prepared detailed specification for the role of required.
They then conducted robust process involving discussions with existing directors and advisers followed by interviews with the potential candidates.
Ridgeway
Partners also carried out detailed research into the candidates and made recommendations to the subcommittee.
The decisionmaking process did not involve myself
Saunders who was candidate or the
Executive
Officer
Mark
Briffa as he will report to the new
Following this process the
Board that
Saunders be appointed as
Board approved the recommendation on
2017.
Peter has been nonexecutive director of the
September
Chairman of the
Committee since
Senior
Independent
Director since
2016.
He will take up the role of
AGM on
2017.
Diversity
The
Company is team made up of people with broad range of backgrounds.
Our
Board this policy will remain in place going forward and the targets.
Instructions
Richard Everitt
April
Nomination Committee report 51 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Dear Shareholder
Audit and
Committee the
Board in maintaining sound internal control and risk management procedures.
It is responsible for ensuring that appropriate corporate reporting risk management and internal control systems are applied throughout the
Board.
The
Committees principal duties are to monitor the integrity of the
Board the effectiveness of audit procedures and the work of the internal and external auditor and to monitor on behalf of the control.
The
Board as whole is responsible for internal control and risk management.
The
Committee is required to report its findings to the improvements.
The
Committee reviewed and revised its terms of reference during the year under review.
Its
Companys website site Robust review of risk
Committee acts on behalf of the basis.
The
Committee undertook this review process throughout the year and subsequent to the balance sheet date to include the date of approval of this
Report.
At each meeting the
CFO on any material matters together with report from the process.
The external auditor
LLP presents its findings to the process.
Issues
Committee are detailed below.
Membership
The
Committee is made up of the nonexecutive directors
Smith
Chairman
Richard
Everitt
Richard
Jackson
Peter
Saunders
Amanda
Wills
Shaun
Smith was appointed to the
May and appointed as
Committee on
Committee
Chairman
Andrew
Wood stepped down as nonexecutive director.
Richard
Jackson joined the
September
2016.
The
Board is satisfied that
Terms of
The
Chairman
Shaun
Smith qualified
Treasurer with an
Economics is considered to have recent and relevant financial experience.
The
Committee as whole is considered to have competence relevant to the aviation and travel sector.
Biographies of the nonexecutive directors are set out on page
Deloitte
LLP
Deloitte the
Executive
Officer
Chief
Financial
Officer
At each meeting the
CEO or the present.
Deloitte attended all meetings during the year.
Meetings
The attendance of directors at the meetings of the
The
Committee met four times during the year.
In addition to reviewing the interim and annual results announcements in advance of publication and planning for the annual statutory audit the developments.
Significant issues related to the financial statements
Committee and discussed with the external auditor during the year and in relation to the
Rollout of new contract approval policy
January the management.
Given this new policy was adopted during the financial year management have also applied retrospective review process to ensure such contracts are captured.
Revenue recognition
Groups revenue recognition methodology with the conclusion being that it was more appropriate to recognise the majority of the basis.
The new contract approval policy as described above was introduced as way of ensuring any contracts that are principal in nature are captured appropriately by management.
Audit and Risk Committee report 52 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The completeness of provisions against operator prepayments
Air
Partners policy to negotiate contract terms with aircraft operators which minimise deposit payments and align the final flight payment with the flight date as closely as possible.
In addition
Partners internal quality control function assesses aircraft operators prior to selection to ensure that only operators of the highest quality are used.
Further to ensuring the completeness of the provisions against pre payments the process.
Completeness of operator accruals invoiced.
These estimates may differ from the actual outcome.
Judgement is exercised when assessing the level of provisions necessary and the judgement.
The
Committee determined that the level of accruals was reasonable following detailed review of the controls and the level of accruals in relation to trading activity in the period before year end.
Finalisation of purchase price allocation relating to the acquisition of Baines Simmons Limited
Group acquired
Simmons
Limited.
There is significant judgement required in the valuation of the intangibles and accordingly the initial recognition was made on provisional basis.
The purchase price allocation was revised during the year which resulted in change to the values of intangibles and goodwill recognised. allocation.
The valuation of goodwill and intangible assets created through acquisitions
CGU of
Simmons
Limited.
Having performed full impairment review exercise it was the view of management that no impairment of the goodwill or other intangibles related to this
There were no issues arising from any other impairment review performed in respect of other goodwill or intangible assets.
External audit
Groups external auditor in 2011.
The
Groups current audit engagement partner was appointed during the period ended
January
2018.
The timing of competitive tender will continue to be assessed on an annual basis considering the results of the annual effectiveness review.
Prior to the audit being conducted the
Deloitte and discussed changes in accounting policies and new developments within the business which might affect financial reporting going forward.
Deloitte in respect of the audit and matters arising from the report was discussed prior to the statements.
The
Committee is aware of the need to safeguard the auditors objectivity and independence and the issue is discussed annually by the
Deloitte.
In addition to this policies on the award of nonaudit work to the external auditor exist.
During the year ended
Deloitte in respect of nonaudit services.
Of
In assessing the effectiveness of the external audit process by the independence.
This year the
Deloitte would employ effective audit procedures to examine them.
The
Committee monitors the auditors performance behaviour and effectiveness during the exercise of their duties which informs the basis.
External auditor effectiveness
Committee reviews the effectiveness of the external auditor with the period.
The
Committee has begun the process of formally assessing
Committee the
Deloitte during the year under review to provide their feedback.
Deloitte has indicated its willingness to continue in office and the
Deloittes appointment to the
Deloitte will be proposed at the
Internal audit
January the responsibilities of the internal audit role were extended to include audits relating to the
SO certification.
The findings of the internal audit work programme are presented to the review.
The internal audit function is not fully independent of management as it is currently staffed by senior members of the function.
Although not independent the senior members of the work.
No significant deficiencies in the system of internal controls were identified following the internal audit review.
Audit and Risk Committee report continued 53 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Internal audit effectiveness
Code and the
Committee to monitor and review the effectiveness of the processes.
The
Committee is satisfied that the internal audit function fulfilled its objectives for the year.
Whistleblowing
The
Committee reviewed the
Concern at
Policy which is in place to enable members of staff to raise concerns about possible improprieties in matters of financial reporting or other matters which they believe would damage the performance or reputation of the
Fair balanced and understandable
Board sought advice from the
Annual
Report when taken as whole is fair balanced and understandable and contains the information necessary for shareholders to assess the strategy.
The steps taken by the
Board included setting up committee of senior individuals within the
Annual
Report with each of these individuals having responsibility for the production of certain sections of the document.
The
Board requested that the
Annual
Report and
Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The
Committee has advised the accordingly.
Discharge of responsibilities
Committee has continued its detailed scrutiny of the appropriateness of the
Groups financial reporting along with both the internal and external audit processes.
The
Committee has devoted significant time to reviewing these areas which are integral to the management.
The
Committee has where necessary taken initiative in requesting information in order to provide the appropriate constructive challenge for its role.
During the course of the year the information that the
Committee to discharge its duties effectively.
Approval
On behalf of the
Risk
Committee.
Shaun Smith
Audit and
Committee
April
Compliance statements Viability statement
Code the
Company over period longer than the months required by the going concern provision.
The
Board conducted this review for period of three years which was selected for the following reasons the
Board believes threeyear period is the most appropriate.
The threeyear strategic plan considers the technology.
These metrics are subject to sensitivity analysis which involves consideration of downside scenarios.
Where possible this analysis is carried out to evaluate the potential impact of the risks.
The threeyear plan is underpinned by regular
Board in its normal course of business.
Based on the results of this analysis the
Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period of the assessment.
Going concern
Groups current financial position the factors affecting its cost base the state of the air charter and aviation consultancy market as whole and forecasts for period of not less than months from the date of approval of these financial statements the directors are satisfied that the
Company have adequate resources to continue in business for the foreseeable future and that the concern.
Therefore the directors have continued to adopt the going concern basis in the preparation of the financial statements.
Goingforwardwewillsupport onbehalfofshareholders theongoingdevelopment andeffectivegovernance ofaremuneration frameworkappropriate forourGroup PETER SAUNDERS Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 54 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear Shareholder
Remuneration
Committee the
Directors remuneration report for the year ended
2017.
During the year was pleased to welcome new
Amanda
Wills
Shaun
Smith and
Jackson to the
Going forward we will support on behalf of shareholders the ongoing development and effective governance of remuneration framework appropriate for our
Committees philosophy for remuneration how the
Committee during the year the key areas of focus for the beyond.
Our remuneration philosophy
Groups total remuneration packages are designed to be competitive to attract retain and motivate highquality individuals throughout the business.
Our
Groups strategy and driving business outcomes through their teams thereby enhancing longterm shareholder value.
The principles of our remuneration policy are to ensure overall remuneration is market competitive to attract and retain the leadership and talent required to drive the business for the benefit of all stakeholders adopt simple transparent and costeffective approach to remuneration which is clear and understandable for business leaders shareholders and the wider team align compensation to performance and incorporate balance of fixed and variable remuneration design incentive plans which reinforce both short and longterm behaviours promote longterm development and support the strategic plans of the business ensure remuneration packages motivate and incentivise executive directors management and the broader team to deliver on stretching performance targets.
The
Company employs number of people in variety of roles from brokers and administration support staff to consultants senior management and directors across range of geographies.
The reward structure for our people is built around set of common reward principles on framework altered to suit the needs of the each business area.
Reward packages differ taking into account number of factors including seniority role impact on the business local practice custom and legislation.
The remuneration policy for the executive directors reflects the overall remuneration philosophy and principles of the wider
When determining remuneration policy and arrangements for executive directors the
Committee considers the wider pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the appropriate.
When considering salary increases for the executive directors the
Group.
Typically salary increases will be aligned with those received elsewhere in the
Remuneration
Committee considers that specific circumstances require different level of increase for executive directors.
Key remuneration activities during the year
AGM the revised policy and
Term
Incentive
Plan
LTIP were implemented.
Details of how the policy was applied during the year are set out on pages to
Company intended in due course to introduce plan.
The
Committee undertook thorough review of possible options for an allemployee share plan the objective being to implement
UK and international employees.
Proposals and costs were sought from three separate marketleading share plan providers.
The review highlighted that although countries.
After discussion the
Groupwide scheme that offered an equivalent benefit for all
Annual statement by the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Directors remuneration report 55 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements decided not to proceed with the implementation of time.
It was agreed that the share plan environment should be kept under review and that if the position changed the future.
The introduction of such plan would require shareholder approval.
Other
Committee during the year were annual benchmarking of executive remuneration to ensure it remains appropriate to promote the longterm success of the
Key
Results
Areas for the
CFO for 201718.
Focus for 201718 and beyond
Committee will continue to review executive and
Company.
Compliance statement
Companies
Act
Schedule of the
Mediumsized
Companies and
Accounts and
Amendment
Regulations and the
Rules and applies the main principles relating to remuneration which are set out in the
Corporate
Governance
Code.
Recommendation
Positive votes of 99.84% in favour of the
Directors remuneration policy report were received from shareholders at the strategy.
Committee members at our
June to answer any questions or receive your feedback with regard to our policy and how we have implemented it.
On behalf of the
AGM.
Peter Saunders
Remuneration
Committee
April
UK Corporate Governance Code
Remuneration
D.1 Setting levels of remuneration
Remuneration
Committee sets levels of remuneration to promote the longterm success of the performance.
D.2 Procedure
Remuneration
Committee and its activities and approach to setting the remuneration policy for the executive directors and recommendations and monitoring of the level and structure of remuneration for senior management can be found in the
Chairman of the
Committee set out on pages to
Board determines the remuneration of the nonexecutive directors within the limits set in the
Articles of
The information contained in the following parts of this report has been audited the table containing the single total figure of remuneration for directors and accompanying notes pension entitlements and incentive awards made during the year on page and directors beneficial interests in shares on page
Auditors report on pages to as specified by the
Listing
Authority and the
Mediumsized
Companies and
Accounts and
Amendment
Regulations the
As required by the
Companys policy on director remuneration the annual report on remuneration which sets out payments made to the
AGM.
56 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy report Directors remuneration report continued Remuneration policy table  executive directors
Purpose and link to remuneration policy
Maximum potential value
Provision for claw back or withholding of payment Base salary Supports the recruitment and retention of executive directors of the calibre required to fulfil the role without paying more than is necessary.
Rewards executives for the performance of their role.
Reflects the individuals skills experience and role within the
Paid in cash.
Normally reviewed annually to take effect on year.
In determining base salaries the
Group personal performance.
The
Committees policy is to set base salary at an appropriate level taking into account the factors outlined in this table there is no maximum value.
The
Committee considers individual salaries at the appropriate year.
NA None Pension Provides funds to allow executives to save for retirement.
Provides market competitive retirement benefit.
Incentivises
In determining pension arrangements the practice.
The scheme is defined contribution. directors.
Executive directors may elect with the
Companys pension contribution as cash alternative.
Bonuses are non pensionable.
Both the
CFO receive company contribution of 12.0% of basic salary.
NA None Benefits in kind directors.
Executive directors can receive life assurance health insurance car allowance income protection critical illness cover and sports club or gym membership.
There is no maximum value.
NA None
AGM are set out below to enable the reported remuneration to be assessed in the context of the relevant aspects of the policy.
The current intention is that this policy will operate until the
The original
January is published in its entirety in the
Annual
Report for the year which is available at site 57 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Purpose and link to remuneration policy
Maximum potential value
Provision for claw back or withholding of payment
Provides assistance to executive directors who are required to work away from their home location to enable the role.
Assistance will include but is not limited to facilitating or meeting the costs of obtaining visas or work permits for executive directors and their immediate family removal and other relocation costs house purchase or rental costs limited amount of travel costs tax equalisation arrangements.
There are number of variables affecting the amount that may be payable but the
Committee would pay no more than it judged reasonably necessary.
The maximum amount payable shall not exceed per individual in any financial year.
NA None Annual bonus Rewards and incentivises the achievement of annual financial objectives which are aligned with key strategic goals and support the enhancement of shareholder value.
Paid in cash following announcement of financial year results.
Bonuses are non pensionable.
May be paid in shares at the discretion.
Maximum opportunity to achieve
150% of base salary
100% of base salary performance.
Both
CEO and
30% based on performance towards
Results
Areas
KRA defined at the beginning of each financial year
70% based on financial metrics.
Bonus is usually not paid to good leaver should they leave before the payment date of said bonus.
From arrangements in place under which amounts paid out in bonus can be clawed back from executive directors in defined circumstances.
Long Term Incentive Plan
Incentivises
Companys longterm strategy and create sustainable shareholder value.
Enhances shareholder value by motivating growth in earnings and maintenance of an efficient and sustainable level of return of capital.
Aligns with shareholder interests through the delivery of shares.
Awards vest after three years based on targets.
Awards are in the form of nilcost options and must be exercised within four years of vesting.
25% of awards vest at threshold levels of performance.
For performance above threshold awards vest on straightline basis up to maximum of 100%.
Maximum plan award of 150% of base salary to be used in exceptional circumstances.
Usual award levels will be
100%150% of base salary
75%100% of base salary.
The
Committee will review the appropriateness of performance measures on an annual basis and set challenging targets consistent with the business strategy.
The
Committee has the ability to select appropriate performance condition criteria mix and targets each year.
In the past these have been
TSR based targets and the continue.
Further detail of the specific measures that the
Committee intends to apply to awards made in the year ending report.
As per the rules of the scheme awards will lapse if the executive leaves before the end of the performance period.
The
Remuneration
Committee has discretion in certain circumstances for example death serious illness redundancy to permit an award to vest before the end of the performance period.
Contains provisions under which amounts paid out can be clawed back from executive directors in defined circumstances.
Contains malus provision.
Shareholding guideline
Companys longterm strategy and create sustainable shareholder value.
Aligns with shareholder interests.
Target value to be achieved over five years
100% of salary
50% of salary.
Until the guideline has been achieved executives must retain at least half vested tax.
NA NA NA 58 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors remuneration report continued Remuneration policy table  nonexecutive directors
Company intends to have at least two independent nonexecutive directors on the
Chairman.
The
Board considers each of the nonexecutive directors to be independent.
The nonexecutive directors remuneration including that of the duties.
Nonexecutive directors do not receive benefits bonuses longterm incentive awards pension or compensation on termination of their appointments.
The following table sets out summary of the
Remuneration policy report continued
Fees Fees for nonexecutive directors are set at an appropriate level to recruit and retain directors of sufficient calibre without paying more than is necessary to do so.
Fees are set taking into account the following factors the time commitment required to fulfil the role typical practice at other companies of similar size and salary levels of employees throughout the
The nonexecutive director fees policy is to pay basic fee for membership of the
Board and chairmanship of committee to take into account the additional responsibilities and time commitment of these roles.
Fees are reviewed at appropriate levels at appropriate intervals normally once every year by the director.
The
Companys current maximum fees are as follows basic fee additional fee for
Chairman additional fee for
Chairman
5000.
Illustration of application of remuneration policy
Chief
Executive
Officer Chief
Officer
Maximum performance pay.
Fixed remuneration
150% of base salary.
Fixed remuneration
100% of base salary.
At expectation performance expected.
Fixed remuneration
78.5% of base salary.
Fixed remuneration
54.75% of base salary.
Below threshold performance accrues.
Fixed remuneration payout.
Fixed remuneration payout.
59 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements individual.
The
Companys bonus schemes operate so that amounts in respect of the current financial period are only paid in the following financial year after the completion of the audit and accounts.
The chart reflects the bonus amount earned in the period but not necessarily paid at year end.
The chart below sets out an illustration of the potential value of the current components of the executive directors remuneration for the year ended component.
Chief Executive Officer
Annual bonus Fixed pay Chief Financial Officer Annual bonus Fixed pay In line with expectations In line with expectations
Minimum performance Maximum Maximum 100% 100% 62% 71% 40% 63% 38% 29% 60% 37% cap.
Please refer to the table in table.
60 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
January
2017.
Remuneration Committee structure
Committee is constituted as formal subcommittee of the reference.
Its
Group as whole and making discretionary performancerelated awards to the executive directors.
The full
Chairman and nonexecutive directors on the principle that no individual should be able to determine their own remuneration.
Remuneration Committee membership
Committee during the year until the date of this report were
Saunders
Chairman
Richard
Everitt
Richard
Jackson appointed
Shaun
Smith appointed
Amanda
Wills appointed
Andrew
Wood resigned
Directors remuneration report continued Annual report on remuneration
Chief
Executive
Officer
Chief
Financial
Officer
Group
Head of
Resources are invited from time to time to attend meetings of the
No individuals are involved in decisions relating to their own remuneration.
The
Committee met formally four times during the year.
The terms of reference for the
Companys website.
Advisers to the Committee
Committee can and did obtain information and advice during the period under review from the
Head of
Resources
Rachel
Thripp the
Secretary
Sally
Chandler and the executive directors
Morris and
Briffa and may seek advice from any other employees as required.
It may also obtain at the expense of the limit.
In the
Annual statement of the
Remuneration
Committee on pages and h2glenfern
Committee on executive remuneration as required.
Directors remuneration for the year ended 31 January 2017 audited
January together with their remuneration for the year ended
Salary Taxable benefits Bonus
Audited
Executive directors
Briffa 250 230 20 1tel Neil
Nonexecutive directors
Everitt 60 60         60 60
Wood
Peter
Saunders
Amanda
Wills
Shaun
Smith
Richard
Jackson
Grahame
Chilton
Total 575 515 33 3tel 52 107 1085 978
January
Neil
Morris surrendered out of his bonus to be paid as pension contribution.
Grahame
Chilton and
Wood resigned from the
March and respectively.
Peter
Saunders was appointed as
Remuneration
Committee on
2015.
Expenses reimbursed to
Board meetings amounted to in the year to
2017.
Amanda
Wills was appointed to the
April
2016.
Shaun
Smith was appointed to the
May and as
Audit and
Committee on
2016.
Richard
Jackson was appointed to the
September
2016.
61 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements operates in accordance with the
Conduct of the
Consultants
Group in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the
Kingdom and has confirmed that it has adhered to the
Consultant
Groups
Code of
Group.
The
Committee has therefore satisfied itself that all advice provided by h2glenfern was objective and independent. review.
Group other than remuneration advice.
Taxable benefits executive directors receive benefits package including car allowance life assurance subsidised gym membership and home telephone and internet facility.
The car allowance payable to the
CFO included in the above amount was and respectively and 10000.
Bonus the maximum bonus for the period for the
CFO was capped at 150% of the financial element of the bonus which equates to maximum of 150% of salary and 100% of salary respectively.
LTIP awards under the revised
Partner
Share
Incentive
Plan following approval at the conditions.
Pensionrelated benefit both executive directors are members of the
Partner
Pension
Scheme defined contribution scheme and receive pension contribution of 12% of base salary.
Executive directors may elect with the
Companys pension contribution as cash alternative.
Annual bonus audited
CEO and
70% on achievement of the
30% attributable to personal objectives which only become payable should the
65% or higher of its underlying profit before tax target.
For reference the underlying profit before tax target for the financial year ended
January was the thresholds for were and respectively.
In respect of the personal objective element the executive directors receive four to five objectives each year against which they will receive score of unacceptable performance to excellent performance.
Although every effort is made to ensure that personal objectives are objective.
As the
65% underpin level of the payment of the personal objective element bonuses were payable to the executive directors for the period ending
2017.
Mark Briffa
Total bonus earned
Financial target 70% 70% 122500 Total bonus achieved 100% 188125 Neil Morris
Total bonus earned
Financial target 70% 70% 52994 Total bonus achieved 100% 73272 disclosed.
Payment table of employee wages and other company metrics 20162017 20152016 % variance
Profit before tax 4348 3137 38.92 Total dividends paid pence 24.93 22.73 9.68
Remuneration
Committee considers profit before tax to be key measure of the above.
62 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Performance graph and CEO remuneration table
Companys comparative performance the graph below shows the change in the total shareholder return of the
FTSE
All
Share
Index.
Directors remuneration report continued Annual report on remuneration continued 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 31 Jan 5tel250 Air Partner FTSE All Share Air Partner and FTSE All Share Index total return rebased
Company is not currently constituent member of the
All
Share
Index
Index
The table below sets out the details for the director undertaking the role of
Executive
Officer
Year
CEO single figure of total remuneration
Longterm incentive vesting rates against maximum opportunity % 2016 570 73.9 2015 271 2014  18 months 656 92.8 66.7 2012 249 16.8 tel.0 2010 215 15.0
Chief
Executive
Officer
Groups
UK employees as whole between the year ended
January
2016.
All
UK employees employed by the
January and structures.
Average pay based on all of the
UK employees 5.86 2.24 20.99 63 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP audited Directors beneficial interests in shares audited
1p each in the
31 Jan 17 31 Jan
262230 33061 Everitt 25000 5000
Smith 11635
June
2016 50000 10000
January and report.
No director has nonbeneficial interest in the shares of the
Share options
Companys share option scheme.
Details of the options held by executive directors at the beginning and end of the year are as follows
Name
31 January 2016 Granted Exercised Expired Lapsed
Exercise price
Briffa 200000    200000  158.5p
2009 21
50000     50000 176.8p
2011 24
200000     200000 109.0p
2011 27
25000     25000 78.5p
2013 26 Oct 475000    200000 275000 as the performance criteria for these share options were not met the options have lapsed. exercised.
Share options audited Number of options
Date of grant 31 January 2016 Granted Exercised Expired Lapsed
Exercise price
Briffa 22
2013 279200  182875  96325  0.0p 22
2016 22
3 Jun 2015 435485     435485 0.0p 04
2018 04
June
2016  552080    552080 0.0p 29
2019 29
Total 714685 552080 182875  96325 987565 Morris 3 Jun 2015 193550     193550 0.0p 04
2018 04
June
2016  113730    113730 0.0p 29
2019 29 Jun Total 193550 113730    307280
LTIP was determined by using the closing price of an
Partner plc share on the day preceding the date of grant as ascertained by the
List which was on
June and on
2016.
The face value of awards made to
Briffa and
Morris on
151000.
This is calculated based on closing share price of on
2015.
Prices quoted are preshare split.
The awards granted are subject to the achievement of performance and employment conditions as specified by the
Committee.
64 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors remuneration report continued
50% earnings per share
50% total shareholder return
EPS
100% vest if performance greater than
20% per annum 25% vest if performance equal to
15% per annum.
TSR
100% vest if performance greater than 75th percentile 25% if performance equal to 50th percentile.
Between these target levels share options will vest on straightline basis and shares will vest subject to achievement of these performance conditions on
2018.
The adjusted underlying
January has been calculated as excluding the impact of oneoff tax credits.
The face value of awards made to
Briffa and
Morris on
84157.
This is calculated based on closing share price of on
2016.
The number of grant.
The awards granted are subject to the achievement of performance and employment conditions as specified by the
Committee.
EPS
Twothirds of the award 66.67% of the award will be subject to an earnings per share
Consumer
Prices
Index
CPI as follows
Below
CPI
5% pa Nil
5% pa 25%
10% pa or above 100%
CPI
5% pa and
10% pa vesting will occur on straightline basis.
TSR
The remaining onethird of the award 33.33% of the award will be subject to an absolute total shareholder return
EPS growth % of award vesting
9% pa returns Nil 9% pa returns 25% 16% pa returns or above 100%
9% pa returns and 16% pa returns vesting will occur on straightline basis.
The adjusted underlying
January has been calculated as
January was year.
The average price during the year ended
January per share.
Prices shown in brackets are preshare split.
Share award vesting
LTIP granted to
Briffa on
October
2016.
The vesting covered the performance period from
July
2016.
The award was subject to performance condition with an
TSR element.
The
Companys broker
Capital confirmed to the
Air
Partner in the
Small
Cap
Index
52nd over the measurement period and that as the schedule of the rules of the
50th and 75th percentile rankings this resulted in 31% of the
Air
Partner ranking as 52nd.
The
Committee therefore agreed that 31% of the
50% of the total award would vest.
The
Remuneration
Committee satisfied itself that the recorded
TSR ranking was genuine reflection of the underlying business performance of the
Performance criterion Achieved % of award to vest
RPI
10% 100% TSR 52nd percentile against the
Small
Cap
Index
31%
Air
Partners accounting reference date.
Annual report on remuneration continued 65 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Mark
Briffa exercised options and acquired shares and shares were surrendered for cash to pay the
Shares vested in award
NI liabilities
Mark
Briffa 36575 17190 19385 Shareholder voting
AGM the results of the votes on the
Directors remuneration report Directors remuneration policy
Number of votes % of votes cast
Against 6614 0.16 6614 0.16
Application of the policy for 201617 Fixed pay
Basic salary
Total
Pension
The
Company pension contribution for the executive directors will remain the same in the current financial year.
Executive directors may elect with the
Companys pension contribution as cash alternative.
Annual bonus
Remuneration
Committee has set stretching targets for both plan.
Detail on the targets is considered commercially sensitive and for this reason is not disclosed during the current financial year.
The performance measures and weightings for the financial year ending
As percentage of maximum bonus opportunity Measures CEO CFO
Personal objectives 30% 30%
Directors remuneration report was approved by the
April and is signed on its behalf by Peter Saunders
Remuneration
Committee 66 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
January
2017.
Statutory information contained elsewhere in the Annual Report
Directors report can be found elsewhere in this document as indicated is incorporated into this report by reference
Chairmans statement on page
Groups financial risk management objectives and policies in the
Details of the salaries bonuses benefits and share interests of directors in the
Directors responsibility statements on page
Our
People on pages and
Strategic report on pages to Management report
Strategic report on pages to and this
Management report as required by
Directors and directors interests
Company are shown on page and changes to directorships during the reporting period are shown on page
Company are shown on page
Company are shown on page reference.
Directors indemnities and insurance
Company has made qualifying thirdparty indemnity provisions for the benefit of its directors that remain in force at the date of this report.
In certain circumstances the
Articles of office.
Directors and officers liability insurance cover remains in place to protect all directors and senior managers.
Directors conflict of interest
Companys business other than contract of employment.
The
Company has procedures in place for managing conflicts of interest.
Should director become aware that they or their connected parties have an interest in an existing or proposed transaction with the
Board in writing or at the next meeting.
Articles of Association
Companys articles of association may only be made by passing special resolution of the shareholders of the
Substantial shareholdings
April the
Companys shares or had been notified of interests in voting rights under
Disclosure and
Rules as follows
Number of shares % held
Schroder
Investment
Management 8783915 16.82 Indirect
Partners
LLP 6754630 12.94 Indirect
DeLand
Asset
Management
3500000 6.70 Indirect BlackRock 2159980 4.14 Indirect rights.
Share split share capital structure buying back and shareholder rights
January the
Companys shares which reduced the nominal value of the ordinary shares to 1p each.
The share split became effective on
2017.
The authorised share capital of the each.
The
Company has one class of ordinary shares which have equal rights to dividends and capital and to vote at general meetings of the
Companys
Articles of
The number of ordinary shares of pence each issued and fully paid at
5p each.
Other
No shares were bought back during the year.
Options
6.12% of the
January
2017.
This includes options granted which have not yet vested.
In addition options representing 8.99% of the issued share capital have been exercised within the years preceding
2017.
No more than 10% of the issued share capital in any rolling 10year period may currently be taken up by employee share schemes by way of dilution with any excess up to further 10% of the issued share capital being acquired by purchase in the market via the
Partner
Employee
Benefit
Trust the
Under the
Directors report 67 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Company has authority to issue ordinary shares.
Resolutions to renew the authorities given to directors to allot shares to disapply certain preemption rights and to make market purchases of the
Annual
General
Meeting
AGM to replace the authorities granted in 2016.
The
Trust holds ordinary shares in the
Groups share option schemes.
At
January the number of ordinary shares held by the
341820.
Shares held by the dividends.
Trust in nominee capacity for two beneficiaries of the
There are no specific restrictions on the size of holding nor on the transfer of shares which are both governed by the general provisions of the
Association and prevailing legislation.
The directors are not aware of any agreements between holders of the rights.
No person has any special rights of control over the paid.
No individual or corporate entity has the right to appoint director.
The appointment and replacement of directors is governed by the
Association the
Corporate
Governance
Code the
Act and related legislation.
Change of control  significant contracts
Company none is considered to be significant in terms of its potential impact on the business of the whole.
The
Company does not have agreements with any director or employee that would provide compensation for loss of office or employment resulting from takeover except that provisions of the takeover.
Branches
The
Company and its subsidiaries have an established branch in
Greenhouse gas emissions Global tonnes of CO
CO 2 Vehicles 18 16
Total 405 323
Large and
Companies and
Accounts and
Regulations as amended in
2013.
The reporting boundary used for collation of the above data is consistent with that used for consolidation purposes in the financial statements.
We have used the
Protocol
Corporate
Accounting and
Standard revised edition data gathered to fulfil our requirements under the
Energy
Efficiency scheme and emission factors from the
Governments
GHG
Conversion
Factors for
Reporting to calculate the above disclosures.
Given the
CO 2 e emissions are restricted to office use and the operation of small number of vehicles.
In the case of offices occupation is within multioccupied building for all of the tenant.
Accordingly an estimate has been used.
68 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Political contributions nil.
Directors statements
Companies
Act the
Corporate
Governance
Code and the
Transparency
Rules
DTRs various statements have been made by the reference.
Independent auditor
LLP has confirmed that it is willing to be reappointed as auditor for the financial year ending
2017.
In accordance with
Companies
Act resolution proposing the appointment of statutory auditor will be proposed at the
Annual General Meeting
AGM will be held at 11am on
June at
Place
Beehive
Ring
Road
Gatwick
RH6
0PA.
The
Company confirms that it will send the
AGM and related documentation to shareholders at least working days before the meeting either by post to those shareholders who prefer paper copy or by email to those shareholders who have agreed that the electronically.
Both the
AGM and the
Investors
Companys website.
The
Directors report was approved by the
April and is signed on its behalf by Sally Chandler
Secretary
Air
Partner plc Directors report continued 69 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Strategic report incorporating the business review the
Directors remuneration report and the
Parent
Company financial statements.
The directors are required to prepare financial statements for the
International
Financial
Reporting
Standards
FRS as adopted for use in the
Union and have also elected to prepare financial statements for the
FRS as adopted for use in the
Union.
Company law requires the directors to prepare such financial statements in accordance with
Companies
Act and
IAS
Regulation.
International
Accounting
Standard requires that financial statements present fairly for each financial year the
Companys financial position financial performance and cash flows.
This requires the fair presentation of the effects of transactions other events and conditions in accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets liabilities income and expenses set out in the
Accounting
Standards
Boards
Framework for the
Presentation of
Statements.
In virtually all circumstances fair presentation will be achieved by compliance with all applicable
Directors are also required to select suitable accounting policies and apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements present information including accounting policies in manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with specific requirements in
Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the
Company for safeguarding the assets for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities and for the preparation of
Directors remuneration report which comply with the requirements of the
Act
2006.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the website.
Legislation in the
Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of the financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors statement of responsibility for financial statements
FRS as adopted by the
Union give true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and financial performance of the
Company the
Directors report give fair review of the
Group faces.
Directors statement of responsibility for disclosure of information to auditor
Companies
Act each director serving at the date of approval of the financial statements confirms that to the best of hisher knowledge and belief there is no information relevant to the preparation of their reports of which the
Companys auditor is aware of that information.
Words and phrases used in this confirmation should be interpreted in accordance with section of the
Act
2006.
The
Directors statements were approved by the
April and are signed on its behalf by Sally Chandler
Secretary
Air
Partner plc Directors responsibility statement 70 Air Partner plc
Report and
Financial statements Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 71 Air Partner plc
Report and
Financial statements 72 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Summary of our audit approach Key risks The key risks that we identified in the current year were
Completeness of provisions against operator prepayments
Finalisation of purchase price allocation relating to the acquisition of
Simmons
Impairment
Baines
Simmons consulting and training cashgenerating unit.
Within this report any new risks are identified with and any risks which are the same as the prior year are identified with Materiality Our chosen materiality of represents 8.1% 6.6% of underlying profit before tax 1.3% 1.0% of gross profit and 2.7% 2.1% of net assets.
Underlying profit before tax is defined by management in note Scoping Our global testing approach is combination of full scope specified audit procedures and defined procedures.
We have made changes to our scoping decisions made in the prior year for several global entities to reflect their current significance.
Significant changes in our approach
Baines
Simmons consulting and training cashgenerating unit.
We have not reported on the revenue recognition of year.
Independent auditors report to the members of Air Partner plc Opinion on financial statements of Air Partner plc
Groups and of the
Companys affairs as at
Groups profit for the year then ended the
International
Financial
Reporting
Standards
FRSs as adopted by the
Union the
Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with
European
Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the
Act the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the
Act and as regards the
Article of the
Regulation.
The financial statements that we have audited comprise the
Income
Statement the
Statement of
Income
Consolidated and
Statements of
Position the
Company
Cash
Flow
Statements the
Company
Statements of
Equity the related notes to
FRSs as adopted by the
Union and as regards the
Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the
Act
2006.
73 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the IASB
Group financial statements in addition to complying with its legal obligation to apply
European
Union the
FRSs as issued by the
Accounting
Standards
Board
IASB.
In our opinion the
FRSs as issued by the
Going concern and the directors assessment of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group
Listing
Rules we have reviewed the directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note to the financial statements and the directors statement on the longerterm viability of the
Audit and
Committee report on page
Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors statement in note to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the
Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have reasonable expectation that the assumptions.
We confirm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Independence
We are required to comply with the
Reporting
Councils
Ethical
Standards for
Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We confirm that we are independent of the Group and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also confirm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
Our assessment of risks of material misstatement team.
74 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Revenue recognition classification as either agent or principal Risk description Air flight.
The recognition of revenue as either agent or principal is determined by the application of the criteria set out in
Revenue.
Under this standard an entity is acting as principal when it has exposure to the significant risks and rewards associated with the rendering of services.
Management must apply their judgement to consider if the
Air
Partners standard terms and conditions are modified or indeed not used as basis for the contract.
There is risk that revenue is recognised incorrectly either as gross revenue when the business is not exposed to principal risk or booked as net or agency revenue when the balance of risk points to the arrangement.
Total gross transaction value
January
GTV represents the total value of invoices raised to customers.
The
Groups revenue recognition accounting policy is included on page of the notes to the financial statements.
This is discussed by the
Risk
Committee on page How the scope of our audit responded to the risk
Air
Partners standard contract terms and those contracts where management concluded that they were principal against the
AS recognition was applied we also selected sample of recorded revenue amounts obtained and reviewed the customer contract in order to assess whether the correct application of
Air
Partner was classified as principal.
For these we evaluated managements assessment on whether
Partner is an agent using the criteria of
Key observations From the work performed above we are satisfied that revenue recognition has been appropriately applied in accordance with
Completeness of provisions against operator prepayments Risk description The backtoback.
The
Group is required to prepay operators for flights which occur in the future.
At the year end the value of prepayments.
Although the recoverable.
In certain cases
Partner may still fulfil the flight for the customer.
There is risk these prepayments need to be provided for.
This is discussed by the
Risk
Committee on page How the scope of our audit responded to the risk
January by agreeing sample through to signed contracts we reviewed prepaid operator costs to identify those which had higher chance of irrecoverability we traced sample of prepayments through to postyear end flight records to check that the operator had supplied the flight for those flights in our sample that had not yet taken off at the date of our testing we reviewed the operators business history with the
Groups external legal advisers to identify legal disputes with operators.
Key observations From the work performed above we are satisfied that operator prepayments are valued appropriately.
Independent auditors report to the members of Air Partner plc continued 75 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Completeness of operator accruals Risk description Flights and related services are purchased from large number of different suppliers and the nature of the requirements.
As result the process of matching costs and associated revenues in order to appropriately account on an accruals basis requires estimation of future costs.
The risk of completeness is considered significant as suppliers submit invoices with differing timescales often significantly later than the date of the service provision certain employees have elements of their remuneration based upon commission calculated with reference to gross profit on flight services.
These factors result in heightened risk of underaccrual of costs.
This is discussed by the
Risk
Committee on page How the scope of our audit responded to the risk
January
2017.
We agreed these to evidence supporting the date of flights or service delivery and considered whether where this was before the year end an accrual had been recorded we performed analytical procedures on gross margin for the components in our scope to highlight instances where costs may not have been recorded.
If
Key observations From the work performed above we did not identify any incomplete accruals which required reporting to the
Risk
Committee.
Finalisation of purchase price allocation relating to the acquisition of Baines Simmons Risk description During the year ended
Air
Partner acquired
Simmons
Limited.
In the current year management finalised the
Simmons acquisition accounting in accordance with
Business
Combinations.
Goodwill is and intangibles are disclosed.
There is significant judgement required in the valuations of the goodwill and intangible assets and management has used valuation expert to assist in this process.
We have identified the finalisation of the purchase price allocation as the significant risk in the acquisition accounting.
We have pinpointed the risk to managements finalisation of the purchase price allocation between cash generating units assets.
The main assumptions used in allocating this between the each.
The
Groups accounting policy is included on page of the notes to the financial statements.
This is discussed by the
Risk
Committee on page How the scope of our audit responded to the risk valuation.
This included involving internal specialists to benchmark the discount rate and challenge the methodology used we also assessed the reasonableness of cash flow forecasts through comparison to historical results and other knowledge gained from our audit we assessed whether the accounting journals posted in relation to the transaction were in accordance with expert.
Key observations From the work performed above we concluded that the assumptions used in the allocations were appropriate.
76 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of Air Partner plc continued Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets relating to the Baines Simmons consulting and training cashgenerating unit CGU
Risk description Management
Group goodwill balances annually for impairment.
The assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and intangibles involves judgement in relation to forecasting future cash flows and is sensitive to growth rates and the discount rate applied to future cash flows.
Management has assessed the future cash flows of the cash generating unit and concluded that it is not impaired.
We have considered the
Baines
Simmons consulting and training
As at
CGU total
Groups goodwill and intangible assets accounting policies are included on page of the notes to the financial statements.
This is discussed by the
Risk
Committee on page How the scope of our audit responded to the risk
2017.
Key observations From the work performed above we concluded that the inputs and assumptions applied in the valuation model were appropriate.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide separate opinion on these matters.
Our application of materiality influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as whole as follows Group materiality 410000 Basis for determining materiality materiality.
Our
8.1% 6.6% of underlying profit before tax 1.3% 1.0% of gross profit and 2.7% 2.1% of net assets.
Rationale for the benchmark applied entities.
Gross profit and underlying profit before tax are the key measures used by analysts in presenting business performance to users of the financial statements.
However as profitbased measures do not fully represent the size of the balance sheet we have also considered net assets in determining materiality.
In making this determination we considered the profit metrics of both the prior year and the current year because of the variation.
Underlying profit is defined by management on page
Audit and
Committee that we would report to the grounds.
We also report to the
Risk
Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
77 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements An overview of the scope of our audit
Group and its environment including internal control how the
Group and assessing the risks of material misstatement throughout the
Based on that assessment we focused our
Group operations in the
France the
Germany.
The
UK and
US and risks.
Our
US and
Groups operations at those locations including an audit of account balances relating to the significant risks areas applicable to those locations.
The
Group audit engagement team visited all overseas component audit teams as part of our oversight of their work.
We visited each of the overseas locations set out above in order for senior member of the papers.
The
Group audit engagement team performed the audit of the
US business without the involvement of component team.
For all other locations we have performed analytical review procedures at level.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process.
The changes in scope this year are that we performed specified audit procedures on revenue and cost of sales for
Simmons
Limited analytical review procedures for
Clockwork
Research
Limited.
The
Group audit engagement team has obtained an understanding of the
Groupwide controls to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
The
Group results are split as follows 51% 42% 7% Gross profit 47% 46% 7% Statutory profit before tax 78% 16% 6% New assets
Specified audit procedures
The materiality used in each location where we performed an audit or specified audit procedures ranged from to to 228000.
78 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of Air Partner plc continued Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006
Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the
Act the information given in the
Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements the
Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the
Strategic report and the report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception
Under the
Act we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the
Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the
Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directorsremuneration
Under the
Act we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Corporategovernancestatement
Under the
Rules we are also required to review part of the
Companys compliance with certain provisions of the
Corporate
Governance
Code.
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
Ourdutytoreadotherinformationintheannualreport
Under
International
Standards on
UK and
Group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identified any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the directors statement that they consider the annual report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the annual report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the
Risk
Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We confirm that we have not identified any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
79 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Respective responsibilities of directors and auditor
Directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give true and fair view.
Our
International
Standards on
UK and
We also comply with
Standard on
Control
UK and
Our
Our
This report is made solely to the
Chapter of
Companies
Act
2006.
Our
Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the
Companys members as body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the
Parent
Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the annual report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If
Robert Knight FCA Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor
United
Kingdom
April
2017 80 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated income statement for the year ended
Financial statements Year ended 31 January 2017 Year ended
Continuing operations Note
Other items
Underlying
Other
Total
Gross transaction value GTV 2 215829  215829 210752  210752 Revenue 3 42538  42538 49942  49942 Gross profit 4 31707  31707 27269  27269
Operating profit 5114 709 4405 4386 1178 3208
Finance expense 9 96  96 81  81 Profit before tax 5057 709 4348 4315 1178 3137 Taxation 10 1654 153 1501 1311 81 1230 Profit for the year from continuing operations 3403 556 2847 3004 1097 1907 Discontinued operations
Profit for the year 3403 556 2847 3391 1097 2294 Attributable to
Parent
Company 3403 556 2847 3391 1097 2294 Earningsloss per share Continuing operations Basic 13 6.5p 1.1p 5.4p 5.9p 2.2p 3.7p Diluted 13 6.4p 1.1p 5.3p 5.8p 2.2p 3.6p Discontinued operations Basic 13    0.8p  0.8p Diluted 13    0.8p  0.8p Continuing and discontinued operations Basic 13 6.5p 1.1p 5.4p 6.7p 2.2p 4.5p Diluted 13 6.4p 1.1p 5.3p 6.6p 2.2p 4.4p
Year ended 31 January
January
Profit for the year 2847 2294 Other comprehensive income  items that may subsequently be reclassified to profit or loss
Total comprehensive income for the year 3193 2265 Attributable to
Parent
Company 3193 2265 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended
2017 81 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended
Share capital
Merger reserve
Translation reserve
Retained earnings
Opening equity as at 1 February 2015 513 4518  1051 1093 1485 6753 13311
Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations     29   29 Total comprehensive income for the year     29  2294 2265
Share option movement in the year      223  223
Share options exercised during the
12       2331 2331 Closing equity as at 31 January 2016 522 4814 295 1199 1064 1708 6650 13854
Share premium account
Own
Translation reserve
Retained earnings
Opening equity as at 1 February 2016 522 4814 295 1199 1064 1708 6650 13854
Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations     346   346 Total comprehensive income for the year     346  2847 3193
Issue
Deferred tax on sharebased payment transactions note
Remeasurements of postemployment benefit obligations       23 23
12       2574 2574 Closing equity as at 31 January 2017 522 4755 354 672 1410 2017 6548 14934 82 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements continued Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended
Share capital
Merger reserve
Share option reserve
Total equity Opening equity as at 1 February 2015 513 4518  1051 1485 4549 10014
Total comprehensive income for the period      5636 5636
Share option movement for the year     223  223
Share options exercised during the
12      2331 2331 Closing equity as at 31 January 2016 522 4814 295 1199 1708 7788 13928
Share premium account
Own
Share option reserve
Total equity Opening equity as at 1 February 2016 522 4814 295 1199 1708 7788 13928
Total comprehensive income for the year      1154 1154
Share option movement for the year     369  369
Share options exercised during the
12      2574 2574 Closing equity as at 31 January 2017 522 4755 354 672 2017 6011 12987 Merger reserve shares.
Own shares
Air
Partner plc purchased in the market and held by the
Partner
Employee
Benefit
Trust to satisfy options under the
Translation reserve sterling.
Share option reserve exercised.
83 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Consolidated statement of financial position as at
Note
31 January
Assets
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 14 3787 3346
Property plant and equipment 16 1086 1281
Total noncurrent assets 10362 9808 Current assets
Current tax assets 506 438 Restrictedbankbalances 1965 2840 Othercashandcashequivalents 17830 16951
Derivative financial instruments 24  36 Total current assets 45706 43973 Total assets 56068 53781 Current liabilities
Current tax liabilities 1071 133
Borrowings 19 514 514
Provisions 23  421
Total current liabilities 37766 36419 Net current assets 7940 7554 Longterm liabilities Borrowings 19 2443 2957
Deferred tax liability 26 725 551 Total longterm liabilities 3368 3508 Total liabilities 41134 39927 Net assets 14934 13854
Share capital 28 522 522
Merger reserve 30 354 295
Translation reserve 1410 1064
Retained earnings 6548 6650 Total equity 14934 13854
Board on
M A Briffa Director N J Morris Director 84 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company statement of financial position as at
Financial statements continued
31 January
Assets
Noncurrent assets
Property plant and equipment 16 726 897 Investments 17 9350 8587
Total noncurrent assets 11139 10551 Current assets
Current tax assets 208 337 Restrictedbankbalances 1965 2840 Othercashandcashequivalents 12237 12146
14202 14986
Total current assets 27949 30842 Total assets 39088 41393 Current liabilities
Current tax liabilities 80
Borrowings 19 514 514
Provisions 23  166
Total current liabilities 23458 24508 Net current assets 4491 6334 Longterm liabilities Borrowings 19 2443 2957
Total longterm liabilities 2643 2957 Total liabilities 26101 27465 Net assets 12987 13928
Share capital 28 522 513
Merger reserve 30 354
Share option reserve 2017 1485
Total equity 12987 10014
Board on
M A Briffa Director N J Morris Director Air Partner plc Registered no.
85 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Group Company
Year ended 31 January
January
Year ended 31 January
January
Net cash inflow from operating activities 34 1874 5785 1926 387 Investing activities
Interest
Dividends received from subsidiaries    3277
Purchases of intangible
Net cash generated used inby investing activities 592 6163 661 2544 Financing activities
Dividends paid 2574 2331 2574 2331
New bank loans raised  3600  3600
Net cash used ingenerated by financing activities 2907 1208 2941 1208 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 1625 830 1676 4139
Effect of changes in foreign exchange rates 162telClosing cash and cash equivalents 19795 19791 14202 14986 JetCard cash
JetCard cash being restricted and unrestricted cash received by the
Company in respect of its
Group Company
JetCard cash unrestricted in its use 13901 13936 10568 10303
JetCard cash 15866 16776 12533 13143
Cash and cash equivalents 19795 19791 14202 14986 Consolidated and company statement of cash flows for the year ended
2017 86 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 General information
Partner plc the
England and
The address of the registered office is
Place
Beehive
Ring
Road
Gatwick
West
Sussex
RH6
0PA.
The nature of the
Strategic report on pages to Accounting policies a Basis of preparation of financial statements
International
Financial
Reporting
Standards
FRSs as adopted for use in the
Union in accordance with
AS regulation
Companies
Act applicable to companies reporting under
The financial statements are presented in sterling being the currency of the primary economic environment in which the operates.
Unless otherwise stated figures are rounded to the nearest thousand.
They are prepared on the historical cost basis except for the revaluation of certain financial instruments which are stated at fair value.
The accounting policies adopted are consistent with those of the previous financial year except as described in the following sections.
Adoption of new and revised standards
FRS amendments
Joint
Operations
January
AS amendments
Plant and
IAS
Intangible
Assets
Amendments regarding the clarification of acceptable methods of depreciation and amortisation effective for periods beginning on or after
AS and
Property
Plant and
Amendments to bring bearer plants into the scope of
AS effective for periods beginning on or after
AS amendments
Financial
Statements
Amendments reinstating the equity method effective for periods beginning on or after
AS amendments
January
IFRS
Consolidated financial statements
Disclosure of interests in other entities and
Investment
January
2016.
Adoption of the above has had no impact on the disclosures or on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements.
Annual Improvements 20122014 cycle
Annual
Improvements
IFRSs.
The primary objective of the process is to enhance the quality of standards by amending existing oversights.
Adoption of the
Improvements
New standards amendments and interpretations in issue but not yet effective
Group
IAS
Income
January
Annual
Improvements
FRS standards cycle effective for periods beginning on or after
IAS
Statement of cash flows clarify disclosure requirements effective for periods beginning on or after
IFRS
Financial
Instruments
January
IFRS
Sharebased payment classification and measurement of sharebased payment transactions effective for periods beginning on or after
IAS
Investment
Property transfers of investment property effective for periods beginning on or after
IFRS
Leases effective for periods beginning on or after
IFRS
Revenue from
Customers effective for periods beginning on or after
2018.
Notes to the financial statements for the year ended
2017 87 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting policies continued
Group or
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the
Company its subsidiaries made up to year.
Control is achieved where the activities.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the consolidated income statement from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used into line with those used by the
All intraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and reported amounts of assets and liabilities income and expenses.
These estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and various other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results could differ from these estimates.
These underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if these are also affected.
Impairment of goodwill subsidiaries.
Accruals related to air charter contracts crystallise.
These estimates may not reflect the ultimate outcome.
Valuation of acquisition goodwill and intangibles reliably.
The identification of intangible assets acquired as part of business combinations requires judgement.
For each business combination the balance of goodwill to other intangible assets is reviewed for appropriateness.
Acquired intangible assets comprising brands customer relationships other mandates and training materials are amortised through the years.
Significant judgement is required in determining the fair value and economic lives of acquired intangible assets.
External valuations are obtained for significant acquisitions.
Details of the intangible assets recognised on acquisition during the year are disclosed in note d Going concern
Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the
The financial position of the
Strategic
Report on pages to
Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital risk details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to interest rate risk credit risk liquidity risk and foreign currency risk.
The
Group has considerable cash resources and little debt.
As consequence the directors believe that the outlook.
The directors have reasonable expectation that the future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual financial statements.
88 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Accounting policies continued e Foreign currency i Foreign currency transactions transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated to the functional currency of the entity at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that date.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing at the reporting date.
Income
Exchange differences arising are classified as equity and transferred to the reserve.
Goodwill arising in business combination is recognised as an asset at the date that control is acquired the acquisition date.
Goodwill is measured as the excess of the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest if any in the entity over the net of the acquisition date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
Goodwill denominated in currencies other than sterling is revalued at the rate of exchange ruling at balance sheet date.
If
Groups interest in the fair value of the acquirees identifiable net assets exceeds the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest in the acquiree if any the excess is recognised immediately in profit or loss as bargain purchase gain.
Goodwill is not amortised but is reviewed for impairment at least annually.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to each of the combination.
Cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the unit may be impaired.
If
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in subsequent period.
On disposal of subsidiary the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
Internally generated assets
Group are recognised only if all of the following conditions are met an asset is created that can be identified it is probable that the asset created will generate future economic benefits the development cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
Other
Amortisation is charged to the income statement so as to write off the cost of assets less their residual values over their estimated useful lives which in the case of software is 10%20% per annum on straightline basis.
The carrying value of intangible assets with finite life is reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
89 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting policies continued Other intangible assets losses.
Amortisation of the carrying value of intangible assets arising on acquisition is charged to the income statement over the estimated useful life which is as follows
10% per annum on straightline basis
100% per annum
5%16.7% per annum on straightline basis
10% per annum on straightline basis recoverable.
Items
Depreciation is charged to the income statement so as to write off the cost of assets less their residual values over their estimated useful lives as follows
Leasehold improvements over the life of the lease on straightline basis
10%33% per annum on straightline basis
25% reducing balance i Impairment of tangible and intangible assets excluding goodwill
Group reviews the carrying amounts of its tangible and intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the belongs.
An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is tested for impairment at least annually and whenever there is an indication that the asset may be impaired.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss unless the relevant asset is carried at revalued amount in which case the impairment loss is treated as revaluation decrease.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset or cashgenerating unit in prior years. increase.
Noncurrent assets and disposal groups are classified as held for sale only if they are available for immediate sale in their present condition and sale is highly probable and expected to be completed within one year from the date of classification.
Such assets are measured at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell and are not depreciated or amortised.
90 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Accounting policies continued k Financial instruments Financial assets
Group classifies its financial assets in the following categories at fair value through profit or loss and loans and receivables.
The classification depends on the purpose for which the financial assets were acquired.
Management determines the classification of its financial assets at initial recognition.
Purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on the trade date the date on which the asset.
Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs except for financial assets held at fair value through profit or loss which are initially recognised at fair value and transaction costs are expensed in the income statement.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows have expired or have been transferred and the ownership.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss trading. term.
Derivatives are also categorised as held for trading unless they are designated as hedges.
Assets in this category are classified as current assets if they are expected to be settled within months otherwise they are classified as noncurrent.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are initially recognised at fair value at the date the contract is entered into and subsequently gains or losses arising from changes in their fair value are presented in the income statement within administrative expenses in the period in which they arise.
The
Groups financial assets at fair value through profit or loss comprise derivative financial instruments.
Derivative financial instruments
Group enters into derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its exposure to foreign exchange rate risk.
Derivatives not designated into an effective hedge relationship are classified as financial asset or financial liability.
The
Group has not designated any derivatives as hedging items and therefore does not apply hedge accounting.
Loans and receivables market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than months at the end of the reporting period.
These are classified as noncurrent assets.
Loans and receivables are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
The
Groups loans and receivables comprise trade receivables other receivables accrued income and cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet.
Trade receivables business.
If
If
Other receivables assets.
Accrued income
Groups accounting policies but not yet invoiced.
Cash and cash equivalents less.
The carrying amount of these assets approximates their fair value.
91 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting policies continued Financial liabilities
Group classifies its financial liabilities in the following categories at fair value through profit or loss and at amortised cost.
The classification depends on the purpose for which the financial liabilities were acquired.
Management determines the classification of its financial liabilities at initial recognition.
Financial liabilities are recognised when the instrument.
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss trading. term.
Derivatives are also categorised as held for trading unless they are designated as hedges.
Liabilities in this category are classified as current liabilities if they are expected to be settled within months otherwise they are classified as noncurrent.
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss are initially recognised at fair value at the date the contract is entered into and subsequently gains or losses arising from changes in their fair value are presented in the income statement within administrative expenses in the period in which they arise.
The
Groups financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss comprise derivative financial instruments.
Financial liabilities at amortised cost
Groups financial liabilities at amortised cost comprise trade payables other payables accrued costs and borrowings.
They are initially measured at fair value net of transaction costs and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Trade payables suppliers.
Trade payables are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year or less.
If
Other payables demand.
Accrued costs
Groups accounting policies but for which invoices have not yet been received or payments made as applicable.
Borrowings
Borrowings consist of an interestbearing bank loan which is recorded at fair value.
Offsetting financial instruments simultaneously.
Other items business.
These measures are consistent with how underlying business performance is measured internally.
The underlying profit before tax measure is not recognised profit measure under companies.
The adjustments made to reported profit before tax are to exclude the following restructuring costs significant and oneoff impairment charges and provisions that distort underlying trading costs relating to strategy changes that are not considered normal operating costs of the underlying business acquisition costs amortisation of intangible assets recognised on acquisition acquisition consideration classified as an employee cost under
Business
Combinations.
92 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Accounting policies continued Equity instruments issued by the Group liabilities.
Equity instruments are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
The
Groups equity instruments comprise share capital in the balance sheet.
Provisions are recognised when the
Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions are measured at the directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the reporting date and are discounted to present value.
Group has developed detailed formal plan for the restructuring and has raised valid expectation in those affected that it will carry out the restructuring by starting to implement the plan or announcing its main features to those affected by it.
Revenues are derived from aircraft chartering services aircraft remarketing services aircraft inspection services and the provision of training and safety consulting services.
In line with
Revenue where contract has been determined as principal the full amount of the invoice is recognised as revenue.
Where
Air
Partner is not acting as principal revenue is recognised on an agency basis and only gross margin is reported as revenue.
Revenue is measured as the fair value of the consideration received for the provision of goods and services to thirdparty customers and is stated exclusive of value added tax and is only recognised where there is contractual right to receive consideration for work undertaken the amount can be measured reliably and it is probable that future economic benefits will flow.
Aircraft chartering services date.
In instances where the
Group is recognised as revenue.
In instances where the revenue.
Aircraft remarketing services
Partner
Remarketings formerly
Aviation principal activity is that of an aircraft remarketing broker.
Fees earned in respect of these services are recognised when they become payable in accordance with the terms of the contract with the customer.
Aircraft inspection services
Isle
Man
Aircraft
Registry which is managed by
Simmons
Limited require an annual inspection.
Amounts receivable in respect of such inspections are recognised as revenue once the aircraft has been inspected.
Provision of aviationrelated training and safety consulting services
Simmons
Limited provides aviationrelated specialist training and consultancy services.
Revenue is recognised by reference to the stage of completion of the contract determined by the value of the services provided at balance sheet date as proportion of the total value of the assignment.
Amounts in respect of unbilled services provided to clients are recognised as revenue at balance sheet date.
Operating
The chief operating decision maker who is responsible for resource allocation and assessing performance of the operating segments is considered to be the
The nature of the operating segments is set out in note o Sharebased payments
Group will grant options to employees to subscribe for ordinary shares in the
The fair value of options granted is recognised as an employee expense with corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value is measured at grant date using the
Carlo method and spread over the period during which employees become unconditionally entitled to the options based on managements estimate of the number of options which will ultimately vest adjusting at each reporting date for the effect of nonmarket based vesting conditions.
93 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting policies continued p Retirement benefit costs service.
Payments made to statemanaged retirement benefit schemes are dealt with as payments to defined contribution schemes where the scheme.
The tax expense represents current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date and any adjustments to the tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary differences arise from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in business combination of other assets and liabilities in transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Gross transaction value tax.
Leases are classified as finance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer all or substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Rental income or expenditure from operating leases is recognised on straightline basis over the lease term.
Final dividends on ordinary shares are recognised as liability in the period in which the dividends are approved by the shareholders.
Dividends are recognised as liability in the period in which they are approved.
Revenue
An analysis of the
Continuing operations
Aircraft remarketing 760 273
Safety consulting and training 4317 1753 42538 49942
UK is revenue of approximately which arose from sales to the customers.
No other single customer contributed more than 10% to the
2016.
94 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Segmental analysis
Group consist of chartering different types of aircraft and related aviation services.
The
Group has four segments
Jets
Private
Jets
Freight and
Training.
Air
Partner
Remarketings formerly
Aviation results are aggregated into
Jets.
Overheads
Groups segments in relation to operating activities.
Sales transactions between operating segments are carried out on an arms length basis.
All results assets and liabilities reviewed by the statements.
The
Board does not review revenue assets and liabilities at segmental level therefore these items are not disclosed.
The segmental information as provided to the
Year ended 31 January 2017 Continuing operations
Jets
Private
Jets
Freight
Consulting and
Corporate costs
Segmental gross profit 14704 10236 1113 5654  31707
Underlying operating profit 3848 2491 233 527 1985 5114
Segment result 3666 2491 233 128 2113 4405
Finance expense 96
Tax 1501
Year ended 31 January 2016 Continuing operations
Jets
Private
Jets
Freight
Consulting and
Corporate costs
Segmental gross profit 14005 9361 1857 2046  27269
Impairment
Underlying operating profit 2952 2387 767 99 1621 4386
Segment result 2516 2126 723 536 1621 3208
Finance expense 81
Tax 1230
Discontinued operations 387
The
Company is domiciled in the
Groups operations significant amount of gross profit is derived from overseas countries.
The
Group reviews gross profit based upon location of the assets used to generate that gross profit.
Apart from the
French operation of 956000.
95 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Segmental analysis continued
Board also reviews information on geographical basis based on parts of the world which are considered to be key to operational activities.
As result the following additional information is provided showing geographical split of the
Europe the
Rest of the
Continuing operations
Europe
US
Rest of the
Total
Year ended 31 January 2017
Noncurrent assets excluding deferred tax assets 8696 1090 39 4 9829 Year ended 31 January 2016
Noncurrent assets excluding deferred tax assets 8665
Continuing operations
Germany
Italy
Other
Total
Year ended 31 January 2017
Year ended 31 January 2016
Operating profit
Continuing operations
Change in the fair value of derivative financial instruments 45 186
Amortisation of intangible fixed assets acquired 305 216
Impairment
Operating
Operating
Staff costs see note 8 18453 15291 96 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Auditors remuneration
The analysis of auditors remuneration is as follows
Companys auditor for the audit of the
Fees payable to the
Total audit feestel Fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates for other services to the Group
Audit related assurance services 22 21
Total nonaudit fees 26 43 Other items Continuing operations
Amortisation of purchased intangibles 304 242
Noncash acquisition related costs 94 98 709 1178
Other
Restructuring costs relate to changes to the management structure following the acquisitions made during the prior year.
97 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Staff costs
Group including directors during the year analysed by category was as follows Continuing operations
Number
Operations 179 140 Administration The aggregate payroll costs comprised Continuing operations
Social security costs 2219 1956
Sharebased payments 191 125 18453 15291
Group contributes to personal pension plans of certain employees and this cost is charged to the income statement in the period in which it is incurred.
Full disclosure of directors emoluments share options and directors pension entitlements which form part of their remuneration packages and their interests in the
Directors remuneration report.
Finance income and expense Continuing operations Finance income
Continuing operations Finance expense
Unwinding of discount on provisions  Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Taxation
Continuing operations Discontinued operations Total Current tax
Foreign
Current tax adjustments in respect of prior years
Overseas 66 333   66 333 1792 1394  98 1792 1492 Deferred tax see note 26 291 164   291 164 Total tax 1501 1230  98 1501 1328 Of which
Tax on other items see note 1501 1230  98 1501 1328
UK was calculated at 20% 20.16% of the estimated assessable profit for the period.
Taxation for other jurisdictions was calculated at the rates prevailing in the respective jurisdictions.
The charge for the period can be reconciled to the profit per the consolidated income statement as follows
Profit from discontinued operations before tax  485
Tax at the
20% 20.16% 870 735
UK corporation tax rate 21% from
March
2015 41 61
Tax effect of different tax rates of subsidiaries operating in other jurisdictions 212 139
Deferred tax not recognised 22 7
Total tax charge 1501 1328
UK corporation tax rate decreased from 21% to 20% from
2016.
The impact on the tax charge is shown above.
Further reductions to the announced.
19% effective from
17% on
October
99 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Discontinued operations
March
Air
Partner
Private
Jets
Limited was closed. fulfilled.
The last date for the claims to be pursued was
2016.
As no further actions have been taken by the claimants the claims have lapsed.
As result the provision was derecognised in the previous financial year.
Revenue
Cost of sales Gross profit
Profit before tax  485 Taxation  98 Net profit attributable to discontinued operations  387
January nil.
Dividends
Amounts recognised as distributions to owners of the Parent Company
January of pence per share 1741 1578
January of pence
January of pence per share 833 753
January of pence 2574 2331
Companys shareholders approving to split of the each.
The share split became effective on
2017.
The directors propose final dividend for the year ended
Annual
General
Meeting to be held on
2017.
The
Air
Partner
Employee
Benefit
Trust which held ordinary shares of 1p each at
5p each representing 0.65% 1.6% of the dividends.
1p each ordinary shares of 5p each shares are held by the
Trust.
100 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Earnings per share
Continuing and discontinued operations
Profit attributable to owners of the
Company 2847 2294
Underlying profit attributable to owners of the
Company 3403 3391 Number of shares
Number
Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the calculation of basic earnings per share 52361659 50606225
Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the calculation of diluted earnings per share 53494742 50881945 From continuing operations
Profit attributable to owners of the
Company 2847 2294
Adjustment to exclude other items 556 1097
From discontinued operations
Earnings for the calculation of discontinued basic and diluted earnings per share  387
January the
Companys shares which reduced the nominal value of the ordinary shares to pence each.
The share split became effective on
2017.
As result the prior year number of shares and numbers.
The denominators used are the same as those above for both basic and diluted earnings per share from continuing and discontinued operations.
The calculation of underlying earnings per share before other items is included as the directors believe it provides better understanding of the underlying performance of the
Other
101 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Group 000
At
February
2015 838
Foreign currency adjustments 10
January
2016 3346
Foreign currency adjustments 108
January
2017 3787 Provision for impairment
February
January and
Net book value
January
2017 3787
January
2016 3346
February
2015 838
CGUs or group of units that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
Before recognition of impairment losses the carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated as follows
Partner
International
S.
Baines
Simmons
Limited
Consulting and Training 1072 1072
Simmons
Limited
Managed
Services 639 639
Aviation
Services
Limited 787 787
Research
Limited 333 3787 3346
Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
For the purpose of impairment testing the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit was measured on the basis of its value in use by applying cash flow projections based on financial forecasts covering threeyear period.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculation were those regarding the discount rates growth rates and expected changes to selling prices and direct costs during the forecast period.
The estimated growth rates were based on past performance and expectation of future changes in the market.
The growth rate used to extrapolate cash flow projections beyond the period covered by the financial forecasts was 2% 2%.
The pretax rate used to discount the forecast cash flows ranged from 10.76%13% 13%.
The directors do not believe that there are any reasonably possible changes to the key assumptions that would result in material impairment of goodwill.
102 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Other intangible assets
Brands
Other
Customer relationships
Software
Total
Cost
At
February
2015     1921 1921 Additions     153 153
158 171 3540 414  4283
January tel3540 414 2074 6357 Additions     173 173
Foreign currency adjustments     4 4
January tel3714 414 2251 6708 Amortisation and impairment
February
2015     855 855
At
January
1079 1319
January
1207 1752 Net book value
January
2017 135 1 3423 353 1044 4956
January
2016 151 48 3449 395 995 5038
February
2015     1066 1066 years.
Company
Software
Cost
At
February
2015 1905 Additions 153
January
2016 2058 Additions 173
January
2017 2231 Amortisation and impairment
February
2015 842
At
January
2016 1066
At
January
2017 1192 Net book value
January
2017 1039
January
2016 992
February
2015 1063 brands.
103 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Property plant and equipment
Short leasehold property and leasehold improvements
Motor vehicles
Cost
At
February
2015 769 2427  3196 Additions Acquired on acquisition of subsidiaries 40 151  191
At
January
2016 858 2615 37 3510 Additions  77 19 96
Foreign currency adjustments 12 45  57
January
2017 870 2742 86 3698 Depreciation and impairment
February
2015 242 1681  1923
At
January
2016 335 1892 2 2229
At
January
2017 433 2166 13 2612 Net book value
January tel73 1086
January tel35 1281
February tel 1273 104 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Property plant and equipment continued
Short leasehold property and leasehold improvements
Motor vehicles
Cost
At
February
2015 714 1524  2238 Additions At
2016 734 1536 37 2307 Additions  34 19 53
January
2017 734 1570 56 2360
At
February tel 1206
January
2016 303 1105 2 1410
January
2017 375 1246 13 1634 Net book value
January
At
January
At
February tel 1032 105 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Company
Investments
Capital contributions to subsidiaries
Cost
At
February
2015 1179 1582 2761
814 5650 6464
Group sharebased payments  98 98
January
2016 1993 7330 9323
Additions
Group sharebased payments  94 94
January
2017 2662 7424 10086 Amounts provided
January and
Net book value
January
2017 2561 6789 9350
January
2016 1892 6695 8587
February
2015 1078 947 2025
January
Air
Partner plc made capital contribution of to
Partner
Consulting
Limited for the purchase of
Simmons
Limited.
The
Company tests its investments for impairment if there are indications that the investments may be impaired.
The recoverable amount of each investment was measured on the basis of its value in use by applying cash flow projections based on the financial forecasts covering threeyear period.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculation for each subsidiary were those regarding the discount rates growth rates and expected changes to selling prices and direct costs during the period.
The estimated growth rates were based on past performance and expectation of future changes in the market.
The growth rate used to extrapolate cash flow projections beyond the period covered by the financial forecasts was 2% 2%.
The pretax rate used to discount the forecast cash flows was 13% 13%.
The directors do not believe that there are any reasonably possible changes to the key assumptions that would result in further impairment of the investments.
106 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Investments
The following is list of the subsidiaries of which
Partner plc incorporated in
Wales is the beneficial owner Name Principal activity
Company number
Air
Partner
International
S.
Air charter broking France Btel A
Partner
International
GmbH Air charter broking Germany HRB 28279 B
Partner
Inc.
Air charter broking US 65 C
Partner
Switzerland
AG Air charter broking Switzerland CH020.3.022.925.4 D
Partner
Travel
Management
Company
Limited Travel agency England and Wales  E
Partner
Srl Air charter broking Italy MI F
Partner
Havacilik ve
Limited
Sirketi Air charter broking Turkey  G
Aviation
Services
Limited Aircraft remarketing England and Wales  E
Partner
Consulting
Limited Holding company England and Wales  E
Simmons
Limited Aviation safety consultants England and Wales  E
Compliance
Limited Aviation safety consultants England and Wales  E
Research
Limited Aviation safety consultants England and Wales  E
Partner
Jet
Charter and
Private
Limited Dormant India U63000DL2012FTC H
Jets
Limited Dormant England and Wales  E
Partner
Group
Limited Dormant England and Wales  E
Partner
Investments
Limited Dormant England and Wales  E
Partner
Enclave
Limited Dormant England and Wales  E
Partner
Nordic Air
Broking Sweden 5369 I
100% owned by
Partner plc except for
Partner
Havacilik ve
Limited
Sirketi where 40% is held by subsidiary undertaking and
Partner
Jet
Charter and
Private
Limited which is 99.99% held by one subsidiary company and 0.01% held by another subsidiary company.
Air
Partner plcs holdings are in the ordinary share capital of all the subsidiaries and there are no other classes of shares.
Registered company addresses are as follows A 89 Rue du
SaintHonor
75008 Paris
B Technologiepark HS 56
75 51429
Gladbach
Germany
C 1100
Wagener
Blvd
Suite
Fort
Lauderdale
FL
US
D Postfach 8722 8036
Switzerland
E 2
Place
Beehive
Ring
Road
Gatwick
West
Sussex
RH6
0PA
F Via
67 20159
Italy
G Yenibosna mah.
Degirmenbahce cad.
Istwest
Konutlar
No17
A1B
Blok
Istanbul
Turkey
H Maulseri
Kapashera
Estate
New
Delhi India I Cerid
AB
Svanegatan
10 22224
Skane
Malm
Sweden
In the opinion of the directors the recoverable amount of the value.
107 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Trade and other receivables Group Company
Allowance for bad and doubtful
Amounts owed by
Social security and other taxes 1045 1018 699 726
25405 23708 13539 15483 value.
All trade and other receivables have been reviewed for indicators of impairment.
The movement in impaired receivables in the year is shown below
Company
At
January telAcquired on acquisition 61
Receivables written off during the year 60 10
At
January telCharge for the year 34 2
Foreign currency adjustments 59
January
2017 322 year.
In addition some of the unimpaired trade receivables were past due at the reporting date.
The ageing of financial assets was as follows Group Company
Ageing of past due but not impaired
By more than months but not more than
By more than year 12tel18867 15509 7263 8423 108 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Group Company
Group Company
2957 3471 2957 3471 sterling.
The
Groups borrowings consists of bank loan of from the bankers.
The loan was taken out on
2016.
Repayments commenced on
August
2020.
The loan is secured by floating charge over the assets.
The loan carries interest at 2.5% above
Subsequent to the balance sheet date the secured bank loan of was refinanced using new revolving credit facility provided by the banker.
The facility is for expiring in
2.5% above
Trade and other payables Group Company
Other
The directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates their fair value.
Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
2017 109 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Other liabilities Group Company Accruals 3662 4980 1548 2772
Amounts owed to
4463 5633 5170 5460 value.
Other longterm liabilities Group Company
Clockwork
Research
Limited note
Group Company
Group Company
Total
Restructuring
Total
At
February
Utilisation of provision 421 421 166 166
January provision of was created in the year ended
Operating
Board and this was fully utilised during the year.
110 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Financial instruments
Groups treasury activities are to manage financial risk minimise adverse effects of fluctuations in the financial markets on the value of the business.
The
Group has various financial instruments such as cash trade receivables trade payables and borrowings that arise directly from its operations along with forward currency contracts undertaken to minimise risk on future business.
The
Groups policy is to manage interest rate risk and to maximise its return from its cash balances.
The
Groups main interest rate risk is related to variable rates on cash held at the bank.
Certain cash balances are deposits on fixed interest terms but are never lodged for more than three months to ensure that the variation.
Group Company
Cash held at year end on variable interest rates 15380 15501 10885 12830 19795 19791 14202 14986 year.
There was no additional impact on shareholders equity.
These changes are considered to be reasonably possible based on observation of current market conditions.
The rate range on which interest was receivable during the year was 0.0% to 1.0% 0.0% to 1.0%.
Effect on profit before tax basis points increase 100 basis points decrease
Cash held at year end on variable interest
Company
Cash held at year end on variable interest
Group is further exposed to interest rate risk due to variable interest owed on its borrowings linked to
The following table illustrates the sensitivity of borrowings on variable interest rates on profit before tax for the year to reasonably possible change in interest rates with effect from the beginning of the year.
There was no additional impact on shareholders equity.
These changes are considered to be reasonably possible based on observation of current market conditions.
The rate at which interest was payable during the year was 3.09% 3.09%.
Effect on profit before tax basis points increase 100 basis points decrease Group and Company
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Financial instruments continued b Credit risk
Groups maximum exposure to credit risk Group Company
Trade and other receivables 20035 17651 7488 10163 39830 37442 21690 25149
Group constantly monitors defaults of customers and other counterparties and incorporates this information into its credit risk controls.
It is the process.
The directors consider that all of the above financial assets that are not impaired for each of the reporting dates under review are of good credit quality including those that are past due.
The
Group has no significant concentration of credit risk to commercial customers as credit risk is predominantly government based.
The credit risk on liquid funds and derivative financial instruments is limited because the counterparties are banks with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies.
Refer to note for details of impairment losses for financial instruments.
The
Group faces liquidity risks in paying operators before flight occurs or before payment is received from the client.
The
Group aims to mitigate liquidity risk by where possible making payments to operators only once payment from the client has been received.
The
Group manages cash within its operations and ensures that cash collection is efficiently managed.
Any excess cash is placed on lowrisk shortterm interestbearing deposits or distributed to shareholders through dividends although the smoothly.
As at
Group and
Current Noncurrent
Group
Trade and other payables 23386 22353 257 257 2443 2957
23395 22353 257 257 2443 2957 Current Noncurrent
Company
Trade and other payables 19382 17353 257 257 2443 2957
19391 17353 257 257 2443 2957   112 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial instruments continued d Foreign currency risk
Group has invested in foreign operations outside the sterling.
As result the value of the
US
Dollar and particular.
The
Groups policy on foreign currency risk is not to enter into forward contracts until firm contract has been signed.
The
Group considers using derivatives where appropriate to hedge its exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates.
The purpose is to manage the currency risks arising from the operations.
It is the undertaken.
Foreign currency denominated financial assets and liabilities translated into sterling at the closing rate are as follows Group Eur  US  GBP  Other Eur  US
Other
Financial assets 19231 5213 14593 793 15628 4714 16825 275
Shortterm exposure 3682 1864 10413 754 231 1538 13075 222
Financial liabilities   2443    2957 Longterm exposure   2443    2957 3682 1864 7970 754 231 1538 10tel Company Eur  US  GBP  Other Eur  US
Other
Financial assets 8468 2404 19185 801 10027 2058 14176 395
Shortterm exposure 3405 116 15701 657 3244 2024 10117 222
Financial liabilities   2443    2957 Longterm exposure   2443    2957 3405 116 13258 657 3244 2024 7160 222 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
2017 113 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Financial instruments continued d Foreign currency risk continued
US dollar exchange rates with all other variables held constant on profit before tax and equity.
It assumes 10% change of the sterlingeuro exchange rate for the year ended
10%.
10% change is also assumed for the sterlingUS dollar exchange rate 10%.
Both of these percentages have been determined based on the average market volatility in exchange rates in the previous months.
The sensitivity is based on the rates.
If
US dollar by 10% 10% and 10% 10% respectively the impact would have been as follows Group Eur  US  Total Eur  US
Financial assets 1923 521 2444 1563 471 2034
1540 318 1858
2017 2016 Company Eur  US  Total Eur  US
Financial assets 847 240 1087 1003 206 1209
Effect on profit before
US dollar by 10% 10% and 10% 10% respectively the impact would have been as follows 2017 2016 Group Eur  US  Total Eur  US
Financial assets 1923 521 2444 1563 471 2034
1540 318 1858
Company Eur  US  Total Eur  US
Financial assets 847 240 1087 1003 206 1209
Effect on profit before tax 340 12 352 324 203 121 114 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial instruments continued e Forward contracts
Group utilises currency derivatives to hedge significant future transactions and cash flows.
The
Group is party to foreign currency forward contracts in the management of its exchange rate exposures.
The instruments purchased are primarily denominated in the currencies of the markets.
Derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting are accounted for as trading instruments and any change in their fair value determined as the marktomarket value at balance sheet date is recognised in the income statement.
No derivatives qualified for hedge accounting during the year none.
At the reporting date the total notional amount of outstanding forward foreign exchange contracts that the
January
Group and Company
Financial liabilityasset 9 36
186000.
These derivative financial instruments are not traded in active markets.
Their fair value has been determined by using valuation techniques which maximise the use of observable market data namely the contract exchange rate and the banks forward rate.
The derivatives are therefore categorised as level using the fair value hierarchy.
The
Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the stakeholders.
The
Groups primary tool in managing risk is cash flow analysis.
In addition to strategic cash flow management the modelling.
The schedule of matters reserved for
2000000.
The capital structure of the
Group comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings disclosed in notes to
Group is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.
The
Groups gearing ratio at year end is as follows Debt 2957 3471
Net cashdebt 972 456 Equity 14934 13880
Debt is defined as long and shortterm borrowings and other longterm liabilities as detailed in note
Group that are managed as capital.
Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
2017 115 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Financial instruments continued g Financial assets by category
Cash and bank balances 19795 19791
Loans and receivables 20985 17651
Total current assets 45706 43973
Cash and bank balances 14202 14986
Loans and receivables 7488 10163
Total current assets 27949 30842 h Financial liabilities by category
Financial liabilities held at fair value through profit or loss 9
Current liabilities which are not financial liabilities 30180 27743
Company
Financial liabilities held at fair value through profit or loss 9
Current liabilities which are not financial liabilities 16543 17201
Group and Company
Total longterm liabilities 2643 2957 value.
116 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sharebased payments
Company operates share option scheme under which options may be granted to certain staff of the
Company.
The scheme rules cover grants under an approved and an unapproved section of the scheme.
The vesting period is three years.
With certain exceptions options are forfeited if an employee leaves the grant.
Details of the share options outstanding during the year are as follows 2017 2016
Weighted average exercise price pence
Weighted average exercise price pence
Outstanding
Granted during the year 918290 0.0 246717 29.2
Exercised during the year 683026 30.4 30000 284.1
Exercisable at year end 1187044 105.4 403775 282.2 years.
The exercise prices of share options outstanding at year end ranged from nil pence to pence nil pence to pence.
The total charge for the year relating to employee sharebased payment plans was 493000.
In the current year options were granted on
2016.
The estimated fair values of the options granted on those dates is 458000.
Inputs
Monte
Carlo model were as follows
Weighted average share price 370p
Expected volatility 43.76%
Riskfree rate 0.12%
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the years.
Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
2017 117 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Deferred tax
17% 18% in respect of subsidiaries.
The following are the major deferred tax liabilities and assets recognised by the
Company with movements thereon during the current and prior reporting periods.
Group
FRS intangibles
Tax losses
Other
Total
At
February
2015  84 13telArising on acquisition of subsidiaries 857 30    887
Creditcharge to the income statement
At
January
Arising on acquisition of subsidiaries 35     35
Creditcharge to the income statement 94 23 2  288 357
At
January
Company
Net accelerated tax depreciation
Total
At
February
Charge to the income statement 12  12
At
January
Charge to the income statement 20  20
At
January
2017 61 85 24
Group has legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances for financial reporting purposes Group Company
Deferred tax
Group had undistributed earnings in respect of overseas subsidiaries that would be subject to overseas withholding taxes on remission to the
No liability has been recognised in respect of these earnings because the future.
At the balance sheet date the available.
118 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Employee benefits
UK the employees.
The assets of the scheme are held in individual personal pension schemes which are fully transferable if the employee leaves the
Similar schemes operate across the rest of the levels.
The amount of expense related to such pension contributions is disclosed in note costs.
The only obligation of the contributions.
The total cost charged to income of represents contributions payable to these various schemes by the
As at the balance sheet date was accrued in respect of such schemes.
Share capital
Issued and fully paid ordinary shares of pence each 522 ordinary shares of pence each  522
January the
Companys shares which reduced the nominal value of the ordinary shares to pence each.
The share split became effective on
2017.
The
Company has one class of ordinary shares which carries no right to fixed income and entitles holders to one vote per share at general meetings of the
January as part of the acquisition consideration for
Aviation
Services
Limited.
Share premium Group and
Balance at
Issue
Balance at
2017 4755 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
2017 119 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Merger reserve Group and
Balance at
2016 295
Balance at
2017 354
Cabot
Aviation
Services
Limited.
Own shares reserve Group and
Balance at
2016 1199
Disposed on exercise of options 467
January
2017 672
Air
Partner plc purchased in the market and held by the
Partner
Employee
Benefit
Trust which was established to satisfy the future exercise of options under the
The number of ordinary shares held by the
Partner
Employee
Benefit
Trust at each.
Trust in nominee capacity for two beneficiaries two of the
120 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
Acquisition of subsidiaries
December
Air
Partner plc acquired 100% of the issued share capital of
Research
Limited obtaining control of the company on that date.
Clockwork
Research
Limited is leading fatigue risk management consultant.
The acquisition of
Research
Limited adds significant specialist consulting expertise and knowledge to the
The provisional amounts recognised in respect of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are set out in the table below.
Clockwork Research
Fair values of assets acquired
Property plant and equipment 35
Deferred tax on intangible assets 35
Goodwill 333
Satisfied by Cash 469
Total consideration 669 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition
Less cash and cash equivalents acquired 107
Deferred consideration of up to is payable depending on earnings performance in the 12month periods ending
March
2018.
The directors consider it likely that the performance conditions will be met and have therefore recognised the maximum amounts payable.
No goodwill is deductible for tax purposes.
Clockwork Research Limited business.
Acquisition related costs included in
55000.
Clockwork
Research
Limited contributed revenue of and losses after tax of being the results for the period between the date of acquisition and
2017.
If
Clockwork
Research
Limited had been completed on the first day of the financial year
Group profit after tax would have been 2955000.
121 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Prior year acquisitions
August
Air
Partner plc acquired 100% of the issued share capital of
Simmons
Limited obtaining control of the company on that date.
Baines
Simmons
Limited is leading aviation safety consultant.
Baines
Simmons
Limited will enable
Partner to extend the business.
Contingent consideration of up to is payable to the vendors of
Simmons
Limited depending on the performance to
2018.
As the directors do not consider it likely that the minimum performance threshold will be met no amounts have been recognised in respect of this.
At
January the purchase price allocation was provisional the accounting in respect of the acquisition of
Simmons
Limited has since been finalised.
This resulted in adjustment to the value of intangibles recognised on acquisition an increase in customer relationships of and decreases in the value of the brand of and training materials of
Baines
Simmons
Limited are set out in the table below.
Baines Simmons
Fair values of assets acquired
Property plant and equipment 191
Intangible
Intangible
Deferred tax on intangible assets 780
Goodwill 1711
Satisfied by Cash 5650 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition
Less cash and cash equivalents acquired 350
5300 122 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Net cash inflow from operating activities Group Company Profit for the year
Discontinued operations  387  387 2847 2320 1168 5672
Dividends received    3277
Finance expense 96 81  28
1501 1328 791 640
Share option cost for period 36telDecrease in provisions 421 91 166 312
Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 4240 4270 1631 3095
Change in payables 867 3901 1067 1054 Cash generated from operations 3009 6794 2508 956
Interest
Net cash inflow from operating activities 1874 5785 1926 387 Operating lease arrangements The Group as lessee Land and buildings
Other
Other
Total
Total
Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised as costs for the period At the reporting date the
The Group as lessee Land and buildings
Other
Other
Total
Total
Within one year In the second to fifth year inclusive 1565 1411 135 108 1700 1519
1993 1987 200 179 2193 2166
Group for certain office properties motor vehicles and office equipment it uses.
Leases are negotiated in isolation dependent on the trading conditions in the countryregion concerned.
Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended
2017 123 Air Partner plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Profit for the financial year
Group financial statements do not include separate income statement for
Partner plc the parent undertaking as permitted by
Companies
Act
2006.
The
Parent
Company profit after tax for the financial year was including dividends from subsidiary companies of nil 3277000.
The
Parent
Company has no other items of comprehensive income.
Related party transactions
Company had the following transactions with related parties in the ordinary course of business during the year under review.
Trading transactions
Sales to subsidiaries  31
Amounts owed by subsidiaries at period end 3498 1505
Outstanding
Compensation of key management personnel being the Board of directors
Postemployment benefits 52 107 1037 978
January
11000.
Board of directors remuneration in accordance with
Accounting
Regulations was as follows Aggregate directors remuneration Emoluments 863 871 schemes.
Further information about the remuneration of individual directors is provided in the audited part of the
Contingent liabilities
Group had issued the following guarantees at the year end.
Description Currency
In addition the
Companys assets.
There is also contingent consideration of up to payable to the vendors of
Simmons
Limited depending on the performance to
2018.
Printed by
Communications on paper.
Park is an
Environmental
Management
System is certified to
14001.
This document is printed on
100% virgin fibre sourced from well managed responsible forests.
The pulp used in this product is bleached using an elemental chlorine free process.
Edited designed and produced by
Windsor. site
Barbara
Kinney
Hillary for
Air
Partner plc
Place
Beehive
Ring
Road
Gatwick
West
Sussex
