WALKER GREENBANK PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 WALKER GREENBANK PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CREATIVE
LIVING WALKER GREENBANK PLC IS AN INTERNATIONAL LUXURY INTERIOR FURNISHINGS GROUP Strategic Report 01 Highlights
02 Chairmans Statement
04 Chief Executives Strategic Review
06 Business Model 07 Strategy 08 Strategy in Action
18 Chief Financial Officers Review
21 Key Performance Indicators 22 Principal Risks 24 Business Units Overview
34 Board of Directors 36 Report of the Directors Statement of Directors Responsibilities
38 Directors Remuneration Report
42 Corporate Governance Statement
44 Audit Committee Report Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report
48 Consolidated Income Statement 49 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 50 Consolidated Balance Sheet 51 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 52 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 53 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report on the Company Financial Statements Company Statement of Comprehensive Income 93 Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Changes in Equity 95 Notes to the Financial Statements 109 Five Year Record 110 Shareholder Information IBC Corporate Advisers Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC AIM WGB the luxury interior furnishings group is pleased to announce its financial results for the 12 month period ended 31 January 2017.
HIGHLIGHTS
Sales up 5.2% to 92.4 million 2016 87.8 million Adjusted underlying profit before tax up 16.9% at 10.4 million 2016 8.9 million Standfast and Barracks fully recovered following flood in December 2015.
Financial results include insurance proceeds for loss of profits and net proceeds for asset replacement of 5.1 million for the period Acquisition of Clarke and Clarke in October 2016 delivered a profit contribution of 1.0 million in the first 18 weeks of ownership with performance continuing to be in line with the Boards expectations UK licensing income gaining momentum up 25.6 % in reportable currency 13.1 % in constant currency at 2.6 million with new distribution agreements for bedding in the US and China Underlying profit from operations up 19.5 % to 9.8 million 2016 8.2 million Total statutory profit from operations down 3.7% to 7.9 million 2016 8.2 million due to acquisition restructuring and reorganisation costs Adjusted earnings per share up 14.6 % at 13.67p per share 2016 11.93p per share Final dividend up 24.9% to 3.06p per share 2016 2.45p per share giving a total dividend up 24.9% at 3.61p per share 2016 2.89p per share Excludes accounting charges relating to sharebased incentives defined benefit pension charge and nonunderlying items.
Excludes acquisition costs Standfast floodrelated costs and restructuring and reorganisation costs.
GROUP REVENUE 2016 87.8M 5.2% GROUP ADJUSTED OPERATING MARGIN 11.5% 2016 10.4% 110BPS
2016 11.93p 14.6% GROUP ADJUSTED UNDERLYING PBT 2016 8.9M 16.9% CASH INFLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 2016 6.3M 56.9% DIVIDEND PER SHARE 2016 2.89p 24.9% Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
I AM PLEASED TO REPORT THAT THE GROUP CONTINUES TO MAKE GOOD PROGRESS AND HAS DELIVERED ANOTHER SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN UNDERLYING PROFITABILITY.
OVERVIEW
I am pleased to report that the Group continues to make good progress and has delivered another significant increase in underlying profitability.
This result was achieved despite the impact of the flood suffered at our fabric printing factory Standfast and Barracks in December 2015 and reflects the success of our continued strategic focus on developing our product offering international expansion market penetration lifestyle product extension and investment in manufacturing.
It also reflects an initial contribution from the acquisition in October 2016 of Clarke and Clarke a fabrics and wallcoverings business with two international brands Clarke and Clarke and Studio G.
This acquisition continues to trade in line with the Boards expectations and is expected to make a material contribution to earnings during the current financial year ending 31 January 2018.
We continue to seek further acquisitions to complement our organic growth initiatives.
We were very pleased with the support from both new and existing investors for the equity fundraising of 17.0 million as partfunding for the acquisition of Clarke and Clarke.
The adjusted underlying profit before tax for the year excluding the LTIP accounting charge and the net defined benefit charge was 10.4 million 2016 8.9 million an increase of 16.9%.
The reported financial results include a firsttime contribution from Clarke and Clarke of 1.0 million.
The Groups results were impacted by the flood in December 2015 at Standfast and Barracks though the financial impact has been mitigated by the Groups comprehensive insurance policy.
The results include 2.8 million as a result of interim insurance payments for loss of profits.
To date the Group has received a total of 16.9 million of floodrelated insurance payments in respect of damage to business assets reimbursement of cleaning costs and loss of profits.
As previously announced we will be seeking to negotiate a final settlement of the insurance claim with our insurers and anticipate that a settlement will be agreed in the first half of the current financial year.
The flood halted production at Standfast and Barracks for a period of 16 weeks thereby removing the Groups internal capacity to print fabric for its own Brands and third party customers.
Full production was restored in October 2016 and the Brands were fully restocked by the financial year end.
Total Brand sales which include Clarke and Clarke were up 12.8% during the year to 76.6 million including sales of 7.3 million from the first 18 weeks ownership of Clarke and Clarke.
Likeforlike sales are down due to the flood.
The impact of this has been mitigated by insurance reimbursement.
Excluding Clarke and Clarke total Brand sales for the year were up 2.2% compared with the same period last year to 69.3 million.
In the UK our largest market sales were down by 4.0% to 38.4 million reflecting the impact of the flood.
Overseas Brand sales were up 10.0% in reportable currency up 0.5% in constant currency.
Sales in the US the Groups second largest market were up 8.3% in reportable currency down 5.2% in constant currency.
In Western Europe our third largest A WARM WELCOME TO FIONA HOLMES MANAGING DIRECTOR FOR BRANDS Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 market Brand sales were up 22.4% in reportable currency up 7.9% in constant currency with strong sales growth in most regions.
Sales in the Rest of the World grew 0.3% in constant currency.
During the year we have continued to develop our product offering.
We have been pleased with the performance of our Woodland Walk collection from Sanderson which has been its bestselling collection for several years and the success of Morris and Co.
Pure a range of classic William Morris designs produced for the first time in neutral colours.
We are particularly pleased with licensing income of 2.6 million which was up 25.6% in reportable currency up 13.1 % in constant currency.
We are continuing to pursue the extension of our product offering through new licensing agreements to take the Companys Brands further into new lifestyle products and geographical territories.
We are excited about the future potential for this important contributor to our growth strategy.
Walker Greenbanks vertically integrated highquality UK manufacturing base comprising our Loughboroughbased wallpaper printing business Anstey Wallpaper Company and Lancasterbased fabric printing business Standfast and Barracks differentiates us from others in our industry.
The flood at Standfast and Barracks resulted in reduced sales and profitability with total Manufacturing sales down 6.7% compared with the same period last year.
The insurancefunded replacement of flooddamaged printing equipment means that the factory is now operating with the latest machinery increasing our production capacity and capabilities.
FINANCIALS
Total sales increased 5.2% to 92.4 million 2016 87.8 million including Clarke and Clarke sales of 7.3 million.
Although statutory profit from operations is down 3.7% to 7.9 million 2016 8.2 million due to acquisition restructuring and reorganisation costs the underlying profit from operations has increased 19.5% to 9.8 million 2016 8.2 million.
The total statutory profit after tax was 5.4 million 2016 5.9 million and basic adjusted earnings per share were up 14.6% after removing the LTIP accounting charge net defined benefit charge and non underlying items.
DIVIDEND
The Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 3.06p per share 2016 2.45p which will be payable on 11 August 2017 to shareholders on the register on 21 July 2017.
This brings the total dividend for the year to 3.61p per share 2016 2.89p an increase of 24.9% reflecting the Boards confidence in the future prospects and the financial strength of the Group.
Dividend per share pencetel
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank all of our management and employees for their contribution to another successful year.
I was delighted to welcome Fiona Holmes to the Walker Greenbank Board as Managing Director of Brands during the year.
Fiona brings a wealth of brand digital and multichannel retail experience to the
I would like to say a particular thank you to Fionas predecessor David Smallridge for his invaluable contribution during his 15 years of service.
I would also like to thank all of the team members at Standfast and Barracks for their huge part in bringing the factory back to full production.
During the year we continued to strengthen the operational management and organisational structure of the Group including the appointment of an MD of Manufacturing and a Group HR Director.
OUTLOOK
We began the new financial year with Standfast and Barracks back to full production capacity and our warehouse fully restocked giving us a strong platform for the year ahead.
In addition we are excited by our recent acquisition of Clarke and Clarke which marks the next step in our growth strategy.
Brand sales in the first quarter are on an improving trend though they continue to reflect the floodconstrained product launches in the spring of last year and partially constrained autumn launches.
Consequential loss of profits continue to be mitigated by our insurance policy though as we look ahead the floods impact on trading will be reduced.
In the first 12 weeks of the current financial year Brands sales were up 4.4% in reportable currency and up 0.9% in constant currency.
Brands sales exclude Clarke and Clarke which is trading in line with the Boards expectations and is an exciting addition to our product portfolio.
Sales in the year ahead are expected to benefit from the new collections launched this spring from the continued momentum of our licensing activities and from the significant contribution from Clarke and
With this backdrop we remain confident in meeting the Boards expectations for the current financial year.
Terry Stannard Nonexecutive Chairman 25 April 2017 Much of Fionas experience was gained at Marks and Spencer Group plc where she worked from 1984 to 2006 in a broad range of roles including Director of Childrens Wear and General Merchandise Procurement and as Executive Assistant to the CEO.
After more than 20 years at Marks and Spencer Fiona joined Charles Tyrwhitt as Buying Merchandising Marketing and Retail Director before joining N Brown Group plc in 2009.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CHIEF EXECUTIVES STRATEGIC REVIEW WE ARE PLEASED TO REPORT THAT IN A CHALLENGING YEAR FOR THE GROUP WE HAVE CONTINUED TO MAKE GOOD PROGRESS WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF OUR STRATEGY.
We are pleased to report that in a challenging year for the Group due to the significant business interruption suffered as a result of the flood at Standfast and Barracks in December 2015 we have continued to make good progress with the implementation of our strategy which comprises international expansion market penetration lifestyle product extension British manufacturing capability and acquisitions.
To read more about our strategy go to pages 7 to 17 THE BRANDS This segment incorporates global trading from our internationally recognised brands and includes our overseas subsidiaries in the US and
In addition to Sanderson Morris and Co Harlequin Zoffany Scion and Anthology the Brands now include Clarke and Clarke and Studio G which were acquired by the Company in October 2016.
Fiona Holmes joined the Company in October 2016 as Managing Director of Brands a role in which she has responsibility for all of the brands apart from Clarke and Clarke and Studio G which operate on a standalone basis.
Fiona is playing a key role in further developing and delivering our strategic ambitions.
Total Brands sales increased during the year despite the impact of the flood at Standfast and Barracks.
Total Brands sales increased by 12.8% compared with last year to 76.6 million.
This included an 18week contribution from Clarke and Clarke of 7.3 million.
Underlying Brands profit from operations increased by 14.3% to 9.2 million.
Excluding Clarke and Clarke total Brands sales were up 2.2% during the year at 69.3 million.
In the UK Brands sales decreased 4.0% to 38.4 million reflecting the flood along with challenging UK trading conditions.
Sales in the US grew by 8.3% in reportable currency down 5.2% in constant currency to 9.2 million and were impacted by the flood.
The US is our second largest market and is strategically important meriting our recent investment in more directly employed sales representatives and an intended investment in our second directly controlled showroom in Chicago to add to our recent investment in our flagship showroom in New York.
Brand sales in Western Europe were up 22.4% in reportable currency up 7.9% in constant currency to 8.5 million with most regions performing strongly particularly the Republic of Ireland up 7.9% in constant currency to 1.9 million.
Other highlights include sales in Scandinavia up 15.8% in constant currency to 2.5 million and growth in Eastern Europe up 3.6% in constant currency to 2.3 million.
Global licensing income is a key part of our strategy and an important developing income stream for the Group.
It extends our lifestyle offering and gives our brands greater consumer awareness both in the UK and internationally.
Income was up 25.6% in reportable currency 13.1 % in constant currency to 2.6 million.
Substantial growth has been achieved by our bedlinen and blinds partners in particular with range extensions into new product areas and new licensing agreements in the US and China.
HARLEQUIN INCORPORATING SCION AND ANTHOLOGY Harlequin remains the UKs leading midmarket contemporary brand.
Its worldwide sales reduced 1.3% to 31.3 million in reportable currency compared with the same period last year.
Sales in the UK decreased by Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 7.2% and were particularly impacted by the flood at Standfast and
In the US sales were up 5.3% in reportable currency down 8.2% in constant currency and sales in Western Europe have grown 30.6% year on year in reportable currency 14.9% in constant currency.
The Scion brand has recently celebrated its fifth anniversary and continues to grow well with its fifth collection Lokho and its first childrens collection Guess Who both having been well received.
This cutting edge accessibly priced brand continues to be a success with young aspirational and fashionaware customers.
Scion has also quickly become established as a valuable brand for licensing partners where the contemporary and graphic nature of the designs translates particularly well.
The Anthology brand launched in April 2014 also continues to show strong growth.
The range now includes five innovative collections of wallcoverings complemented by a growing range of fabrics which are designled and aspirational while remaining inherently suitable for contract applications.
ARTHUR SANDERSON and SONS INCORPORATING THE MORRIS and CO.
BRAND
Sales were up 4.7% at 22.5 million in reportable currency compared with the same period last year.
The flood at Standfast and Barracks continued to impact UK sales which saw a decline of 1.2% compared with the same period last year.
However sales in the US saw significant growth up 18.9% in reportable currency 4.1 % in constant currency and sales in Western Europe were up 16.8% in reportable currency up 3.1 % in constant currency.
Sandersons Woodland Walk collection has been the brands bestselling collection for several years now and has been universally appreciated as quintessential Sanderson.
The Morris and Co. year driven by the launch of the Pure Morris collection.
This collection interprets William Morris iconic designs in a new neutral colour palette.
This has broadened the brands appeal making it more accessible to a wider audience working equally well in both traditional and contemporary settings.
ZOFFANY
Zoffany is positioned at the upper end of the premium market.
Total sales grew by 3.5% compared with the same period last year to 12.2 million in reportable currency.
This growth has been driven by sales of recent collections which reflect the focus on design strategy and direction to position the brand for sustained growth.
Sales in the US were up 11.9% in reportable currency down 1.9% in constant currency and sales in Western Europe were up 12.8% in reportable currency down 0.4% in constant currency.
CLARKE and CLARKE Clarke and Clarkes two brands Clarke and Clarke and Studio G are at the more affordable end of the market complementing the Groups existing Brands.
Studio G launched its first collection in spring 2016 comprising of four books in a variety of modern styles of which the highlight was Lustro a book of three glamorous velvet designs which are practical competitively priced and widely appealing.
Total sales for the first 18 weeks of ownership grew by 6.8% compared with the same period last year to 7.3 million in reportable currency with performance in line with the Boards expectations.
MANUFACTURING
Our Manufacturing capabilities are one of the Groups key assets and differentiates us from our peer group.
They are an integral part of our growth strategy.
The flood at Standfast and Barracks had a significant impact on our Manufacturing activities with the result that total Manufacturing sales fell 6.7% to 32.0 million leading to a decrease in profits of 58.7% to 1.0 million.
This shortfall has been mitigated by interim insurance payments.
The factory has recovered from the flood and is back in full production and the Companys Milton Keynes warehouse was fully stocked with the Companys printed textiles by the financial year end.
The construction of flood defences to protect the Standfast and Barracks factory has also been completed.
ANSTEY WALLPAPER COMPANY Sales at Anstey our wallpaper printing business fell 9.1 % to 16.9 million.
Third party sales in the UK were down 23.3% and third party export sales were down 6.2%.
Internal sales to our own Group Brands grew by 9.7% reflecting a higher level of new product launches compared with the prior year.
Sales were impacted by the consequences of the Standfast and Barracks flood but as the weakness of sterling feeds through we see a great opportunity to grow sales overseas.
STANDFAST and BARRACKS Standfast our fabric printing factory saw a decrease in sales of 3.7% to 15.1 million as a direct result of the flood in December 2015.
Third party sales in the UK fell by 28.9% while sales to our own Group Brands increased by 17.7%.
As a result of the flood Standfast has experienced a period of significantly disrupted production and loss of stock machinery and profits.
To date we have received 16.9 million in insurance receipts covering costs plus business interruption losses and interim cash flow requirements with further business interruption reimbursements expected.
During the period two of the digital printing machines were replaced with nextgeneration digital printers with higher throughput and additional capabilities.
SUMMARY
Despite the significant challenges faced as a result of the flood in 2015 I am pleased that we have been able to continue to invest in our Brands both in the UK and internationally.
We have also made significant progress in growing our licensing income boosting our lifestyle product extension and greater consumer awareness.
We have successfully completed our first significant acquisition since 2003 with the purchase of Clarke and Clarke which will accelerate the Groups market penetration and extend our reach in the
Furthermore we have made some key senior appointments which combined with our ongoing investment in our key UK manufacturing will help to drive growth in 2017 and help to further develop and deliver our strategic objectives.
John Sach Group Chief Executive 25 April 2017 CLARKE and CLARKE ACQUISITION We are delighted to acquire Clarke and Clarke and to welcome its two brands into our Brands portfolio.
Clarke and Clarke will add significantly to our product offering customer base and US presence and also create collaborative opportunities.
Clarke and Clarke has a strong track record of growth and its acquisition will be materially enhancing for Walker Greenbank in its first full financial year.
To read more about the acquisition go to page 16 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUSINESS MODEL THE DIRECTORS PRESENT THEIR STRATEGIC REPORT ON THE GROUP FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 WALKER GREENBANK PLC IS A LUXURY INTERIOR FURNISHINGS COMPANY THAT DESIGNS MANUFACTURES AND MARKETS WALLPAPERS AND FABRICS TOGETHER WITH A WIDE RANGE OF ANCILLARY INTERIOR PRODUCTS.
The Companys brand portfolio  comprising Sanderson Morris and Co Harlequin Zoffany Scion Anthology Clarke and Clarke and Studio G spans heritage and contemporary design and its products are sold in more than 85 countries worldwide.
The Company derives significant licensing income from the use of its designs in lifestyle products such as bedlinen rugs and tableware.
DESIGN
Marketleading brands that span archive heritage and contemporary design creatively developed by talented award winning inhouse designers.
BRITISH MANUFACTURING AND LOGISTICS Vertically integrated highquality British manufacturing with a wide range of techniques and significant investment in innovation.
MARKETING
Industry benchmark marketing through significant investment in sampling books worldwide showrooms advertising and digital.
LICENSING
Our iconic designs are adored globally and through our partners are available across an extensive range of lifestyle products.
SALES CHANNELS We have a diverse global customer base covering designers retailers distributors and commercial contracts with whom we have developed deep relationships.
BUSINESS REVIEW AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS A review of the Groups activities and the strategy and information regarding the future development of the business are given in the Chief Executives Strategic Review on page 4 which when taken with the Chairmans Statement the Chief Financial Officers Review and the information provided below together form the Directors Strategic Report for the year ended 31 January 2017.
CONTEMPORARY
TRADITIONAL
MASS MARKET PREMIUM Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
OUR PURPOSE IS TO CREATE BEAUTIFUL ELEGANT AND INSPIRATIONAL INTERIORS AND WITH A BRITISH MANUFACTURING BASE WE ARE ABLE TO DIFFERENTIATE OURSELVES FROM OUR MAJOR COMPETITORS.
Rosa wallpaper from Sandersons Waterperry collection.
Lintu wallpaper from Scions Noukku collection and the Lintu rug from Scions collaboration with Brink and Campman.
INTERNATIONAL EXPANSION To focus on the distribution and marketing of our brands in the important US European and Asia Pacific markets where we see significant potential to grow our existing market share and to invest in the exciting growth opportunities in other international markets.
Page 8 MARKET PENETRATION To continue to develop our brands in the UK and internationally through the development of new product categories and extension of market positions.
Page 10 LIFESTYLE PRODUCT EXTENSION To profit from the global recognition of the Groups heritage brands Sanderson and Morris and Co and the contemporary design excellence of the Harlequin and Scion brands by broadening the product range and exploiting the considerable licensing opportunities.
Page 12 BRITISH MANUFACTURING CAPABILITY To continue to promote our British manufacturing capability through investment in innovative printing techniques and marketleading facilities that provide quality addedvalue products to our customers worldwide.
Page 14
To actively evaluate acquisition opportunities that fit synergistically with our current brand portfolio with the objective of further advancing our earnings growth.
Page 16 THE STRATEGY COMPRISES FIVE PILLARS Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION
EXPANSION
TO BUILD ON THE SUBSTANTIAL GROWTH POTENTIAL FOR THE BRANDS OVERSEAS.
Morris and Co. in the United States.
Lotus wallpaper from Harlequins Momentum 3 collection and Lotus bedding from a collaboration with Indo Count in the United States.
Brands revenue by export market % Europe 46.0% US 32.7% Far East 10.5% Middle East 4.3% Australasia 3.2% South America 1.5% Rest of the World 1.8% Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Inside the USA showroom New York.
Inside the Paris Dco Off Zoffany pop up January 2017.
We have a diverse global customer base that provides a broad and everwidening range of routes to market.
We sell in 85 international markets.
We operate through wholly owned subsidiaries in the US and France and our own sales operations in Holland and Dubai.
Elsewhere around the world we work either through agents or distributors based in the local markets.
International sales to Western Europe were particularly strong in 2016 with exceptional performance from Sweden with the Morris and Co. the Pure Morris collection.
A major focus has been on the unification of accounts which will deliver greater efficiencies to customers and make us easier to do business with.
Clarke and Clarke has an exclusive distribution agreement with Duralee one of the largest wholesale fabric distributors in the US which helps to enhance our international reach particularly in the US.
INTERNATIONAL MARKETS WE SELL IN 85 INTERNATIONAL MARKETS Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION MARKET PENETRATION DEVELOPMENT OF NEW PRODUCT CATEGORIES AND EXTENSION OF MARKET POSITIONS.
Morris and Co.
MarchApril 2017.
Pure Strawberry Thief wallpaper from Morris and Co. s Pure Morris collection.
NEW COLLECTIONS LAUNCHED DURING THE YEAR 56 Revenue mtel Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Louise Collis Designer for Harlequin experimenting with inks and techniques for the Anthozoa collection.
Diffusion design from Anthologys collection of statement wallcoverings Definition.
A selection of fabrics from Clarke and Clarkes Halcyon collection.
Our design studios are at the heart of everything we do creating inspiring design concepts for each spring and autumn selling season and developing them into beautifully presented collections of fabrics and wallpapers.
In addition to these core activities our studios work closely to ensure the best possible interpretation of our designs for the development of new product categories and markets.
The acquisition of Clarke and Clarke will accelerate the progression of the Groups market penetration strategy and complement the Groups existing brands.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION LIFESTYLE PRODUCT
BUILDING ON EXISTING RELATIONSHIPS AND FORMING NEW PARTNERSHIPS BOTH IN THE UK AND INTERNATIONAL MARKETS.
New towels featuring Scions iconic characters Mr Fox and Spike.
Floreale rug from Harlequins collaboration with Brink and Campman.
The uplift in activity both with our existing and new partners following the appointment of a new Licensing Director with dedicated staff in early 2015 began to reap its rewards in 2016.
In addition to growing our product offer and extending our brand positioning with existing partners 2016 saw the introduction of new product categories including giftware kitchenware kitchen textiles and fashion.
As well as securing product line extensions with almost all of our established partners in the UK Japan France Holland and Australia new and exciting partnerships have been forged in the US and China which will expose the brands to a high level of consumer awareness in premium retail spaces.
Beyond conventional licensing partnerships we are increasingly extending the reach of our brands through further product categories such as cushions and blinds.
LICENSING INCOME CONSTANT CURRENCY GROWTH DURING THE YEAR 13.1% Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A glorious array of bold floral cushion designs from Sanderson.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION
MANUFACTURING
CAPABILITY
A Sanderson fabric in the process of being digitally printed.
Callista wallpapers from Harlequins second collaboration with Clarissa Hulse.
Innovative printing techniques together with continuing investment in enhanced capacity capability and efficiency puts us at the forefront of our industry.
The Lancaster factory has been fully restored following the flood in December 2015.
Replacement of flooddamaged printing equipment means that the factory is now operating with the latest machinery increasing our production capacity and capabilities.
We manufacture for the industry with approximately 55% of our total production being for the Brands direct competitors.
THE UK MANUFACTURING BASE COMPRISING OF THE LOUGHBOROUGHBASED WALLPAPER PRINTING BUSINESS AND LANCASTERBASED FABRIC PRINTING BUSINESS IS A KEY ASSET THAT DIFFERENTIATES US FROM OTHERS IN OUR INDUSTRY.
Digital printed fabric sales mtel Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Scions Mr Fox fabric in the process of production.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION
CLARKE and CLARKE WILL ADD SIGNIFICANTLY TO OUR PRODUCT OFFERING CUSTOMER BASE AND OUR PRESENCE IN THE US MARKET WILL ALSO CREATE COLLABORATIVE OPPORTUNITIES.
A selection of fabrics from the Matador collection Clarke and Clarke.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A selection of Savannah plains from Clarke and Clarkes Studio G.
Founded in 1999 Clarke and Clarke is a designer and distributor of interior fabrics and wallcoverings under the brands of Clarke and Clarke and Studio G.
The brands are at the affordable end of the interior furnishings market and enhance Walker Greenbank Groups international reach particularly in the US.
Studio G is a fresh new brand which brings design provenance to unique collections that deliver trendy savvy designs and colours at an affordable price.
Lively fashionable and accessible Studio G is designed with aspirational and fashionaware customers in mind.
The products are distributed to over 90 countries and have an extensive customer base including home furnishing stores interior designers and major UK chains.
The acquisition provides revenue growth opportunities strengthens our sourcing expertise and capabilities and is materially earnings enhancing.
CLARKE and CLARKE
CONTRIBUTION
TO REVENUE 7.3m Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW FINAL DIVIDEND UP 24.9% TO 3.06P PER SHARE GIVING A TOTAL DIVIDEND UP 24.9% AT 3.61P PER SHARE.
INCOME STATEMENT The Chairmans Statement and Chief Executives Strategic Review provide an analysis of the key factors impacting revenue and operating profit.
In addition to the information on our Brands and Manufacturing divisions included in these reports the Group has included in note 3 to the accounts further information on our reporting segments.
This is the basis on which the Group presents its operating results to the Board of Directors which is considered to be the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM for the purposes of IFRS 8.
NONUNDERLYING
Statutory profit before tax of 6965000 2016 7338000 included nonunderlying charges of 2164000 2016 nil.
These charges are analysed below.
Statutory profit before tax 6965 7338 Acquisitionrelated costs 2955 Unwind of discount on contingent consideration 181 Total acquisitionrelated costs 3136 Standfast floodrelated costs 7165 3276 Standfast flood insurance reimbursements 9413 3276 Standfast net other income 2248 Restructuring and reorganisation costs 1276 Total nonunderlying charges included in profit before tax 2164 Underlying profit before tax 9129 7338 LTIP accounting charge 756 924 Net defined benefit pension charge 527 685 Adjusted profit before tax 10412 8947 Acquisitionrelated costs incurred were in respect of the acquisition of Clarke and Clarke.
These include professional fees of 1552000 amortisation of intangible assets of 342000 and a cost of 1061000 associated with the fair value adjustment recognised on the inventory as at the date of acquisition.
A charge of 181000 has been recognised in respect of the unwind of the contingent consideration payable for Clarke and Clarke.
Standfast net other income comprises of proceeds of 2780000 from the reimbursement of costs to replace impaired plant and equipment less flood defence costs of 253000 and additional insurance costs of 279000 not reimbursed.
Restructuring and reorganisation costs of 1276000 reflect the rationalisation of certain operational and support functions.
These costs mainly comprise professional fees employee severance and property costs associated with the reorganisation process.
NET OTHER INCOME The substantial flooding at Standfast and Barracks resulted in extensive stock and machinery damage as well as a period of disrupted printing resulting in lost sales revenue.
Our Brands business was also impacted by the lack of printing capacity at Standfast resulting in a loss of profits.
We have recovered the costs of machinery loss and other incremental costs together with interim business interruption losses from our insurance providers for the period to 31 January 2017.
The insurance claim in respect of losses for future financial years is ongoing.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 To date 16933000 cash has been received as interim payments from our insurers of which 518000 has been recognised and included within accruals and deferred income as at 31 January 2017.
In the Income Statement in addition to the nonunderlying net other income described above a further 2837000 has been recognised in underlying net other income which represents business interruption losses for the period to 31 January 2017.
CLARKE and CLARKE ACQUISITION The acquisition of 100% of the issued share capital of Clarke and Clarke was completed during the year for an initial cash consideration of 25000000 and a contingent consideration of up to 17500000 in aggregate payable in the Companys shares and linked to the performance of the acquired business over a fouryear period giving a total potential consideration of up to 42500000 excluding working capital adjustments.
In order to finance the initial cash consideration a placing of a total of 8947369 new ordinary shares of 1p each in the Company was also undertaken.
These shares were placed at a price of 190.0 pence per share raising gross proceeds of approximately 17000000.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLAN LTIP There was a new award of shares during the financial year under the LTIP with vesting conditions half based on Total Shareholder Return TSR with an adjusted profit before tax floor and half based on Earnings Per Share EPS growth.
There was a charge of 756000 2016 924000 in the Income Statement relating to LTIP awards.
The charge in the year is lower than last year driven by a reduction in the expected number of shares that will vest in future awards compared with the prior year.
INTEREST
The net underlying interest charge for the year was 186000 2016 179000 including amortisation of capitalised debt issue costs reflecting higher borrowings as a result of utilisation of 5000000 of the Groups existing accordion tranche of its bank facilities following the acquisition of Clarke and Clarke.
NET DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION The Group operates two defined benefit schemes in the UK for its employees.
These comprise the Walker Greenbank Pension Plan and the Abaris Holdings Limited Pension Scheme which are both closed to new members and to future service accrual from 30 June 2002 and 1 July 2005 respectively.
The charge during the year was 527000 2016 685000.
The decrease reflects an increase to the expected return on pension scheme assets.
CURRENT TAXATION There was a corporation tax charge of 1445000 2016 1410000 which has been impacted by the Clarke and Clarke transaction costs not being eligible for tax relief.
The effective tax rate has increased to 23.0% 2016 20.0% due to transaction costs and the amortisation of acquired intangible assets being nondeductible for UK corporation tax.
DEFERRED TAXATION There was a deferred tax charge of 155000 2016 56000 driven by the intangible assets recognised in respect of the Clarke and Clarke acquisition.
The Group also continues to recognise the deferred tax asset arising from the pension deficit and LTIP.
EARNINGS PER SHARE EPS Basic reported EPS for the year was 8.55p 2016 9.79p.
The Group also reports an adjusted EPS which removes the impact of the LTIP accounting charge net defined benefit pension charge and other nonunderlying items as these can fluctuate due to external factors outside the control of the Group.
A better understanding of the underlying performance of the business is given after adjusting for these items.
The adjusted basic EPS for the year was 13.67p 2016 11.93p.
OPERATING CASH FLOW AND NET DEBT The Group generated net cash inflow from operating activities during the year of 9925000 2016 6324000 driven by a reduction to the insurance reimbursement debtor compared with the prior year.
Capital expenditure was 6768000 2016 2510000 and includes investment in new nextgeneration digital printers and other equipment at Standfast and Barracks amounting to 4627000 and development costs relating to the design of new collections for the
The depreciation and amortisation charge during the period was 3191000 2016 2638000.
During the prior year there was also a property plant and equipment impairment in respect of the flood of 988000.
The defined benefit schemes triennial valuation was formally completed during the financial year.
This is based on continuing the current level of deficit repayments but has resulted in a modest extension of one year in the recovery plan.
The Group made additional payments to the pension schemes of 1374000 2016 1307000 to reduce the deficit part of the ongoing planned reduction along with 392000 2016 380000 of pension fund scheme expenses.
Income tax and national insurance of 664000 2016 967000 that arose on the vesting of an LTIP award was paid during the year.
The Group had net debt at the year end of 5309000 2016 net funds 2306000.
Average debt during the year varies due to the timing and seasonality of revenues and investment in product.
The average monthly net debt decreased by 881000 to 3040000 2016 3921000 as a result of the Group starting the financial year with net funds which reduced the need to utilise the bank facilities.
The Group utilises facilities provided by Barclays Bank PLC.
There is a term property facility of 200000 2016 600000 at the year end expiring in July 2017.
In December 2015 the Group entered into a new 12.5 million multicurrency revolving credit facility with Barclays Bank PLC for a fiveyear period and cancelled the existing receivables facilities.
The agreement also includes a 10 million accordion facility option to further increase available funds which provides substantial headroom for future growth.
There were 7500000 borrowings at the end of the year for the revolving facility 2016 nil.
Under these facilities there was borrowing headroom of 12391000 2016 15405000.
The total facilities have a current limit of 22.70 million 2016 23.10 million.
All of the Groups bank facilities remain secured by first fixed and floating charges over the Groups assets.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW
PENSION DEFICIT The pension deficit has increased this year.
The increase in liabilities is a result of a lower discount rate being applied due to a reduction in the bond rates.
The impact of these factors is shown as follows Deficit at beginning of the year 4313 Scheme expenses 392 Interest cost 2199 Expected return on plan assets 2064 Contributions 1766 Return on scheme assets 8107 Actuarial loss from the change in discount factor 12615 Experience adjustments on benefit obligation 169 Gross deficit at the end of the year 7413
During the year the Group paid a final dividend for the year ended 31 January 2016 of 2.45p per share and an interim dividend of 0.55p per share.
The Directors have recommended the payment of a final dividend of 3.06p per share 2016 2.45p which will be payable on 11 August 2017 to shareholders on the register on 21 July 2017.
This brings the total dividend for the year to 3.61p per share 2016 2.89p an increase of 24.9%.
GOING CONCERN The Directors are confident after having made appropriate enquiries that the Group and Company have adequate resources to continue trading for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK All foreign currencies are bought and sold centrally on behalf of the
Regular reviews take place of the foreign currency cash flows and unmatched exposures are covered using forward contracts and working capital exposures are hedged using currency swaps where deemed appropriate.
The Group does not trade in financial instruments and hedges are used for highly probable future cash flows and to hedge working capital exposures.
There is no hedging liability 2016 26000 liability at the end of the year in relation to US dollar forward contracts.
There is no liability 2016 nil arising from US dollar and euro swaps used to hedge working capital exposures.
CREDIT RISK The Group no longer seeks credit insurance as this is not a commercial solution to reducing credit risk.
The Board reviews the internal credit limits of all major customers and reviews the credit risk regularly.
The aging profile of trade debtors shows that payments from customers are close to terms however there have been specific expenses during the year.
The current economic environment still presents a level of risk and in addition to specific provisioning against individual receivables a provision has been required of 65000 2016 241000 which is a collective assessment of the risk against nonspecific receivables.
Mike Gant Chief Financial Officer 25 April 2017 Adjusted underlying EPS pence el Group revenue m 78.4tel Revenue growth % 5.4tel Average gearing % 11.1tel Year end gearing % 6.5tel Group adjusted underlying operating margin % 10.4tel Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS THE KPIs FOR THE BUSINESS ARE PRIMARILY FINANCIAL.
Underlying earnings adjusted for accounting charges relating to the sharebased incentives defined benefit charge and nonunderlying items less tax at the effective rate divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year.
Growth is the total current year revenue as a percentage of the previous years revenue.
Year end net debtfunds divided by total equity.
Total current year revenue.
Average net debt for the year divided by total equity.
Underlying operating profit adjusted for the accounting charge relating to the sharebased incentive plan expressed as a percentage of revenue.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS THE GROUP HAS PUT IN PLACE AN ONGOING PROCESS TO IDENTIFY MONITOR AND MANAGE THE RISKS FACED BY THE GROUP.
RISKS ARE RANKED ACCORDING TO THEIR POTENTIAL FINANCIAL IMPACT AND PROBABILITY.
THE BOARD REGULARLY REVIEW THE RISKS FACED BY THE GROUP.
The Audit Committee on behalf of the Board has reviewed the effectiveness of the internal controls and risk management and no significant failings in control were found.
There are general business risks faced by the Group that are comparable to those faced by most other businesses.
General business risks include Marketplace  changes in the economic environment weakening of the eurozone and changes in consumer discretionary spending.
Financial  availability of bank borrowing and costs of borrowing taxation and pension fund liability.
Operational  market penetration international expansion and information security IT systems and cyber risk.
In addition there are a number of more specific risks which are more relevant to Walker Greenbank and the industry in which we operate.
These risks are principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group that are material to our strategy.
EMPLOYEES
The Group is a responsible employer compliant with all relevant human resources and health and safety regulations.
The Group keeps its employees informed on matters affecting them and on the progress of the Group by way of informal meetings and consultation with employees representatives.
All Group businesses apply the principles of equal opportunity in recruitment career progression and remuneration.
Disabled persons are given full and fair consideration for employment where an appropriate vacancy occurs having regard to their particular aptitudes and abilities.
Whenever possible arrangements are made for the continuing employment of persons who have become disabled during service and for appropriate training of all disabled employees who are given equal consideration with all other employees in promotion and career development.
ENVIRONMENT
Both factories have environmental policies and actively seek to reduce their impact on the environment through responsible sourcing of raw materials responsible waste handling and recycling where economically viable and emissions monitoring in accordance with environmental permits.
Third party suppliers to the Brands are issued a set of quality and operational standards to which they are expected to adhere which includes their confirmation that they conduct their business within all applicable laws with regard to human rights pay working conditions and health and safety.
This report was approved by the Board of Directors on 25 April 2017 and signed on its behalf by John Sach Group Chief Executive VIABILITY STATEMENT The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through its bank facilities of up to 12.5 million.
The Groups forecasts taking into account the Boards future expectations of the Groups performance indicate that there is sufficient headroom within these bank facilities and the Group will continue to operate well within the covenants attaching to those facilities.
The Directors assessment has been made with reference to the resilience of the Group and its strong financial position the Groups current strategy the Boards risk appetite and the Groups principal risks and how these are managed as described in the Strategic Report.
An assessment period of three years has been chosen as it is consistent with the Boards strategic review of the Groups strategy at which the prospects of each business are discussed assumptions are made regarding entering into new markets and geographies about future growth rates of the existing businesses and potential acquisitions and about the acceptable performance of existing businesses.
Based on the results of this analysis the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period of their assessment.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RISK CHANGE CONTROLS TO MITIGATE
Trading environment The Group operates in major international markets which have experienced headwinds and there is ongoing uncertainty around the economic outlook for some markets.
Given that our products may be viewed as discretionary there is a risk that these are impacted by consumer confidence.
Change in consumer trends in interior decoration.
The Group continues to focus on strong cost control to try to ensure that it remains well positioned to deal with an uncertain environment.
Focus on product diversification through licensing opportunities as well as geographic expansion to strengthen our product offering.
The Group offers a wellbalanced diverse product range to meet the demands of different customers.
The recent acquisition of Clarke and Clarke which is at the affordable end of the market accelerates the Groups market penetration strategy.
The Group is broad based carries out consumer research and the design teams constantly monitor trends within and outside our marketplace.
Competition
The Group operates in markets that are highly competitive.
The Group has sought to differentiate itself through highquality luxury products and continues to develop new product categories and extension of market positions.
We have continued to invest in our British manufacturing sites through innovative printing techniques and marketleading factories to provide quality addedvalue products.
There is focus on product extension through global recognition of the Groups heritage brands and the contemporary design excellence broadening the product range and exploring worldwide licencing opportunities.
The Groups focus is on international expansion through the distribution and marketing of our brands in the important US European and Asia Pacific markets.
Our recent acquisition of Clarke and Clarke has helped to enhance our international reach particularly in the US.
We are continuing to make progress with consumer ecommerce development and gaining greater consumer insight.
FINANCIAL
Foreign exchange A large proportion of the Groups activities and earnings are denominated in US dollars and euros giving rise to foreign currency exposure.
The Group hedges a portion of revenue and earnings to minimise exposure to foreign exchange losses.
Increasing exchange rate volatility may have an adverse effect on balance sheet andor profit and loss account.
The recent reduction in the value of sterling and ongoing currency fluctuations as a result of Brexit will lead to higher input costs however we are taking actions to reduce some of this impact.
Our manufacturing businesses are likely to become more competitive helping exports.
OPERATIONAL
Recruitment and retention of key employees The Group is reliant upon a number of key employees to design manufacture and sell its products.
The Groups employees are its key asset.
The depth of their experience is a real benefit to the business.
In recognition of this the Group has developed programmes to help attract and retain employees and encourage personal development across all levels.
In addition the Group offers competitive remuneration packages including longterm incentive schemes designed to retain key individuals and during the year has appointed a Group HR director.
Reputation risk The Group prides itself on the high quality of its product range.
There is ongoing emphasis on high quality control throughout the various stages right from manufacturing through to delivery of the finished product and customer satisfaction.
The Group has invested in customer market research which has helped to identify further areas of improvement.
There is regular monitoring at the monthly Board meetings of the Groups image and reputation.
Acquisition risk Acquiring the wrong company or at the wrong price would impact our financial return and any benefits from the acquisition as well as causing disruption to other business activities.
Management actively evaluate acquisition opportunities that fit synergistically with our brand portfolio.
We have a rigorous preacquisition due diligence process which seeks to evaluate each opportunity.
Close monitoring of the integration of any acquisition would take place to ensure planned revenue and cost synergies are realised to enable further earnings growth.
Sound project discipline would be implemented in the event of an acquisition and would be resourced by dedicated and appropriately qualified personnel to ensure minimum disruption to our core business activities.
The recent acquisition of Clarke and Clarke was completed following a thorough due diligence process and involved a significant number of professional advisers.
Trading performance for the first 18 weeks of ownership has been in line with expectations.
Risks are further mitigated through the retention and appropriate incentivisation of acquisition targets senior management.
Where appropriate the consideration is structured to include deferred and contingent elements which are dependent on financial performance for a number of years following completion of the acquisition.
Major incident or disaster such as fireflood An incident affecting one or more of the Groups key locations could significantly impact its operations.
Business continuity and disaster recovery plans are regularly reviewed to ensure the uninterrupted operation of the Groups core business operations.
Business continuity plans are in place to manage the impact of such an event and insurance cover mitigates the financial consequences.
The segregation of the Groups central warehousing facility with two warehouses has helped to mitigate risk to stock.
Flood defence measures have been installed at the Lancaster production site.
Increased
Decreased
Unchanged Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUSINESS UNITS
THE BRANDS SEGMENT INCORPORATES GLOBAL TRADING FROM OUR INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNISED BRANDS INCLUDING OUR OVERSEAS SUBSIDIARIES IN THE US AND FRANCE.
TOTAL BRANDS SALES INCREASED BY 12.8% COMPARED WITH LAST YEAR TO 76.6 MILLION AS A RESULT OF CONTINUED INVESTMENT IN DESIGN MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION AND FROM NEW PRODUCT LAUNCHES.
Page 25 Page 28 Page 31 Page 26 Page 29 Page 32 Page 27 Page 30 Page 33 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 TIMELESSLY ELEGANT PRODUCTS THAT CELEBRATE THE ENGLISH COUNTRYSIDE Founded in 1860 and granted the Royal Warrant in 1923 Sanderson is one of the most renowned interiors brands worldwide.
Sanderson is famous for its signature style that is informed by its heritage and designed for modern living.
Combining classic countryinspired handdrawn patterns with fresh vibrant colours its products bring a timeless and easy elegance to family life.
The Woodland Walk collection launched in 2016 was a standout success with its beautifully drawn natureinspired patterns in their Potting Shed colours.
The early indicators are that the Art of the Garden collection launched in January 2017 will enjoy a similar outcome.
BEAUTIFULLY CRAFTED PRODUCTS THAT UPHOLD THE LEGACY OF WILLIAM MORRIS Steeped in history Morris and Co. founded his first company.
As custodians of the original company Morris and Co. unique Arts and Crafts heritage within its modern interpretations.
Designs are often inspired by their extensive Morris and Co. printed and woven textiles and the original wooden printing blocks.
The Pure Morris range is in perfect harmony with Morris values of craftsmanship and expertly executed patterns recognising that as an interior designer he created rooms with honesty and simplicity.
Harnessing this spirit Pure Morris present his iconic designs in a pared back neutral palette while maintaining the intricacies of the originals.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 LUXURIOUS DESIGN ARTFULLY CRAFTED TO THE HIGHEST STANDARDS Fusing luxury and art Zoffany is one of the fastest growing and respected brands in premium interiors.
Drawing on the Zoffany archive innovative technology and contemporary design the Zoffany collection of fabrics wallcoverings paints and furniture pieces are celebrated for their artistry integrity and authenticity.
In the design process all artwork is developed by hand.
Each yarn each brushstroke and each technique is meticulously considered resulting in exquisitely crafted unique fabrics and wallpapers.
Used by interior designers and architects all over the world Zoffanys designs are captivating and effortlessly sophisticated.
Early pioneers of digital printing and paperbacked fabric wallcoverings the studio push the boundaries to create products that are truly individual.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A FASHION STATEMENT FOR THE HOME By mixing innovative production techniques with ambitious uninhibited design Harlequin has earned a global reputation as a trendleading brand.
Harlequin brings together highquality collections with vivacious colours innovative textures and catwalkinspired designs.
Early indicators of the new Momentum launch for spring 2017 show that this hugely anticipated sequel will not disappoint.
First launched in 2011 Momentum is a highly successful range of collections within the Harlequin brand.
Its iconic hotelchic fabrics and wallcoverings are now firmly established as trendsetters within the premium interiors world.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FUN AND PLAYFUL BRITISH DESIGNS THAT BRING A SMILE TO THE EVERYDAY Scion is an upbeat brand for everyone with zesty colours clean Scandiinspired designs and fresh ideas for modern living.
Launched to great acclaim in spring 2012 Scion celebrates its fifth birthday in 2017 and is already a market leader.
Accessibly priced Scion collections are full of fun and have a sense of spontaneity.
From Scions very first collection Melinki the Mr Fox design took to the spotlight and quickly became the iconic design of the brand.
Today youll find Mr Fox his new friend Spike and many other Scion designs popping up on bedlinen rugs towels tableware and bathroom accessories.
CUTTINGEDGE DESIGN FOR DYNAMIC METROPOLITAN SPACES Launched in spring 2014 Anthology is the first ever Walker Greenbank brand dedicated to design products aimed at the contract market.
Fuelled by a passion for challenging convention and producing stateoftheart designs Anthology collections are designed to evoke sleek contemporary spaces.
Originally presenting a compendium of innovative wallcoverings Anthologys creative finishes subtle textures and sophisticated complexity easily caught the eye of interior designers and hotel groups worldwide.
Capitalising on this success Anthology introduced a collection of edgy urban fabrics in 2016.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Anstey Wallpaper Company is the worlds leading specialist commission printer of wallcoverings.
The business operates at the premium end of the market offering a unique combination of gravure rotary flexo surface print and hand screen printing methods.
As well as producing for the Walker Greenbank brands it also produces for many third party customers in the UK and overseas.
Anstey continues to invest in innovative techniques including a scatter machine to produce exciting new texture effects and most recently in widewidth digital printing.
Standfast and Barracks has a heritage stretching back almost 90 years and is acknowledged as a worldwide leader in its field using a variety of conventional rotary and flatbed screen printing techniques to produce beautiful prints for many of the worlds finest designled home furnishings and apparel brands.
A programme of investments in the latest CAD and printing technology has positioned Standfast at the forefront of the digital revolution in fabric printing with a rapidly expanding customer base around the world.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACQUIRED BY WALKER GREENBANK IN 2016 CLARKE and CLARKE WAS FOUNDED IN 1999 BY HUSBAND AND WIFE TEAM LEE AND EMMA CLARKE Clarke and Clarkes creative vision began with an ambition to create products that would inspire both consumers and interior designers underpinned by impeccable service.
Seventeen years on the company distributes fabrics and wallcoverings to over 90 countries and their energy and enthusiasm has certainly delivered against their ambition to provide quality innovation and excellence in customer service.
For
2017 Clarke and Clarke will launch a number of collections taking inspiration from many styles including arts and crafts English country style English cottage gardens Nordic folklore and Spanish culture augmented by a range of plains in linen and chenille.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FRESH MODERN AND STYLISH STUDIO G IS A NEW BRAND OF CONTEMPORARY FABRICS CREATED BY THE DESIGN TEAM AT CLARKE and CLARKE Designed with aspirational fashionconscious customers in mind Studio G brings their interpretation of the latest trends in the seasons key colours at an affordable accessible price without compromising on the quality that customers have come to expect from the Clarke and Clarke studio.
The latest collections for 2017 are Batik Graphica Linum and Savannah.
Caroline Geary Company Secretary Caroline joined the Group in 2000.
She is a Chartered Secretary and was appointed Company Secretary in 2012.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS Terry Stannard Nonexecutive Chairman John Sach
Group Chief Executive Officer
Fiona Holmes Managing Director  Brands Mike Gant Chief Financial Officer Fiona Goldsmith Nonexecutive Director TERMS OF
Terry joined the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in September 2007 and became Nonexecutive Chairman on 31 January 2009.
He has particular expertise in international brandbased businesses.
From a marketing background he went on to run businesses in Asia Pacific and Europe at United Biscuits plc was a divisional CEO at Hillsdown Holdings plc and CEO at Terranova Foods plc and Uniq plc.
Since 2001 he has held a wide range of nonexecutive chair and director appointments at both quoted and unquoted businesses.
John is a Chartered Management Accountant who joined the Group in 1994 as Group Financial Controller and was appointed to the Board as Group Finance Director in 1999.
He was appointed Group Chief Executive Officer in May 2004.
Fiona joined the Group in October 2016 as Managing Director of the Brands business and was appointed to the Board.
She brings a wealth of brand and multichannel retail experience gained in a broad variety of roles at Marks and Spencer plc Charles Tyrwhitt Ltd and N Brown Group plc.
Mike is a Chartered Management Accountant with an MBA from Nottingham Business School who joined the Board in 2014.
He brings a breadth of international financial and brand experience to the Company from his previous roles at Bass plc Marstons plc Geest plc Constellation Brands Inc and Britvic plc.
Fiona joined the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in December 2008.
She is a Chartered Accountant who started her career with KPMG where for nine years she focused on the retail and leisure sectors in various roles.
She then moved to First Choice Holidays plc where she became European Finance Director.
From 2004 until October 2008 she was Finance Director of Land Securities Trillium a division of Land Securities Group plc.
COMMITTEE
MEMBERSHIP
Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Nomination Committee Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Terry Stannard Nonexecutive Chairman John Sach
Group Chief Executive Officer
Fiona Holmes Managing Director  Brands Mike Gant Chief Financial Officer Fiona Goldsmith Nonexecutive Director TERMS OF
Terry joined the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in September 2007 and became Nonexecutive Chairman on 31 January 2009.
He has particular expertise in international brandbased businesses.
From a marketing background he went on to run businesses in Asia Pacific and Europe at United Biscuits plc was a divisional CEO at Hillsdown Holdings plc and CEO at Terranova Foods plc and Uniq plc.
Since 2001 he has held a wide range of nonexecutive chair and director appointments at both quoted and unquoted businesses.
John is a Chartered Management Accountant who joined the Group in 1994 as Group Financial Controller and was appointed to the Board as Group Finance Director in 1999.
He was appointed Group Chief Executive Officer in May 2004.
Fiona joined the Group in October 2016 as Managing Director of the Brands business and was appointed to the Board.
She brings a wealth of brand and multichannel retail experience gained in a broad variety of roles at Marks and Spencer plc Charles Tyrwhitt Ltd and N Brown Group plc.
Mike is a Chartered Management Accountant with an MBA from Nottingham Business School who joined the Board in 2014.
He brings a breadth of international financial and brand experience to the Company from his previous roles at Bass plc Marstons plc Geest plc Constellation Brands Inc and Britvic plc.
Fiona joined the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in December 2008.
She is a Chartered Accountant who started her career with KPMG where for nine years she focused on the retail and leisure sectors in various roles.
She then moved to First Choice Holidays plc where she became European Finance Director.
From 2004 until October 2008 she was Finance Director of Land Securities Trillium a division of Land Securities Group plc.
COMMITTEE
MEMBERSHIP
Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Nomination Committee Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS The Directors submit their Annual Report together with the audited financial statements of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings the Group for the year ended 31 January 2017.
GROUP RESULT The profit before taxation amounted to 6965000 2016 7338000 and profit after tax of 5365000 2016 5872000.
DIVIDEND
The Directors recommend payment of a final ordinary dividend of 3.06p per share amounting to 2128131 excluding dividends on shares held by the employee benefit trust which will be recognised in the financial statements for the following year 2016 2.45p per share.
Subject to shareholders approval at the Annual General Meeting AGM the final dividend is expected to be paid on 11 August 2017 to shareholders on the register at 21 July 2017.
An interim dividend of 0.55p per share was paid during the year.
GOING CONCERN The Directors are confident after having made appropriate enquiries that the Group and Company have adequate resources to continue trading for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
BUSINESS REVIEW AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS A review of the principal activities during the year and likely developments of the business is contained in the Strategic Report.
A description of the Groups exposure and management of risks is provided in the Strategic Report on pages 22 to 23.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Details of the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies are contained in the Strategic Report on page 22 and in note 2 to the financial statements.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT The Group continues to invest in its products to retain and enhance its market position.
Details of the Groups expenditure on collection design development costs are set out in note 15 of the financial statements.
DIRECTORS
The Board of Directors who served during the year ended 31 January 2017 and up to the date of reporting were as follows Terry Stannard Nonexecutive Chairman Fiona Goldsmith Nonexecutive Director John Sach
Chief Executive Officer
Mike Gant Chief Financial Officer Fiona Holmes Managing Director Brands appointed 31 October 2016 David Smallridge Managing Director Brands retired 31 January 2017 Details of the Directors service contracts are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 40 to 43 together with details of their interests in the ordinary shares of the Company.
Biographical details are set out on pages 36 and 37.
DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN MATERIAL CONTRACTS None of the Directors had any material interest in any contract during the year which was significant to the business of the Group.
DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS LIABILITY INSURANCE The Group maintains liability insurance for its Directors and officers.
PENSIONS
The Group operates defined benefit and defined contribution schemes in the UK and overseas for all qualifying employees.
Further information on the schemes and details of the valuations are given in note 23 to the consolidated financial statements.
POLITICAL DONATIONS The Group has not made any political donations 2015 nil.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING At the forthcoming AGM Fiona Holmes will stand for election following her appointment since the last AGM.
Mike Gant will retire by rotation and being eligible will offer himself for reelection.
The AGM will be held on 21 June 2017 as stated in the Notice of Meeting separately distributed to shareholders.
SHARE CAPITAL The Companys issued capital consists of 69551678 ordinary shares with a nominal value of 1p each with each share carrying the right to one vote and the right to distributions from dividends or on winding up of the Company.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of securities.
In October 2016 the Company conducted an equity placing of 8947369 new ordinary 1p shares at a price of 190.00 pence per share a discount of 10% to raise a total of 17000000 before expenses.
The proceeds from the equity placing were used to partly fund the acquisition of the Clarke and Clarke business.
Further detail is given in notes 27 and 33 of the consolidated financial statements.
DIRECTORS AUTHORITY TO ISSUE AND PURCHASE SHARES At the AGM in 2015 the Directors were authorised to allot ordinary shares up to a nominal value of 197216 and were further authorised to make market purchases of up to 5976256 of the Companys ordinary shares.
No purchases of Company shares were made during the year.
Details of shares allotted during the year are shown in note 27 to the consolidated financial statements.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDINGS As at 7 April 2017 the Company is aware of the following substantial shareholdings in its ordinary share capital.
The percentages are calculated from the 69551678 ordinary 1p shares allotted called and fully paid up.
Comparatives at 7 April 2016 are shown.
Octopus Investments 13.32% 2016 13.15% Schroder Investment Management 12.51 % 2016 11.71 % Investec Wealth and Investment 12.49% 2016 13.83% Blackrock Investment Management 6.86% 2016 6.96% Rathbones 3.37% 2016 3.59% Brown Shipley Asset Management 3.33% 2016 3.18% Royal London Asset Management 3.24% 2016 4.05% Killick and Co 3.22% 2016 2.63%.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS A resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors of the Company will be proposed at the AGM.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in the Governance section of the Annual Report confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
In the case of each Director in office at the date the Directors Report is approved so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Group and Companys auditors are unaware and they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Group and Companys auditors are aware of that information.
By order of the Board Caroline Geary Company Secretary 25 April 2017 Registered Office Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX Registered number 61880 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
INTRODUCTION
As a company listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM the Company is not required to comply with the Directors Remuneration Report requirements set out in Schedule 8 of the Large and Medium sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in August 2013 the Regulations.
However while the Company is not required to comply with the Regulations the Company has used them as guidance and voluntarily presents selected disclosures in this report where relevant and appropriate.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The members of the Remuneration Committee during the financial year were Terry Stannard Nonexecutive Chairman and Fiona Goldsmith Nonexecutive Director.
Terry Stannard is Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
There have been no changes in the composition or chairmanship of the Remuneration Committee during the year.
The Chief Executive Officer is invited to attend meetings of the Committee but no Director is involved in any decisions relating to their own remuneration.
None of the Committee has any personal financial interest other than as shareholders conflicts of interests arising from cross directorships or daytoday involvement in running the business.
The Committee is responsible for setting the framework and policy for the remuneration of the Executive Directors and designated senior managers.
It determines specific elements of their remuneration their contractual terms and where necessary compensation arrangements.
The Committee keeps itself informed of all relevant developments and best practice in the field of remuneration and seeks advice from external advisers when it considers it is appropriate.
Aon Hewitt was retained during the financial year to provide independent advice to the Committee where required.
REMUNERATION POLICY The Groups remuneration policy is designed to ensure that the remuneration packages attract motivate and retain Directors and senior managers of high calibre and to reward them for enhancing value to shareholders.
The Companys policy is that a substantial proportion of the total potential remuneration of the Executive Directors should be performance related and aligned to performance measures that benefit all shareholders and promotes the longterm success of the Company.
The performance measurement of the Executive Directors and the determination of their annual remuneration package including performance targets is undertaken by the Remuneration Committee.
There are four main elements of the remuneration package for Executive Directors and other senior management basic annual salary and benefits annual bonus payments longterm incentives and pension arrangements.
The remuneration of the Nonexecutive Directors comprises only Directors fees and is determined by the Executive Directors.
BASIC SALARY AND BENEFITS IN KIND Salary is normally reviewed annually in February or when responsibilities change.
In deciding the appropriate levels the Committee takes into account factors which it considers necessary including Group and individual performance market levels of and trends in executive remuneration and relative pay levels within the Group.
In addition to basic salary each Executive Director is provided with health care benefits.
ANNUAL PERFORMANCERELATED BONUS Each Executive Directors remuneration package includes a performancerelated bonus.
The maximum bonus potential was 100% of basic salary for the year ended 31 January 2017.
Payouts are based on profit targets and performance against individual objectives.
Details of the bonus awards for 201617 are set out on page 39.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLAN LTIP The Company operates the Walker Greenbank LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP as its primary senior executive incentive arrangement.
The LTIP was approved by shareholders at the 2015 Annual General
The LTIP seeks to motivate and retain Executive Directors and other senior management within the Group to enable them to potentially benefit from delivering abovemarket Total Shareholder Return TSR and earnings growth.
The key terms of the LTIP are as follows the LTIP has a maximum annual limit of 150% of basic salary awards are normally granted in May each year.
In 2016 the highest grant equated to a maximum of 150% of basic salary awards are normally structured as nil cost options awards only vest i. are met.
The 2017 grant will again be a threeyear measurement with the performance conditions based on a combination of TSR and EPS.
This combination rewards both earnings growth and relative stock market performance and is consistent with market practice in the FTSE AllShare.
A summary of the performance conditions attaching to outstanding awards can be found on page 40.
To the extent that these performance conditions are not met at the end of the vesting period the options will lapse.
DILUTION
All equitybased awards are subject to an overall limit on the number of new shares issued of 10% within any 10year period.
The current dilution against this limit is 2.9%.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report 2017 DIRECTORS DETAILED EMOLUMENTS Year to 31 January 2017
Annual bonus LTIP awards Benefits in kind
Cash allowance in lieu of pension contribution
Executive Directors J Sach M Gant D Smallridge   465 F Holmes from 31.10.16 71 15  1  11 98 Nonexecutive Directors T Stannard 70      70 F Goldsmith 32      3tel6 25 62 1835 Year to 31 January 2016
Annual bonus LTIP awards Benefits in kind
Cash allowance in lieu of pension contribution
Executive Directors J Sach   1167 M Gant   370 D Smallridge   886 Nonexecutive Directors T Stannard 69      69 F Goldsmith 32      32 754 388 1283 4 95  2524 The majority of the annual bonus payable was linked to achievement of operating profit with a small percentage based on achievement of personal performance objectives.
PENSIONS
John Sach is a member of the defined benefit section of the Walker Greenbank Pension Plan and the Abaris Holdings Pension Scheme.
Both schemes were closed to new entrants from April 1997 and April 1998 respectively.
Both schemes were closed to future accrual of benefits on 30 June 2002 and 30 June 2005 respectively.
John Sach David Smallridge Fiona Holmes and Mike Gant are members of a Group Flexible Retirement Plan the Plan sponsored by the Group.
Part way through the year due to HMRC changes in tax relief the Remuneration Committee agreed a cash allowance in lieu of pension contribution for those who wished to opt out of the Plan.
For the purposes of determining employer contributions to that scheme annual performancerelated bonuses are not included in the pensionable pay of the Executive Directors.
DIRECTORS CONTRACTS It is the Companys policy that Executive Directors should have contracts with an indefinite term providing for a maximum of one years notice.
In the event of early termination the Executive Directors contracts provide for compensation of an amount equal to the gross salary and benefits that they would have received during the balance of the notice period plus any bonus once declared to which they would have become entitled had contractual notice been given.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS All Nonexecutive Directors have service contracts with an indefinite term subject to a sixmonth notice provision.
Their remuneration is determined by the Board taking into account their duties and the level of fees paid to Nonexecutive Directors of similar companies.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not participate in the Companys bonus or longterm incentive schemes and no pension contributions are made in respect of them.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
CONTINUED
DIRECTORS PENSION ENTITLEMENTS Accrued annual pension benefits for John Sach at the year end were 14593 2016 14506.
DIRECTORS SHARE INTERESTS The interest of the Directors and their families in the shares of the Company at the beginning and end of the financial year were as follows 1p ordinary shares 31 January
1p ordinary shares 31 January
T Stannard 80526 70000 F Goldsmith 52894 45000 J Sach 1939820 1800877 D Smallridge 1248435 1161150 M Gant 17105 0 F Holmes 0 0 There have been no changes in the interests set out above between 31 January 2017 and 26 April 2017.
DIRECTORS LTIP AWARDS Date of grant
Maximum awards at 1 February
Exercised in year
Maximum awards at 31 January J Sach 16052013 111.5p 274897 229883 45014 0 28052014 187.0p 168827 168827 26052015 197.0p 163461 163461 01122016 204.5p 171132 171132 607185 171132 229883 45014 503420 D Smallridge 16052013 111.5p 196938 164689 32249 0 28052014 187.0p 120949 120949 26052015 197.0p 117105 39035 78070 434992 164689 71284 199019 M Gant 28052014 187.0p 152406 152406 26052015 197.0p 159898 159898 01122016 204.5p 167395 167395 312304 167395 479699 F Holmes 01122016 204.5p 103075 103075 103075 103075 The LTIP awards granted in 2013 vested on 16 May 2016.
The performance conditions attached to this award were based both on compound growth in adjusted EPS and relative TSR against a comparator group of AIM companies.
The comparator group chosen was the AIM companies ranked 101 to 200 by market capitalisation as at the day preceding the respective date of grant.
The performance of the Company over the threeyear measurement period resulted in a vesting level of 83.625% of the total awards granted.
The share price on the vesting date was 191.5p.
The performance conditions for the 2014 and 2015 awards are based both on compound growth in adjusted EPS and relative TSR against a comparator group of AIM companies.
The comparator group chosen was the AIM companies ranked 101 to 200 by market capitalisation as at the day preceding the respective date of grant and the relevant TSR measurement is on a sliding scale with no vesting until the Company reaches at least median position within the comparator group.
The performance conditions for the 2016 awards are also a mixture of compound growth in relative TSR against a comparator group of AIM companies and an EPS measurement with the EPS element based on an absolute adjusted EPS for the period ending 31 January 2019.
The comparator group chosen was the AIM companies ranked 101 to 200 by market capitalisation as at the day preceding the respective date of grant and the relevant TSR measurement is on a sliding scale with no vesting until the Company reaches at least median position within the comparator group.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The 2014 2015 and 2016 LTIP awards will vest subject to continued service and the extent to which relevant performance conditions are achieved.
Adjusted for accounting charges relating to sharebased incentives defined benefit pension charge and nonunderlying items.
The share price reached a high of 217.5p and a low of 159.5p during the financial year ended 31 January 2017.
The average share price during the financial year was 200.1p.
The share price on 1 February 2016 was 195.0p and on 31 January 2017 it was 202.5p.
Total Shareholder Return index for the ve nancial years ending 31 January 2017 Jan 11 Jul 11 Jan 12 Jul 12 Jul 16 Jan 13 Jul 13 Jan 14 Jan 15 Jul 14 Jul 15 Jul 16 Jan 17 Walker Greenbank FTSE AIM AllShare % 40tel0
This report was approved by the Directors and signed by order of the Board Caroline Geary Company Secretary 25 April 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
As a company listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM the Company is not required to issue a Corporate Governance Statement of Compliance with the principles and provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code however the Company voluntarily presents disclosures that reflect the extent of the Companys application of the Code.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
The Board supports the principles and aims of the Code.
Good governance reduces risk and adds value to our business.
Delivering growth and longterm shareholder value with effective and efficient decision making is of high importance to the Board.
THE BOARD The Company is supervised by the Board of Directors.
The Board comprises three Executive and two Nonexecutive Directors.
There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman who is responsible for the effective leadership and smooth running of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer who with the other Executive Directors is responsible for the running of the Company.
THE DIRECTORS The Board of Directors who served during the year ended 31 January 2017 and their attendance at meetings is shown in the adjacent table.
Biographical details of the current Board are given on pages 34 and 35.
BOARD PROGRAMME The Board meets at least eight times each year in accordance with its scheduled meeting calendar and the attendance by each Board member at scheduled meetings is shown in the adjacent table.
THE ROLE OF THE BOARD The Board is responsible for the longterm success of the Company.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved to the Board.
It is responsible for overall Group strategy approval of major capital expenditure projects approval of the annual and interim results annual budgets dividend policy and Board structure.
It monitors the exposure to key business risks and reviews the strategic direction of all trading subsidiaries their annual budgets their performance in relation to those budgets and their capital expenditure.
All Directors receive regular and timely information on the Groups operational and financial performance.
Relevant information is circulated to the Directors in advance of meetings.
The business reports monthly on its performance against its agreed budget and the Board reviews the monthly update on performance and any significant variances are reviewed at each meeting.
Senior executives below Board level attend Board meetings where appropriate to present business updates.
Board meetings throughout the year are held at the Companys various sites giving in particular the Nonexecutive Directors access to the manufacturing sites to gain a greater understanding of the Groups activities.
INDEPENDENT ADVICE All Directors are able to take independent professional advice in the furtherance of their duties if necessary at the Companys expense.
In addition the Directors have direct access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
BOARD COMMITTEES The Board has Remuneration Audit and Nomination committees each of which has written terms of reference which are available on the Companys website.
The Company Secretary acts as secretary to the committees.
The Board is satisfied that the committees discharged their responsibilities appropriately.
ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS OF THE BOARD AND ITS COMMITTEES
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Audit
Committee
T Stannard F Goldsmith J Sach 13 2 M Gant 13 D Smallridge 11 F Holmes 3 The Board scheduled eight meetings during the year and additional meetings were convened to deal with specific matters and approval of the financial results.
INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS The Board considers after careful review that the Nonexecutive Directors bring an independent judgement to bear.
All Nonexecutive Directors have contracts which contain sixmonth notice clauses.
These are available for inspection at the Companys registered office and at the Annual General Meeting AGM.
All Directors retire by rotation at regular intervals in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association and the principles of the Code.
The Nonexecutive Directors continue to retire for reelection at least every third year and their other time commitments are reviewed regularly.
Further details of each of the independent Directors are set out on page 34.
All Directors undergo a performance evaluation before being proposed for reelection to ensure their performance continues to be effective that where appropriate they maintain their independence and that they are demonstrating continued commitment to the role.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE The Nomination Committee is chaired by Terry Stannard Non executive Chairman and comprises Fiona Goldsmith the other Nonexecutive Director and John Sach the Chief Executive Officer.
It makes recommendations to the Board on all new Board appointments.
The Companys Articles of Association stipulate that onethird of the Directors or the nearest whole number below onethird shall retire each year.
The Company requires all Directors to submit themselves for reelection at least every three years.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Terry Stannard and comprises himself and Fiona Goldsmith.
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for making recommendations to the Board in relation to all aspects of remuneration for Executive Directors and designated senior managers.
The Remuneration Committee believes that the presence of the Chief Executive Officer is important when determining the remuneration of the other Executive Directors.
In framing its policy the Remuneration Committee takes into account any factors which it deems necessary including industry standard executive remuneration differentials between executive and employee remuneration and differentials between executives.
The remuneration of the Nonexecutive Directors is determined by the Executive Directors.
AUDIT COMMITTEE The Audit Committee is chaired by Fiona Goldsmith and comprises herself and Terry Stannard.
Although all the Committee members are considered to be appropriately experienced to fulfil their role Fiona Goldsmith is considered as having significant and relevant experience in line with the Code.
Further details of the work of the Committee is contained in the Audit Committee Chairmans report on page 46.
INTERNAL CONTROL The Board acknowledges that it is responsible for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The Board keeps its risk control procedures under constant review particularly with regard to the need to embed internal control and risk management procedures further into the operations of business both in the UK and overseas and to deal with areas of improvement which come to managements and the Boards attention.
As might be expected in a group of this size a key control procedure is the daytoday supervision of the business by the Executive Directors supported by the senior managers with responsibility for key operations.
The Executive Directors are involved in the budget setting process regularly monitor key performance indicators and review management accounts on a monthly basis noting and investigating any major variances.
All significant capital expenditure decisions are approved by the Board as a whole.
RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS
The Groups significant risks together with the relevant control and monitoring procedures are subject to regular review to enable the Board to assess the effectiveness of the system of internal control.
During the course of its reviews the Board has not identified nor been advised of any failings or weaknesses which it has determined to be significant other than disclosed in the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors.
The Groups system of internal control is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Groups systems are designed to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial information ensuring proper control over income and expenditure assets and liabilities.
The Board has considered the need for an internal audit function but because of the size and nature of its operations does not consider it necessary at the current time.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS The Group encourages twoway communications with both its institutional and private investors and responds in a timely fashion to all queries received.
The Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have regular dialogue with individual institutional investors in order to develop an understanding of their views.
Presentations are made to analysts investors and prospective investors covering the annual and interim results.
The Company website site has an Investors section giving private investors direct access to business information and Company reports.
There is also an enquiries mailbox facility.
All shareholders receive notice of the AGM at which all committee chairs will be available for questions.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Each meeting is attended by the Committees members as well as by invitation the Executive Directors and the external auditor.
A record of the meeting attendance by Committee members is set out on page 42.
During the year the Audit Committee held a private meeting with the external auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC without management being present in order to receive feedback from them.
The Committee Chairman also met with PwC separately on several occasions.
The Committee supports the Board in carrying out its responsibilities in relation to financial reporting risk management and assessing internal controls.
The need for an internal audit department is also examined on a continuing basis.
The Committee also manages the relationship with the external auditor.
The Committee undertook the following activities during the course of the year FINANCIAL REPORTING The Committee reviews the halfyear and annual financial statements and matters raised by management and the auditors.
The accounting policies used are consistent both year on year and across the Group other than as disclosed in note 1 of the financial statements.
The methods used to account for significant transactions are appropriate.
The financial statements give a true and fair view and the disclosures made are balanced and understandable.
Appropriate estimates and judgements have been used taking into account the views of the external auditor.
The appropriate accounting standards have been applied.
INTERNAL CONTROLS AND RISK MANAGEMENT There is an ongoing process to identify evaluate and manage the risks faced by the Group.
The Committee reviews this risk management process annually and the process is continually being developed and improved.
Each business unit reports monthly on key risks identified and measures that are being taken to mitigate the risk.
The Strategic Report includes further detail as to the business risks identified and actions being taken.
The Audit Committee on behalf of the Board has reviewed the effectiveness of the internal controls and risk management and no significant failings in control have been found.
Fiona Goldsmith Audit Committee Chairman
The Committee is comprised solely of independent Directors being myself as Chairman and the other Nonexecutive Director Terry Stannard.
The Board is satisfied that I have significant and relevant experience in line with the Code.
RESPONSIBILITIES
The objective of the Committee is to provide oversight and governance to the Groups financial reports its internal controls and processes in place its risk management systems and the appointment and relationship with the external auditors.
Monitor the integrity of the financial statements of the Company reviewing any significant reporting issues and judgements they contain.
Advise on the clarity of disclosure and information contained in the Annual Report and Accounts.
Ensure compliance with applicable accounting standards and review the consistency of methodology applied.
Review the adequacy and effectiveness of the internal control and risk management systems.
Oversee the relationship with the external auditors reviewing performance and advising the Board on their appointment and remuneration.
Ensure appropriate arrangements are in place for individuals to raise concerns regarding breach of conduct and legal and regulatory compliance.
TERMS OF REFERENCE Updated terms of reference were adopted by the Board in 2012.
These are available on the website.
MEETINGS
The Committee meets three times per year in April and September being the appropriate time to review the Annual Report and Accounts and the interim report respectively and also in January to review the previous year and plan for the year ahead.
At meetings the findings of the external audit are discussed and the effectiveness of the Companys system of internal controls and risk management is reviewed.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EXTERNAL AUDIT The Committee considers a number of areas when reviewing the external auditor appointment namely their performance in discharging the audit the scope of the audit and terms of engagement their independence and objectivity and their reappointment and remuneration.
The Committee reviews the objectivity and independence of the auditors when considering reappointment.
The external auditor reports to the Committee on actions taken to comply with professional and regulatory requirements and is required to rotate the lead audit partner every five years.
PwC provide a range of other services which include tax compliance and advisory services.
To ensure auditor objectivity and independence the Committee has adopted a policy on the engagement of external auditors for the provision of nonaudit services which include financial limits above which the Audit Committee must approve.
The policy is available on the website.
Any nonaudit fees above 15000 per engagement must be approved by the Chairman of the Audit Committee before the work commences.
Details of fees paid to PwC during the year are disclosed in note 8 of the financial statements.
The Committee had discussions with the external auditor on audit planning fees accounting policies audit findings and internal controls.
The effectiveness of the audit was assessed through the review of audit plans reports and conclusions and through discussions with management and the external auditor.
The Committee has confirmed it is satisfied with the independence objectivity and effectiveness of PwC and has recommended to the Board that the auditors be reappointed and there will be a resolution to this effect at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Fiona Goldsmith Audit Committee Chairman 25 April 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REPORT ON THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR OPINION In our opinion Walker Greenbank PLCs Group financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 31 January 2017 and of its profit and cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
WHAT WE HAVE AUDITED The financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report comprise the Consolidated Balance Sheet as at 31 January 2017 the Consolidated Income Statement and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year then ended the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement for the year then ended the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and applicable law.
In applying the financial reporting framework the Directors have made a number of subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates.
In making such estimates they have made assumptions and considered future events.
OPINIONS ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF WALKER GREENBANK PLC OTHER MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION ADEQUACY OF INFORMATION AND EXPLANATIONS RECEIVED Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THE AUDIT OUR RESPONSIBILITIES AND THOSE OF THE DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on page 37 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
WHAT AN AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INVOLVES We conducted our audit in accordance with ISAs UK and Ireland.
An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Groups circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Report of the Directors we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
OTHER MATTER We have reported separately on the Company financial statements of Walker Greenbank PLC for the year ended 31 January 2017.
John Minards Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors St Albans 25 April 2017 The maintenance and integrity of the Walker Greenbank PLC website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017tel
Underlying
Non underlying note 7
Underlying
Non underlying note 7
Revenue 4 92373  92373 87839  87839 Cost of sales 36223 1061 37284 35875  35875 Gross profitloss 56150 1061 55089 51964  51964 Net operating expenses Distribution and selling expenses 12421  12421 13125  13125 Administration expenses 36724 3170 39894 32044  32044 Net other income 6 2837 2248 5085 1407  1407 Profitloss from operations 48 9842 1983 7859 8202  8202 Net defined benefit pension charge 9 527  527 685  685 Finance costs 10 186 181 367 179  179 Total finance costs 713 181 894 864  864 Profitloss before tax 9129 2164 6965 7338  7338 Tax expenseincome 13 1609 9 1600 1466  1466 Profitloss for the year attributable to owners of the parent 7520 2155 5365 5872  5872 Earnings per share  Basic 14 8.55p 9.79p Earnings per share  Diluted 14 8.08p 9.52p Adjusted earnings per share  Basic 14 13.67p 11.93p Adjusted earnings per share  Diluted 14 12.92p 11.61p All of the activities of the Group are continuing operations.
The notes on pages 53 to 89 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Profit for the year 5365 5872 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurements of defined benefit pension schemes 24 4339 5037 Corporation tax credits recognised in equity 270 184 Increasereduction of deferred tax asset relating to pension scheme liability 484 1114 Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 3585 4107 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Currency translation gains 128 191 Cash flow hedge gains 26 169 Total items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss 154 22 Other comprehensive expenseincome for the year net of tax 3431 4085 Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to the owners of the parent 1934 9957 The notes on pages 53 to 89 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 15 31606 7104 Property plant and equipment 16 15845 11687 Deferred income tax assets 17  108 47451 18899 Current assets Inventories 18 30305 18104 Trade and other receivables 19 19508 19280 Cash and cash equivalents 21 1516 2902 51329 40286 Total assets 98780 59185 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 22 25347 18966 Derivative financial instruments 20  26 Borrowings 23 6825 400 Provision for other liabilities and charges 25 2652 34824 19392 Net current assets 16505 20894 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 23  196 Deferred income tax liabilities 17 2573 Retirement benefit obligation 24 7413 4313 Provision for other liabilities and charges 25 2677 12663 4509 Total liabilities 47487 23901 Net assets 51293 35284
Share capital 27 696 602 Share premium account 16390 457 Foreign currency translation reserve 428 556 Accumulated losses 5872 5700 Other reserves 40507 40481 Total equity 51293 35284 The financial statements on pages 48 to 89 were approved by the Board of Directors on 25 April 2017 and signed on its behalf by John Sach
Registered number 61880 Mike Gant
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AT 31 JANUARY 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 30 12381 7103 Interest paid 162 149 Corporation tax paid 2294 630 Net cash generated from operating activities 9925 6324 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiary net of cash acquired 33 27073 Purchase of intangible assets 15 792 548 Purchase of property plant and equipment 16 5976 1962 Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 89 Insurance proceeds relating to investing activities 2268 Net cash used in investing activities 31484 2510 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issuance of ordinary shares 16022 Debt issue costs 40 100 Repayment of term loan 31 400 400 Dividends paid to Companys shareholders 1818 1444 Net cash generated fromused in financing activities 13764 1944 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 7795 1870 Cash and cash equivalents and bank overdraft at beginning of year 2902 971 Effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash held 217 61 Cash and cash equivalents and bank overdraft at end of year 31 5110 2902 The notes on pages 53 to 89 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Attributable to owners of the parent
Share premium account
Other reserves
Total equity
Merger reserve
Balance at 1 February tel14065 43457 2950 195 365 26937 Profit for the year   5872     5872 Other comprehensive income Remeasurements of defined benefit pension schemes note 24   5037     5037 Corporation tax credits recognised in equity   184     184 Deferred tax relating to pension scheme liability   1114     1114 Currency translation differences       191 191 Cash flow hedge      169  169 Total comprehensive income   9979   169 191 9957 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity Dividends   1444     1444 Allotment of share capital 4  4 Longterm incentive plan charge   790     790 Longterm incentive plan vesting   967     967 Related tax movements on longterm incentive plan   11     11 Balance at 31 January tel5700 43457 2950 26 556 35284 Attributable to owners of the parent
Share premium account
Other reserves
Total equity
Merger reserve
Balance at 1 February tel5700 43457 2950 26 556 35284 Profit for the year   5365     5365 Other comprehensive income Remeasurements of defined benefit pension schemes note 24   4339     4339 Corporation tax credits recognised in equity   270     270 Deferred tax relating to pension scheme liability   484     484 Currency translation differences       128 128 Cash flow hedge      26  26 Total comprehensive income   1780   26 128 1934 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity Dividends   1818     1818 Allotment of share capital 94 15933 4     16023 Longterm incentive plan charge   658     658 Longterm incentive plan vesting   664     664 Related tax movements on longterm incentive plan   124     124 Balance at 31 January 2017 696 16390 5872 43457 2950  428 51293 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND GENERAL INFORMATION GENERAL INFORMATION Walker Greenbank PLC the Company and its subsidiaries together the Group is a luxury interior furnishings group whose brands include Sanderson Morris and Co Harlequin Zoffany Scion Anthology Clarke and Clarke and Studio G.
The brands are targeted at the mid to upper end of the premium market.
They have worldwide distribution including prestigious showrooms at Chelsea Harbour London and the DandD building Manhattan New York.
Half of the Brands turnover is sourced inhouse from the Groups own specialist manufacturing facilities of Standfast and Barracks the fabric printing business situated in Lancaster and Anstey Wallpaper Company situated in Loughborough.
The Manufacturing businesses produce for other interior furnishing businesses both in the UK and throughout the world.
The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock Exchange and is registered and domiciled in the UK.
The company registration number is 61880 and the address of its registered office is Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX.
BASIS OF PREPARATION The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the valuation of derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss and with the accounting policies set out below which have been consistently applied to all periods presented unless otherwise indicated.
The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through its banking facilities.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its current facilities as disclosed in note 23.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Therefore the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its consolidated financial statements.
In preparing these financial statements the Group has applied the IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the IFRS IC interpretations where the effective date is relevant to the financial year commencing on 1 February 2016 or ending 31 January 2017.
Since the Groups previous annual financial statements for the year ended 31 January 2016 the following pronouncements are now effective and have been adopted by the Group Amendment to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements on disclosure initiative  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 Amendments to IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets  Amendments relating to Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 There has been no material effect on the Groups financial statements following the introduction of the above.
The Group has not applied the following new standards amendments and interpretations for which adoption is not mandatory for the year ending 31 January 2017 andor which have not yet been endorsed by the EU.
With the exception of IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 where the Group is continuing to assess the materiality of the impact of these new standards the Group has concluded its evaluation of the impact of these pronouncements but at this stage does not expect there to be any material impact on the financial statements IFRS 9 Financial instruments  classification and measurement  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 Amendment to IAS 7 Cash flow statements on disclosure initiative  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017 In addition a number of exposure drafts of new or amended standards and interpretations have been announced by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
Until final details of these exposure drafts have been concluded by the IASB the Group is not able to evaluate the potential impact on the Group of these pronouncements.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements are disclosed in note 3.
The financial statements of the Company as an entity are prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and the Companies Act 2006 and are presented separately from the consolidated financial statements pages 92 to 108.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND GENERAL INFORMATION CONTINUED BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The consolidated financial information incorporates the financial statements of the Company and all its subsidiary undertakings made up to 31 January each year.
Subsidiaries are entities where the Company has the power to govern the financial and operating policies generally accompanying a shareholding of more than one half of the voting rights.
The existence and effect of potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are considered when assessing whether the Group controls another entity.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the Income Statement from the effective date on which control is transferred to or from the Group as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring accounting policies used into line with those used by the Group.
The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted for using the purchase method.
The cost of the acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of the assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Any acquisition costs are expensed as incurred.
The identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the Group is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration that is deemed to be an asset or liability is recognised in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement either in profit or loss or as a change to other comprehensive income.
Contingent consideration that is classified as equity is not remeasured and its subsequent settlement is accounted for within equity.
Goodwill arising on acquisition is recognised as an asset in accordance with the policy described below.
All intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated on consolidation.
Profits and losses resulting from intercompany transactions that are recognised in assets such as inventory are eliminated in full.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the assets transferred.
The Employee Benefit Trust EBT controlled by the Group is also included by consolidation.
Until shares held by the EBT vest unconditionally in and are transferred to employees the consideration paid for those shares is deducted from consolidated equity.
No gain or loss is recognised in the statement of comprehensive income on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of shares including transfers to and from treasury shares.
Dividends receivable on shares held by the EBT are excluded from the Income Statement and are excluded from amounts recognised as dividends payable by the Group.
FOREIGN CURRENCIES For the purpose of the consolidated financial statements the results and financial position are expressed in sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentation currency for the consolidated financial statements.
Transactions in foreign currencies which are those other than the functional currency of the Company are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are translated at the rate ruling at the Balance Sheet date.
All unhedged exchange differences are recognised in the Income Statement for the period within administration expenses.
The assets and liabilities of the Groups overseas subsidiaries on consolidation are translated at the rates of exchange ruling at the Balance Sheet date.
The income and expenses are translated at the weighted average rate during the period.
Differences on translation are recognised in a separate foreign currency translation reserve within equity.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS  GOODWILL Goodwill arising on acquisition of subsidiaries is initially measured at cost being the excess of the fair value of the consideration for the acquisition which includes the amount of any noncontrolling interest recognised over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the acquired entitys identifiable assets and liabilities and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is not amortised but reviewed for impairment annually any impairment is recognised immediately in the Income Statement and is not subsequently reversed.
If a significant event occurs that may affect the carrying value of goodwill an impairment review will be carried out.
No such events have occurred in the current or previous financial year.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units for the purpose of impairment testing.
The allocation is made to those cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the business combination in which the goodwill arose.
The measurement basis for goodwill is cost less accumulated impairment.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 On disposal of a subsidiary or cashgenerating unit the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS  ARTHUR SANDERSON AND WILLIAM MORRIS ARCHIVE The Arthur Sanderson and William Morris Archive comprises an historical record of unique designs that can be used at any point going forward and is regularly used to generate a significant royalty income in the business.
The Directors believe that the Archive has an indefinite useful life and is therefore not subject to amortisation.
The carrying value of this asset is reviewed annually and provision made for any impairment in the carrying value if required.
If a significant event occurs that may affect the carrying value of the Archive an additional impairment review will be carried out.
No such events have occurred in the current or previous financial year.
The measurement basis used for the Archive is historical cost less accumulated impairment.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS  SOFTWARE Acquired computer software licences are capitalised at the cost incurred to bring the asset into use including where relevant directly attributable internal costs incurred in preparing the software for operation.
The costs are amortised to their estimated residual value over their estimated useful lives which range from three to 10 years on a straightline basis.
Software amortisation commences when the asset goes into operational use by the business.
The measurement basis used for software is cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS  COLLECTION DESIGN Research expenditure is recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs incurred on development projects relating to the design of new collections are recognised as intangible assets when the following criteria are fulfilled It is technically feasible to complete the new collection so that it will be available for use or sale.
Management intends to complete the new collection and use it or sell it.
There is an ability to use or sell the new collection.
It can be demonstrated how the new collection will generate probable future economic benefits.
Adequate technical financial and other resources to complete the development and to use or sell the new collection are available.
The expenditure attributable to the new collection during its development can be reliably measured.
Any costs relating to the design of new collections that do not meet these criteria are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Any such costs recognised as an expense in previous periods are not recognised as an asset in a subsequent period.
Capitalised collection design costs are recognised as intangible assets and are amortised to their estimated residual value which is 25% of their historical cost on a straightline basis over the life of the asset and are tested for impairment if any impairment trigger events are identified in accordance with IAS 36.
The measurement basis used for collection design is cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS  BRANDS Brands acquired separately or as part of a business combination are capitalised if they meet the definition of an intangible asset and the recognition criteria are satisfied.
Strategic brands are wellknown internationallocal brands with a strong market position and an established brand name.
Strategic brands have a finite useful economic life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Brands are amortised on an individual straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the brands being 20 years.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS  CUSTOMERRELATED INTANGIBLES Customerrelated intangibles are capitalised if they meet the definition of an intangible asset and the recognition criteria are satisfied.
If the amounts are not material these are included in the brand valuation.
The relationship between brands and customerrelated intangibles is carefully considered so that brands and customerrelated intangibles are not both recognised on the basis of the same cash flows.
Customerrelated intangibles acquired as part of a business combination are valued at fair value.
Customerrelated intangibles acquired separately are measured at cost.
Customerrelated intangibles are amortised on a straightline basis over the remaining useful life of the customer relationships currently being six years.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Historical cost comprises the purchase price and costs directly incurred in bringing the asset into use.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed annually and adjusted if appropriate at each Balance Sheet date.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND GENERAL INFORMATION CONTINUED Depreciation is charged on a straightline basis on the original costs excluding freehold land after deduction of any estimated residual value.
The principal annual rates are Freehold buildings 2% Leasehold improvements Over the length of the lease Plant equipment and vehicles Between 5% and 33% Computer hardware 33% Government grants received for property plant and equipment are included within other payables and deferred revenue and released to the Income Statement over the life of the asset.
IMPAIRMENT OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Intangible assets with finite useful lives and property plant and equipment are tested for impairments if events or changes in circumstances assessed at each reporting date indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
When an impairment test is conducted the recoverable amount is assessed by reference to the higher of the value in use net present value of expected future cash flows of the relevant cashgenerating unit or the fair value less cost to sell.
Goodwill and other intangible assets with an indefinite useful life are tested for impairment at least annually.
If a cashgenerating unit is impaired provision is made to reduce the carrying amount of the related assets to their estimated recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are allocated firstly against goodwill and secondly on a pro rata basis against intangible and other assets.
Nonfinancial assets other than goodwill that suffer impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date.
INVENTORIES
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials on a firstin firstout basis and direct labour plus attributable production overheads based on a normal level of activity.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling prices less anticipated costs of disposal.
Provision is made for any slowmoving and obsolete inventory.
MARKETING MATERIALS Marketing materials consist of patterning books and other saleable marketing assets used to support the sale of the Groups products.
They are recognised at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials plus costs of production.
Net realisable value is based on estimated recoveries from customers and distributors for those pattern books expected to be sold less the anticipated cost of disposal.
As books are sold or otherwise utilised and are no longer within the control of the Group their cost is charged to the Income Statement as an expense.
An impairment allowance is made for any slowmoving and obsolete marketing materials including those expected to be given away free of charge.
The Groups policy is to classify marketing materials on the Balance Sheet within trade and other receivables.
Nonsaleable marketing materials are expensed to the Income Statement once the collection that these marketing materials relate to has been launched.
Any subsequent costs or development expenditure are expensed as incurred.
FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  MEASUREMENT BASIS Financial assets and liabilities are recognised on the date on which the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument giving rise to the asset or liability.
Financial assets and liabilities are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs and are continually reviewed for impairment going forward.
Any impairment of a financial asset is charged to the Income Statement when incurred.
Financial assets are derecognised when the Groups rights to cash inflows from the asset expire financial liabilities are derecognised when the contractual obligations are discharged cancelled or expire.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nonderivative financial assets are classified as loans and receivables according to the purpose for which the asset was acquired.
This category includes trade and other receivables  these are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise when the Group provides goods directly to a customer or advances money with no intention of trading the loan or receivable.
Subsequent to initial recognition loans and receivables are included in the Balance Sheet at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any amounts written off to reflect impairment with changes in the carrying amount recognised in the Income Statement within distribution and selling or administration expenses and cash and cash equivalents  these comprise deposits with an original maturity of three months or less with banks and financial institutions bank balances bank overdrafts with the right of offset and cash in hand.
A provision for impairment of trade and other receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables.
Significant financial difficulties of the receivable probability that the receivable will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation default or delinquency in payments and the unavailability of credit insurance at commercial rates for receivables are considered indicators that the trade receivable may be impaired.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the net present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of a provision account and the amount of the loss is recognised in the Income Statement within distribution and selling expenses.
When a trade receivable is uncollectible it is written off against the provision account for trade receivables.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against distribution and selling expenses in the Income Statement.
The Groups nonderivative financial liabilities are classified as other liabilities.
Other liabilities are financial liabilities with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise when the Group receives goods or services directly from a payable or supplier or borrows money with no intention of trading the liability.
This category includes trade and other payables  these are typically noninterest bearing and following initial recognition are included in the Balance Sheet at amortised cost using the effective interest method bank loans and overdrafts  these are initially recorded at fair value based on proceeds received net of issue costs and subsequently held at amortised cost using the effective interest method and borrowings  these are recorded initially at the fair value net of direct issue costs and are subsequently stated at amortised cost.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are accounted for in the Income Statement using the effective interest method and are included within the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the end of the reporting period.
Borrowing costs are capitalised as an increase to the carrying value of software or property plant and equipment on major projects where their impact is material.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGE ACCOUNTING  MEASUREMENT BASIS The Groups activities expose it to the financial risks of changes in exchange rates and the Group uses forward exchange rate contracts and swap exchange rate contracts to manage these exposures.
The use of derivative financial instruments is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board of Directors which provide written principles on the use of derivative financial instruments.
The Group documents at the inception of the transaction the relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items.
The Group also documents its assessment both at hedge inception and on an ongoing basis of whether the derivatives that are used in hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in fair values or cash flows of hedged items.
The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges is recognised in equity.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Income Statement within Other operating incomeexpense.
Amounts accumulated in equity are released to the Income Statement when the hedged item affects the Income Statement and are also classified in the Income Statement within Other operating incomeexpense.
Derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting under IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement are classified as financial assets or liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
They are initially recognised at fair value with fair value being remeasured at each reporting date.
The fair value of the derivative is based on the market price of comparable instruments at the Balance Sheet date.
Changes in fair value are included in the Income Statement within finance costs.
The Group has no embedded derivatives that are not closely related to the host instrument.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND GENERAL INFORMATION CONTINUED CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents represent only liquid assets with original maturity of 90 days or less.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand deposits held at call with banks and bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts that cannot be offset against other cash balances are shown within borrowings in current liabilities on the Balance Sheet.
For the purposes of the Cash Flow Statement it is the Groups policy to classify interest income and expense within cash flows from operating activities.
OFFSETTING FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the Balance Sheet when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
The legally enforceable right must not be contingent on future events and must be enforceable in the normal course of business and in the event of default insolvency or bankruptcy of the Company or the counterparty.
LEASES
Leases are classified as finance leases where the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the Group.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Operating lease rentals are charged to the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Rentfree periods receivable on entering an operating lease are released on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS Payments to defined contribution retirement benefit schemes are charged as an expense as they fall due.
For defined benefit retirement schemes the funding of benefits is determined using the projected unit credit method with full actuarial valuations being carried out triennially.
The retirement benefit obligation recognised in the Balance Sheet represents the present value of the defined benefit obligation as adjusted for unrecognised service cost and as reduced by the fair value of the scheme assets.
Any asset resulting from this calculation is limited to past service cost plus present value of available refunds and reductions in future contributions to the plan.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by qualified independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the future cash outflows using interest rates of high quality corporate bonds that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension liability.
Scheme expenses met by the Group expected returns on plan assets and interest on pension scheme liabilities are classified within Net defined benefit pension charge within the Income Statement as the scheme is now closed to future accruals.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in full in the period in which they occur.
They are recognised outside the Income Statement and presented in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Past service costs are recognised immediately to the extent that the benefits are already vested and otherwise are amortised on a straightline basis over the average period until the benefits become vested.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  SHAREBASED PAYMENTS UNDER LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS LTIP The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees which must be measured at fair value and recognised as an expense in the Income Statement with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair values of these payments are measured at the date of grant taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the awards are granted.
The fair value is recognised over the period during which employees become conditionally entitled to the awards subject to the Groups estimate of the number of awards which will lapse either due to employees leaving the Group prior to vesting or due to nonmarket based performance conditions not being met.
The total amount recognised in the Income Statement as an expense is adjusted to reflect the actual number of awards that vest.
National insurance contributions related to the awards are recognised as an expense in the Income Statement with a corresponding liability on the Balance Sheet.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  SHORTTERM BONUS PLANS The Group recognises a liability and an expense for bonuses where contractually obliged or where there is a past practice that has created a constructive obligation.
SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Dividend distribution is set by the Board on a regular basis so long as sufficient funds are available.
SHARE PREMIUM Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
TREASURY SHARES Consideration paid including any directly attributable incremental costs net of income taxes on the purchase of the Companys equity share capital treasury shares is deducted from equity attributable to the Companys equity holders until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently reissued any consideration received net of any directly attributable incremental transaction costs and the related income tax effects is included in equity attributable to the Companys equity shareholders.
The EBT is treated as an agent of the Group and as such EBT transactions are treated as being those of the Group.
REVENUE
The Group revenue is measured at fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts recoverable by the Group for goods and services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Revenue comprises Sales of goods  sales of goods are recognised when the Group has transferred to the buyer the significant risks and rewards of ownership which is usually at the point of delivery of the goods.
Royalty revenue  royalties are received from licence holders under the terms of various agreements and are recognised on an accruals basis in accordance with the substance of the relevant agreement.
Deposits received from customers in advance of the delivery of goods or services are recognised as deferred revenue.
Amounts receivable from customers representing the recovery of expenses incurred by the Group for design and setup costs delivery and marketing materials are not considered to be revenue and are credited to the relevant expense within the Income Statement.
NONUNDERLYING ITEMS Items that are both material and whose nature is sufficient to warrant separate disclosure and identification are disclosed within the financial statements and classified within their relevant category in the Income Statement as nonunderlying.
Where some or all of the expenditure required to settle a provision is expected to be reimbursed by another party the reimbursement shall be recognised when and only when it is virtually certain that reimbursement will be received if the entity settles the obligation.
The reimbursement shall be treated as a separate asset and recognised as an other receivable.
TAXATION INCLUDING DEFERRED INCOME TAX The tax expense represents the sum of the current tax and deferred tax charges or credits.
Current tax is based on the taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from the net profit as reported in the Income Statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the Balance Sheet date.
Current tax includes withholding taxes from sales and licensing income in overseas territories.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the tax profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND GENERAL INFORMATION CONTINUED IAS 12 Income taxes requires that the measurement of deferred tax should have regard to the tax consequences that would follow from the manner of expected recovery or settlement at the Balance Sheet date of the carrying amount of its assets and liabilities.
In calculating its deferred tax liability the Groups policy is to regard the depreciable amount of the carrying value of its property plant and equipment to be recovered through continuing use in the business unless included within assets held for resale where the policy is to regard the carrying amount as being recoverable through sale.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each Balance Sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Income Statement except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax relating to retirement benefit obligations is also recognised in equity where the tax relief arises from contributions paid to fund deficits arising in previous periods that were recognised in equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities and there is an intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
SEGMENTAL REPORTING The Group is a designer manufacturer and distributor of furnishings fabrics and wallpaper and manages its operations as two reportable segments which are Brands and Manufacturing.
Reportable segments consist of one or more operating segments.
Aggregation of operating segments into reportable segments occurs when aggregation criteria as laid down in IFRS 8 Operating Segments are satisfied including similar economic characteristics or when operating segments are less than the quantitative limits as laid down in IFRS 8.
After applying aggregation segmental information is disclosed in a manner consistent with the internal reporting to the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM.
The Group considers its CODM to be the Board of Directors who are responsible for the allocation of resources and assessing performance of the operating segments.
INTEREST RECEIVED Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and at the effective interest rate applicable.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks market risk including foreign exchange risk and interest rate risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments to hedge certain risk exposures.
Risk management is carried out at Board level under policies approved by the Board of Directors.
Executive Directors identify evaluate and where appropriate hedge financial risks in close cooperation with the Groups operating units.
A FOREIGN EXCHANGE RISK The Group operates internationally and is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from various currency exposures primarily with respect to the US dollar and the euro.
Foreign exchange risk arises when future commercial transactions or recognised assets or liabilities are denominated in a currency that is not the entitys functional currency.
The Groups policy is where possible to allow the Groups entities to settle liabilities in their functional currency with the cash generated from their operations in that currency.
Where the Groups entities have liabilities denominated in a currency other than their functional currency and have insufficient reserves of that currency to settle them cash already denominated in that currency will where possible be transferred from elsewhere in the Group.
To manage the foreign exchange risk arising on future transactions it is the Groups policy to enter into forward currency contracts to hedge the exposure.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 For the year ended 31 January 2017 the average sterling to US dollar translation rate applied by the Group including the impact of hedging contracts was 1 US1.35.
If the rate had been 1 US1.25 with all other variables held constant profit before tax would have been higher by 314000.
If the rate had been 1 US1.45 with all other variables held constant profit before tax would have been lower by 270000.
For the year ended 31 January 2017 the average sterling to euro translation rate applied by the Group including the impact of hedging contracts was 1 1.13.
If the rate had been 1 1.03 with all other variables held constant profit before tax would have been lower by 60000.
If the rate had been 1 1.23 with all other variables held constant profit before tax would have been higher by 50000.
The sensitivities tested above reflect movements in the foreign currency exchange rates over the financial year.
The sensitivity of movements in other currencies is not considered material to the performance of the Group.
B INTEREST RATE RISK As the Group has no significant interestbearing assets its revenue and cash generated from operations are substantially independent of changes in market interest rates.
The Groups interest rate risk arises from borrowings.
Borrowings issued at variable rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk.
The
Groups borrowings at variable rate are denominated in either UK pounds or euros.
The Group regularly analyses its interest rate exposure calculating the impact on profit and loss of a defined interest rate shift.
Based on the calculations the Board considers refinancing renewal of existing positions alternative financing and hedging.
The Group has not felt there has been a requirement during the current or previous financial year to enter into any of these options.
In December 2015 the Group entered into a new multicurrency revolving credit facility with Barclays Bank PLC and cancelled the existing receivables facility.
Variable interest rates were negotiated on all the loans.
The Board continues to monitor the interest rates monthly.
For the year ended 31 January 2017 had the benchmark interest rate levels been 0.5% higherlower than the actual experience with all other variables held constant the profit before tax of the Group would have been lowerhigher by 27000 due to the change in interest rate expense on variable rate borrowings.
The 0.5% sensitivity is deemed a reasonable sensitivity analysis based on expected movements in the base rate for the next financial year.
C CREDIT RISK Credit risk arises from the Groups trade receivables cash held with banks and derivative financial instruments.
It is the risk that the counterparty fails to discharge its obligation in respect of the instrument.
Cash at bank and derivative financial instruments are predominantly held with the Groups major relationship bank Barclays Bank PLC and the Group considers this credit risk to be minimal.
The Group does not have any significant credit risk exposure to any single company or group of companies within trade receivables as the nature of the Groups operations mean that trade receivables consist of a large number of customers spread across diverse industries and geographical areas.
Prior to accepting new customers an independent credit check is obtained.
Based on this information individual credit limits and payment terms are established.
If no independent credit ratings are available customers are asked to pay on a proforma basis until creditworthiness can be established.
The utilisation of credit limits is regularly monitored.
Credit limits may only be exceeded with the authorisation from key management this is dependent on the amount expected to exceed the limit and the Groups trading history with that customer.
There is no difference between the carrying amount and the maximum credit risk exposure.
No collateral is held as security by the Group.
D LIQUIDITY RISK Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital and the finance charges and principal repayments on its debt instruments.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting its financial obligations as they fall due.
The maturity profile of the Groups debt and other financial liabilities is disclosed in note 23.
During the year the Group had facilities with Barclays Bank PLC which are disclosed in note 23.
Management monitors rolling forecasts of the Groups cash and loan facility utilisation on a monthly basis.
The Group ensures that it has adequate facilities available to cover both its shortterm and mediumterm commitments and complies with bank covenants.
In addition the Groups liquidity management policy is to project cash flows in major currencies and consider the level of liquid assets necessary to meet these liabilities as they fall due.
Surplus cash held over and above the balance required for working capital requirements is transferred to the Group treasury and held in interestbearing accounts.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
E CAPITAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to provide an adequate return for shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk.
The Group sets the amount of capital in proportion to risk.
The Group manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares buy back issued shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The Group monitors capital on the basis of the average net debt to adjusted capital ratio or gearing ratio.
The ratio is calculated as average net debt divided by adjusted capital.
Average net debt is calculated as the total debt less cash and cash equivalents during the year.
Adjusted capital comprises all components of equity i. equity relating to cash flow hedges and forward currency contracts.
During the year to 31 January 2017 the Groups strategy which was unchanged from the previous year was to reduce the average gearing ratio.
The average gearing ratios for 2017 and 2016 were as follows Year ended 31 January Average net debt 3040 3921 Total equity 51293 35284 Add amounts recognised directly in equity relating to currency contracts  26 Adjusted capital 51293 35310 Average net debt to adjusted capital ratio 5.9% 11.1% Year end net debtfunds to adjusted capital ratio 10.4% 6.5% The Group considers the average net debt to adjusted capital ratio to be appropriate at this time but it will continue to reduce the pension deficit by cash generated from operations and will also invest within the Group through capital expenditure and working capital.
The gearing ratio at the year end is higher than the average gearing ratio due to the seasonal nature of trading in the months of December and
F FAIR VALUE ESTIMATION The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is determined using quoted forward exchange rates at the Balance Sheet date provided by relationship banks.
Under the revisions to IFRS 7 these amounts are classified within level two of the fair value hierarchy.
The carrying value less impairment provision of trade receivables and payables and cash and cash equivalents approximate their fair values.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND JUDGEMENTS The Group makes estimates and assumptions concerning future events.
The resulting accounting estimates will seldom precisely equal the related actual results.
The Group applies its best endeavours in setting accounting estimates and uses historical experience and other factors including input from experienced and specialist management.
Estimates and assumptions are periodically reevaluated and the resulting accounting balances updated as new information including actual outcomes become apparent.
The estimates and judgements that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
A RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS The Group recognises its obligations to employee retirement benefits.
The quantification of these obligations is subject to significant estimates and assumptions regarding life expectancy discount and inflation rates wage and salary changes the rate of increase in pension payments and the market values of equities bonds and other pension assets.
In making these assumptions the Group takes advice from a qualified actuary about which assumptions reflect the nature of the Groups obligations to employee retirement benefits.
The assumptions are regularly reviewed to ensure their appropriateness.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Group determines the appropriate discount rate at the end of each year.
This is the interest rate that should be used to determine the present value of estimated future cash outflows expected to be required to settle pension obligations.
In determining the appropriate discount rate the Group considers the interest rates of highquality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related pension liability.
Details of the estimates and assumptions applied and carrying amounts of retirement benefit obligations and pension assets are set out in note 24.
B IMPAIRMENT OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS The Group tests annually whether goodwill or its indefinite life intangible asset has suffered any impairment in accordance with its accounting policy.
Other intangibles and property plant and equipment are also reviewed whenever impairment triggers are apparent.
The recoverable amounts of cashgenerating units have been determined based on value in use VIU calculations.
These calculations require use of estimates of future sales margins and other operating and administration expenses and of discount rates.
Further disclosures relating to the estimates and assumptions applied and carrying amounts of the nonfinancial assets are set out in notes 15 and 16.
The Group makes provision for impairment in the carrying amount of its inventories and marketing materials.
The nature of the Groups products are exposed to changes in taste and attitudes from time to time which can affect the demand for those products.
The Group has skilled and experienced management who utilise historical sales information and exercise their judgement in making estimates about the extent of provisions necessary based on the realisable value of inventory and expected future benefit to the Group of marketing materials taking into account the estimated price and volume of future sales or usage less the further costs of sale and holding costs.
Further disclosures relating to the effect on the Income Statement of the establishment and reversal of such provisions against inventory are included in note 8.
Details of the carrying amount of inventories are disclosed in note 18 and of marketing materials in note 19.
The carrying values of the nonfinancial assets are not considered to be sensitive due to the nature of the assets.
C DEFERRED TAX RECOGNITION The Group considers it appropriate to recognise at the Balance Sheet date deferred tax assets resulting from historical trading losses and other temporary differences including pension deficits and the impact of awards under the longterm incentive plan.
The amount of deferred tax recognised is based on estimates of the timing and amount of future taxable profits of companies within the Group which in turn relies upon estimates of future operating profits and the occurrence timing and tax treatment of significant items of income and expenditure including contributions to pension schemes and the vesting of LTIP payment awards.
Further disclosures relating to the effect on the Income Statement of the recognition of deferred tax assets are included in note 13 and the amount of deferred tax asset recognised and other relevant disclosures are included in note 17.
The Group considers the sensitivity on deferred tax recognition to be based on profits generated by the Group and tax rates substantively enacted.
There has been no material impact on sensitivity in the current or previous financial year.
D LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLAN PAYMENT AWARDS The Group has granted awards to Executive Directors and senior management which include vesting conditions relating to the future financial performance of the Group as measured by adjusted profit before tax PBT and the relative performance of the Groups Total Shareholder Return TSR against comparator companies.
The fair value of the awards granted is charged against the Income Statement over the vesting period the amount of that charge including the national insurance component of the charge is dependent upon the Groups estimates of how many awards will ultimately vest which is linked directly to its estimates regarding future PBT and TSR achievement.
Further disclosures relating to performance targets are included in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 38 to 41 and in note 27.
E BUSINESS COMBINATIONS The Group applies judgement in determining whether a transaction is a business combination which includes consideration as to whether the Group has acquired a business or a group of assets.
For business combinations the Group estimates the fair value of the consideration transferred which includes assumptions about the future performance of the business acquired and an appropriate discount rate to determine the fair value of any contingent consideration.
There is some sensitivity in determining this accounting estimate as there is a range of outcomes.
If the EBITDA of the acquired business increases by 10% then the contingent consideration would be 127000 higher and if it decreased by 10% it would be 127000 lower.
Judgement is also applied in determining whether any future payments should be classified as contingent consideration or as remuneration for future services.
The Group estimates the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the business combination including any separately identifiable intangible assets and considering contingent liabilities.
These estimates also require inputs and assumptions including future earnings customer attrition rates and discount rates.
The Group engages external experts to support the valuation process where appropriate.
The fair value of the contingent consideration recognised in business combinations is reassessed at each reporting date using updated inputs and assumptions based on the latest financial forecasts for the relevant business.
Judgement is applied as to whether changes should be applied at the acquisition date or as postacquisition changes.
Fair value movements and the unwinding of the discounting is recognised within finance costs in the Income Statement.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS The Group is a designer manufacturer and distributor of luxury interior furnishings fabrics and wallpaper.
The reportable segments of the Group are aggregated as follows Brands  comprising the design marketing sales and distribution and licensing activities of Sanderson Morris and Co Harlequin Zoffany Anthology Scion Clarke and Clarke and Studio G brands operated from the UK and its foreign subsidiaries in the US and France.
Manufacturing  comprising the wallcovering and printed fabric manufacturing businesses operated by Anstey and Standfast respectively.
This is the basis on which the Group presents its operating results to the Board of Directors which is considered to be the CODM for the purposes of IFRS 8.
Additional revenueonly data is also reported to the CODM and is disclosed on the basis explained below.
Other Groupwide activities and expenses predominantly related to corporate head office costs defined benefit pension costs longterm incentive plan expenses taxation and eliminations of intersegment items are presented within Eliminations and unallocated.
A PRINCIPAL MEASURES OF PROFIT AND LOSS  INCOME STATEMENT SEGMENTAL INFORMATION Year ended 31 January 2017
Manufacturing
Eliminations and unallocated
UK revenue 42531 12227  54758 International revenue 31552 3497  35049 Licence revenue 2566   2566 Revenue  External 76649 15724  92373 Revenue  Internal  16320 16320 Total revenue 76649 32044 16320 92373 Profitloss from operations 9239 1026 2406 7859 Net defined benefit pension charge   527 527 Net finance costs   367 367 Profitloss before tax 9239 1026 3300 6965 Tax charge   1600 1600 Profitloss for the year 9239 1026 4900 5365 Year ended 31 January 2016
Manufacturing
Eliminations and unallocated
UK revenue 39971 16528  56499 International revenue 25888 3409  29297 Licence revenue 2043   2043 Revenue  External 67902 19937  87839 Revenue  Internal  14392 14392 Total revenue 67902 34329 14392 87839 Profitloss from operations 8080 2482 2360 8202 Net defined benefit pension charge   685 685 Net finance costs   179 179 Profitloss before tax 8080 2482 3224 7338 Tax charge   1466 1466 Profitloss for the year 8080 2482 4690 5872 The segmental Income Statement disclosures are measured in accordance with the Groups accounting policies as set out in note 1.
Intersegment revenue earned by Manufacturing from sales to Brands is determined on normal commercial trading terms as if Brands were any other third party customer.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 All defined benefit pension costs and LTIP expenses are recognised for internal reporting to the CODM as part of Groupwide activities and are included within Eliminations and unallocated above.
Other costs such as Group insurance rent and auditors remuneration which are incurred on a Groupwide basis are recharged by the head office to segments on a reasonable and consistent basis for all periods presented and are included within segment results above.
Business interruption reimbursements to cover loss of profits of 2837000 2016 1407000 are included within Eliminations and unallocated.
B ADDITIONAL SEGMENTAL REVENUE INFORMATION The segmental revenues of the Group are reported to the CODM in more detail.
One of the analysis presented is revenue by export market for Brands.
Brands international revenue by export market Western Europe 9594 6982 Scandinavia 2557 1959 Eastern Europe 2374 2105 Europe Total 14525 11046 Middle East 1345 1161 Far East 3308 3207 US 10310 8459 South America 458 394 Australasia 1004 1031 Other 602 590 31552 25888 Revenue of the Brands reportable segment  revenue from operations in all territories where the sale is sourced from the Brands operations together with contract and licence revenue Brand revenue analysis Harlequin incorporating Anthology and Scion 31270 31676 Sanderson incorporating Morris and Co 22516 21503 Zoffany 12162 11749 Clarke and Clarke incorporating Studio G 7267 Other brands 868 931 Licensing 2566 2043 76649 67902 Revenue of the Manufacturing reportable segment  including revenue from internal sales to the Groups Brands Manufacturing revenue analysis Standfast 15097 15681 Anstey 16947 18648 32044 34329 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS CONTINUED C OTHER INCOME STATEMENT SEGMENTAL INFORMATION The following additional items are included in the measures of profit and loss reported to the CODM and are included within a above Year ended 31 January 2017
Manufacturing
Eliminations and unallocated
Depreciation 1070 1093 9 2172 Amortisation 666 11 342 1019 Impairment losses  trade receivables 45 4  49 Reversal of impairment losses  trade receivables 160   160 Impairment losses  inventory 1366 189  1555 Reversal of impairment of inventory  32  32 LTIP payment charges   756 756 Year ended 31 January 2016
Manufacturing
Eliminations and unallocated
Depreciation 979 1046 11 2036 Amortisation 595 7  602 Property plant and equipment impairment in respect of flood at Standfast  988  988 Impairment losses  trade receivables 67 15  82 Reversal of impairment losses  trade receivables  10  10 Impairment losses  inventory 873 147  1020 Inventory write off in respect of Standfast flood  1469  1469 Reversal of impairment of inventory  40  40 LTIP payment charges   924 924 D PRINCIPAL MEASURES OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  BALANCE SHEET SEGMENTAL INFORMATION Segment assets consist primarily of goodwill intangible assets property plant and equipment trade and other receivables including intersegment receivables and inventories.
Segment liabilities consist primarily of trade and other payables including intersegment payables.
Unallocated assets and liabilities consist primarily of cash deferred tax assets borrowings derivative financial instruments retirement benefit obligations and elimination of intersegment balances.
Segment assets and liabilities and unallocated assets and liabilities are measured in accordance with the Groups accounting policies as set out in note 1.
Year ended 31 January 2017
Manufacturing
Eliminations and unallocated
Assets 47925 20996 29859 98780 Liabilities 15773 13333 18381 47487 Total net assets 32152 7663 11478 51293 Capital expenditure  Intangible assets 774 18  792 Capital expenditure  Property plant and equipment 918 4658 400 5976 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Year ended 31 January 2016
Manufacturing
Eliminations and unallocated
Assets 34333 15715 9137 59185 Liabilities 12954 6209 4738 23901 Total net assets 21379 9506 4399 35284 Capital expenditure  Intangible assets 529 19  548 Capital expenditure  Property plant and equipment 879 1083  1962 E ADDITIONAL ENTITYWIDE DISCLOSURES Revenue by geographical location of customers United Kingdom 56064 57509 Continental Europe 15917 12551 US 12237 10099 Rest of the World 8155 7680 92373 87839 No single customer of the Group accounts for 10% or more of total revenue.
Noncurrent assets by geographical territory United Kingdom 46584 18084 Continental Europe 218 202 47451 18899 Noncurrent assets included above comprise intangible assets and property plant and equipment.
A ANALYSIS OF REVENUE BY CATEGORY Sale of goods 89807 85796 Licence royalty income 2566 2043 92373 87839 B ANALYSIS OF EXPENSE BY NATURE Changes in inventories of finished goods and work in progress 5858 4256 Raw materials and consumables used 32927 24920 Employee benefit expense 26065 24824 Depreciation and amortisation charges 2849 2638 Transportation expenses 2180 1949 Advertising costs 2138 1383 Other selling costs 5355 7070 Establishment costs 4345 4478 Operating lease payments 2618 2501 Repairs and maintenance 1010 1229 Other expenses 11739 5796 Total cost of sales distribution and selling costs and administration expenses included within underlying results 85368 81044 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NET OTHER INCOME Net other income arising as a result of the flood at Standfast the Groups fabric printing factory in December 2015 is 2837000 2016 1407000 and represents business interruption reimbursements to cover loss of profits.
NONSTATUTORY PROFIT MEASURES UNDERLYING PROFIT MEASURES The Group seeks to present a measure of underlying performance which is not impacted by material nonrecurring items or items considered nonoperational in nature.
This measure of profit is described as underlying and is used by management to measure and monitor performance.
The excluded items are referred to as nonunderlying items.
NONUNDERLYING ITEMS The nonunderlying items included in profit before tax are as follows
Transaction costs a 1552 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets b 342 Unwind of the fair value uplift adjustment on inventory 33c 1061 Unwind of discount on contingent consideration c 181 ii Standfast flood Incremental costs inventory loss and property plant and equipment impairments 7165 3276 Insurance reimbursements 9413 3276 d 2248 iii Restructuring and reorganisation costs e 1276 Total nonunderlying items included in profit before tax 2164 Tax on nonunderlying items 9 Total impact of nonunderlying items on profit after tax 2155 Costs detailed in a  c below relate to costs incurred in the period to 31 January 2017 on the acquisition of Clarke and Clarke which completed on 31 October 2016 see note 33. a Transaction costs comprise legal and professional fees in relation to the acquisition.
In addition share issue costs of 978000 relating to the acquisition have been offset against the share premium account. b Details of acquired intangible assets are included in note 33. c A charge of 181000 2016 nil has been recognised in respect of unwind of the contingent consideration on acquisition note 33. and equipment of 2780000 less flood defence costs of 253000 and additional insurance costs of 279000. support functions.
These costs mainly comprise professional fees employee severance and property costs associated with the reorganisation process.
In addition to the nonunderlying items detailed above an adjustment is made for the LTIP accounting charge and net defined benefit pension charge in arriving at the Adjusted profit and Adjusted earnings per share.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 GROUP PROFIT FROM OPERATIONS Group profit from operations is stated after chargingcrediting Depreciation of property plant and equipment 2172 2036 Property plant and equipment impairment in respect of flood at Standfast  988 Amortisation of intangibles 677 602 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 342 Cost of inventories recognised as expense in cost of sales 27069 27149 Unwind of the fair value uplift adjustment on inventory 1061 Inventory write off in respect of Standfast flood  1469 Impairment of inventories 1555 1020 Reversal of impairment of inventories 32 40 Impairment of trade receivables 49 82 Reversal of impairment of trade receivables 160 10 Net foreign exchange gainslosses 81 177 Operating lease rentals Hire of motor vehicles and plant and machinery 564 552 Land and buildings 2054 1955 Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the parent Company and consolidated financial statements 58 60 Fees payable to the Companys auditors for other services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 148 100 Other accounting services 35 10 Advisory services 67 18 Taxation services 40 20 Corporate finance services 536 NET DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION CHARGE Expected return on pension scheme assets 2064 1829 Interest on pension scheme liabilities 2199 2134 Scheme expenses met by the Group 392 380 Net charge note 24 527 685 FINANCE COSTS Interest income Interest received on bank deposits 1 Interest expense Interest payable on bank borrowings 161 152 Amortisation of issue costs of bank loans 26 27 Total finance costs 187 179 Net finance costs excluding nonunderlying items 186 179 Unwind of discount on contingent consideration note 7 181 Net finance costs including nonunderlying items 367 179 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EMOLUMENTS OF DIRECTORS
Bonus
LTIP
Benefits
Subtotal
Aggregate emoluments
Cash allowance in lieu of pension
Total
Executive Directors John Sach 167 Mike Gant 213 85  David Smallridge resigned 31 January 2017  465 886 Fiona Holmes appointed 31 October 2016 71 15  1 87  11 98 Nonexecutive Directors Terry Stannard 70    70   70 69 Fiona Goldsmith 32    32   32 3tel6 1748 25 62 1835 2524 Retirement benefits were accruing to one Director 2016 one under a defined benefit scheme who is the highest paid Director.
Accrued annual pension benefits at the year end were 14593 2016 14506.
Benefits are accruing under defined contribution schemes for three Directors 2016 three Directors.
Further information on the remuneration of the Directors is included in the Directors Remuneration Report set out on pages 38 to 41.
EMPLOYEE INFORMATION Wages and salaries 22276 20558 Social security costs 2101 2162 Other pension costs 932 1180 LTIP awards including NIC thereon 756 924 Employee benefit expense 26065 24824 The average monthly number of employees including Directors during the year
Number
Brands including warehousing 300 269 Manufacturing 329 331 Overseas 34 32 Corporate and administration Compensation of key management personnel Shortterm employee benefits including shortterm incentives 3286 3115 Postemployment benefits including pension costs 182 240 LTIP awards 756 924 4224 4279 The Group regards its key management personnel to be its Directors and senior management having authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Group either directly or indirectly.
LTIP awards reflect the charge in the Income Statement and do not reflect the market value of shares expected to vest.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 TAX EXPENSE Current tax UK current tax 1367 1278 UK adjustments in respect of prior years 78 130 overseas current tax  2 Corporation tax 1445 1410 Deferred tax current year 271 253 adjustments in respect of prior years 12 84 effect of changes in corporation tax rates 104 113 Deferred tax 155 56 Total tax charge for the year 1600 1466 Reconciliation of total tax charge for the year Profit on ordinary activities before tax 6965 7338 Tax on profit on ordinary activities at 20% 2016 20.16% 1393 1480 Nondeductible expenditure 418 23 Parent and overseas losses and temporary timing differences not recognised 99 10 Permanent differences in respect of share options 11 40 Adjustments in respect of prior years 66 46 Adjustments in respect of preacquisition period 85 Effect of changes in corporation tax rates 104 113 Total tax charge for year 1600 1466 FACTORS AFFECTING CURRENT AND FUTURE TAX CHARGES No overseas taxation is anticipated to become payable within the immediate future due to the availability of gross tax losses of approximately 2.8 million 2016 1.3 million.
The deferred tax balance at 31 January 2017 included within these financial statements has been calculated at a rate of 17% as this is the rate at which the majority of the balances are expected to unwind.
A change to the UK corporation tax rate was announced in the Chancellors Budget on 16 March 2016 and became substantively enacted in the Finance Bill 2016 on 6 September 2016 to reduce the main rate to 19% from 1 April 2017 and to 17% from 1 April 2020.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EARNINGS PER SHARE Basic earnings per share EPS is calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the year excluding those held in the Employee Benefit Trust EBT and those held in treasury note 27 which are treated as cancelled.
The adjusted basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the adjusted earnings by the weighted average number of shares.
As a consequence of the improved profitability of the Group PBT performance criteria within LTIPs 8 9 and 10 are now being met and as a consequence these LTIP awards are now dilutive.
2017 2016
Weighted average number of shares Per share amount
Earnings
Weighted average number of shares Per share amount
Basic earnings per share 5365 62732 8.55 5872 59997 9.79 Effect of dilutive securities Shares under LTIP 3645 1675 Diluted earnings per share 5365 66377 8.08 5872 61672 9.52 Adjusted basic and diluted earnings per share Add back LTIP accounting charge 756 924 Add back net defined benefit pension charge 527 685 Nonunderlying items note 7 2164 Tax effect of nonunderlying items and other add backs 235 321 Adjusted basic earnings per share 8577 62732 13.67 7160 59997 11.93 Adjusted diluted earnings per share 8577 66377 12.92 7160 61672 11.61 As detailed in note 33 in order to finance the initial cash consideration to acquire 100% of the issued share capital of Clarke and Clarke a placing of a total of 8947369 new ordinary shares of 1p each in the Company was announced on 12 October 2016.
These shares which represented approximately 12.9% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital on admission to trading on AIM excluding treasury shares were placed at a price of 190.0 pence per share raising proceeds of approximately 17000000.
On 16 May 2016 773393 shares vested under the Companys LongTerm Incentive Plan.
To satisfy the vesting 431788 shares of 1 pence each were allotted at par value.
Following these transactions Walker Greenbanks issued ordinary share capital with voting rights consists of 69551678 2016 60172521 ordinary shares of which no 2016 nil ordinary shares are held in treasury and 4909 2016 nil ordinary shares are held by the Walker Greenbank PLC EBT.
Shares held in treasury or by the EBT are treated as cancelled when calculating EPS.
On 18 May 2015 1090326 shares vested under the Companys LTIP of which 188272 shares were issued from the Walker Greenbank PLC EBT.
The market value of shares held by the EBT at 31 January 2017 was 9941 2016 nil.
The total number of shares held in the EBT at the year end represented 0.01 % 2016 0% of the issued shares.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Arthur
Sanderson and William
Archive
Collection design
Customer related intangibles
Total
Cost
1 February 2015 1400 4300 2476   2262 10438 Additions   330   218 548 31 January 2016 1400 4300 2806   2480 10986 Additions   548   244 792 Additions from business combinations note 33 14736   5566 4427  24729 Disposals   213    213 31 January 2017 16136 4300 3141 5566 4427 2724 36294 Accumulated amortisation 1 February 2015 841  1634   805 3280 Charge   322   280 602 31 January 2016 841  1956   1085 3882 Charge   019 Disposal  213    213 31 January 2017 841  2083 94 248 1422 4688 Net book amount 31 January 2017 15295 4300 1058 5472 4179 1302 31606 31 January 2016 559 4300 850   1395 7104 31 January 2015 559 4300 842   1457 7158 During the year goodwill 14736000 brand 5566000 and customer related intangibles 4427000 have been recognised on the business combination of Clarke and Clarke note 33.
The Arthur Sanderson and William Morris Archive was purchased as part of the acquisition of Arthur Sanderson and Sons on 29 August 2003.
It comprises an historical record of unique designs that are used to generate royalty income in the business.
The total amortisation expense of 1019000 2016 602000 is split between administration expenses 666000 2016 594000 distribution and selling costs 11000 2016 8000 and 342000 2016 nil in nonunderlying items.
The amount included in nonunderlying items relates to the amortisation of acquired intangible assets.
IMPAIRMENT TESTS FOR GOODWILL AND ARTHUR SANDERSON AND WILLIAM MORRIS ARCHIVE Out of the total carrying value of goodwill at year end of 15295000 2016 559000 14736000 2016 nil is attributable to the Brands segment and 559000 2016 559000 to the Manufacturing segment.
The carrying value of the Archive at the year end of 4300000 2016 4300000 is attributable to the Brands segment.
The Group tests goodwill and the Archive for impairment annually or more frequently if there are indications that they might be impaired.
There was no impairment charge recognised in the year 2016 nil.
In assessing whether an impairment of goodwill is required the carrying value of the cashgenerating unit CGU or group of CGUs is compared with its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amounts for each CGU being a division of the business operated at a separate site and collectively for groups of CGUs that make up the segments of the Groups business have been based on the value in use VIU.
The Group estimates the VIU using a discounted cash flow model DCF where the projected cash flows for separate or collective groups of CGUs are discounted using a pretax rate of 11.34% 2016 11.11 %.
The discount rate used is the same across all segments.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INTANGIBLE ASSETS CONTINUED The Group has used formally approved budgets for the first two years 2016 two years of its VIU calculation with extrapolation beyond the last explicit year using an assumption of growth for future years ranging from 1 % to 2% 2016 1 % to 2% depending upon the CGU being tested.
The cash flows used in the calculation of the VIU are derived from past experience and are based on operating profit forecasts which in turn rely upon assumptions relating to sales growth margins and operating and administration expenses.
The cash flows have not included the benefits arising from any future asset enhancement expenditure and therefore exclude significant benefits anticipated from future capital expenditure.
The growth rates included within the assumptions supporting the VIU calculations do not therefore represent the Groups anticipated total forecast growth but rather only the growth deriving from capital expenditure completed at the Balance Sheet date.
The recoverable amount of the Archive intangible asset is estimated based on VIU and comprises estimated future cash flows from royalty income relating to the Archive.
A discount rate of 11.34% 2016 11.11 % is applied.
The Group does not consider it reasonably probable that any significant changes to the key assumptions will arise that would result in impairment of either goodwill or the Archive as at 31 January 2017.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Freehold land and buildings
Plant equipment and vehicles
Total
Cost
1 February 2015 5434  26753 1742 33929 Additions   1834 128 1962 Disposals   1700 158 1858 Currency movements   January 2016 5434  26955 1713 34102 Additions 275 412 5074 215 5976 Additions from business combinations  Disposals   466  466 Currency movements   January 2017 5709 454 31958 1990 40111 Accumulated depreciation 1 February 2015 1697  17932 1586 21215 Charge 97  1831 108 2036 Impairment   988  988 Disposals   1698 158 1856 Currency movements   January 2016 1794  19084 1537 22415 Charge 97 3 1945 127 2172 Disposals   377  377 Currency movements   January 2017 1891 3 20705 1667 24266 Net book amount 31 January 2017 3818 451 11253 323 15845 31 January 2016 3640  7871 176 11687 31 January 2015 3737  8821 156 12714 The total depreciation expense of 2172000 2016 2036000 has been allocated to the following categories cost of sales 22000 2016 nil administration expenses 2114000 2016 1906000 and distribution and selling costs 36000 2016 130000.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The net book amount of freehold land and buildings comprises Freehold land 450 450 Freehold buildings 3368 3190 Net book amount 3818 3640 Land and buildings are stated at historical cost less impairment where applicable.
All of the Groups banking facilities remain secured by a fixed and floating charge over the carrying value of assets land and buildings of 3818000 2016 3640000.
ASSETS UNDER CONSTRUCTION Included in property plant and equipment at 31 January 2017 was an amount of 1195000 2016 232000 relating to expenditure for assets in the course of construction.
DEFERRED INCOME TAX A net deferred tax liability of 2573000 2016 asset of 108000 is recognised in respect of future deductions for LTIP payments and other temporary differences.
Taxable temporary differences on property plant and equipment 1361 967 Taxable temporary differences on intangible assets 2591 178 Other temporary differences 141 42 Temporary differences on LTIP payments 260 435 3833 668 Retirement benefit obligations 1260 776 2573 108 A deferred tax credit of 484000 2016 charge of 1114000 arising on retirement benefit obligations has been recognised within the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
At 31 January 2017 the Group has gross unused UK tax losses of 3225000 2016 3225000 available for offset against future profits.
Potential deferred tax assets at 31 January 2017 of 613000 2016 674000 relating to UK tax losses and deductible temporary differences have not been recognised as it is not considered probable that recovery of the potential deferred tax asset will arise under existing tax legislation.
These are summarised in the table below and comprise the following No deferred tax has been recognised on 3225000 2016 3225000 of gross UK losses as these are not readily available for offset against the Groups future profits under existing tax legislation and therefore the realisation of these losses is not considered probable.
In addition there are gross tax losses in overseas subsidiaries of 2782000 2016 1302000 which are available for offset against future taxable profits by those subsidiaries.
However the realisation of these losses is not considered probable in the foreseeable future.
Other deductible temporary differences which predominantly arise on LTIP payment reserves.
Unutilised tax losses  UK 548 645 Unutilised tax losses  Overseas 473 234 Other deductible temporary differences  UK 65 29 Derivative financial instruments  UK  5 1086 913 There are also unutilised capital tax losses at 31 January 2017 of 4881000 2016 4881000 but no deferred tax asset has been recognised as it is not considered probable that these losses will be utilised.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DEFERRED INCOME TAX CONTINUED The gross movement on the deferred income tax account is as follows Net deferred tax assetliability At 1 February 108 1591 Acquisition of subsidiary note 33 2885 Income Statement charge 155 56 Tax creditcharge relating to components of other comprehensive income 484 1114 Tax charged directly to equity 125 313 At 31 January 2573 108
Raw materials 3389 2085 Work in progress 2035 559 Finished goods 24881 15460 30305 18104 The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of sales amounted to 28130000 2016 27149000.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
Trade receivables 13302 10463 Less Provision for impairment of trade receivables 198 398 Net trade receivables 13104 10065 Corporation tax 609 Other taxes and social security 39 Other receivables 2066 4897 Marketing materials 1249 1346 Prepayments 2441 2972 19508 19280 Other receivables include the recognition of 1500000 2016 4683000 relating to insurance reimbursement in respect of the Standfast flood received after the year end.
There is no material difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the trade and other receivables.
The only impaired assets are within trade receivables and marketing materials.
CREDIT QUALITY OF FINANCIAL ASSETS i Neither past due nor impaired Included in the Groups trade receivable balances are receivables with a carrying value of 8782000 2016 6637000 which are neither past due nor impaired at the reporting date.
The nature of the Groups business means that it has a longstanding relationship with the majority of its customers who either have no experience of historical default or only temporary late payments with full recovery of balances due.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ii Past due  not individually impaired Included in the Groups trade receivable balances are receivables with a carrying value of 4248000 2016 3134000 which are past due at the reporting date for which the Group does not consider the need to create a specific impairment provision against individually identified receivables.
The table below shows the aging analysis of the receivables 130 days past due 2363 2294 3160 days past due 1216 840 6190 days past due 515 91 days past due 154 4248 3134 The Directors believe however that in the current economic environment there is objective evidence of credit deterioration and an impairment of 65000 2016 241000 representing a collective assessment of risk against receivables that are yet to be specifically identified.
Due to the nature of the Groups products there is a limited amount of inventory left in the possession of customers that could act as collateral under terms of trade.
As the value of this inventory is immaterial it has not been disclosed in the financial statements.
As at 31 January 2017 trade receivables of 272000 2016 692000 were individually determined to be impaired and provided for.
The amount of the provision was 133000 2016 157000.
The main factor used to assess the impairment of trade receivables is the circumstances of the individual customer.
The carrying amounts of the Groups trade and other receivables are denominated in the following currencies Sterling 11885 13287 US dollars 769 24 Euros 2304 1510 Other 212 141 15170 14962 The Group considers that any exposure to concentrations of credit risk will be impacted principally by underlying economic conditions in the principal geographical territories in which the Group operates.
As at the Balance Sheet date the carrying value of trade receivables by geographical territory of the customer was United Kingdom 8161 6973 Continental Europe 2895 1573 Rest of the World 1179 1179 13104 10065 PROVISIONS FOR IMPAIRMENT Movements on the Group provision for impairment of trade receivables are as follows At 1 February 398 371 Provision for receivables impaired 49 82 Receivables written off in the year as uncollectible 89 46 Unused amounts reversed 160 9 At 31 January 198 398 The creation and release of provisions for impaired trade receivables have been included within distribution and selling costs in the Income Statement.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash flow hedges  liability  26 FORWARD FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS The Groups USbased subsidiary Walker Greenbank Inc. sells products to local customers with sales invoiced in US dollars.
As the Groups presentation currency is sterling it is exposed to changes in the reported sterling value of these sales.
The Group considers that it is highly probable that future sales of this nature will continue to arise over at least the next 12 months.
The Company enters into monthly forward foreign exchange contracts with a third party to buy sterling and sell US dollars.
The Group designates these contracts as cash flow hedges of the foreign currency risk arising from the highly probable future forecast sales transactions.
As at the reporting date there were no US dollar forward exchange contracts and therefore the fair value of the forward foreign currency contracts relating to the benefit on these anticipated future transactions was nil 2016 liability of 26000.
The amounts deferred in equity are released into the Income Statement in the period or periods during which the hedged forecast transactions impact the Income Statement which is normally within one month of the Balance Sheet date.
The Brands make more purchases from the eurozone than sales made to the eurozone.
As the Groups presentation currency is sterling it is exposed to changes in the reported sterling value of the purchases.
The Group considers that the level of this exposure will reduce over the next 12 months.
As at the reporting date there were no euro forward foreign currency contracts.
SWAP FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS The Group uses swap contracts to manage its working capital exchange risk from both the foreign subsidiaries and the balances on receivables payables and cash held in foreign currency.
These swap contracts are designated as fair value through the Income Statement.
The use of swaps are reviewed monthly and renewed when necessary.
As at the reporting date there were no US dollar swap contracts 2016 fair value liability of nil and no euro swap contracts 2016 fair value asset of nil.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash at bank and in hand 1516 2902 There is a setoff arrangement for bank accounts held with the UK clearing bank and accordingly the amounts stated as bank overdraft in note 23 represent the net of accounts in funds and in overdraft.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES Trade payables 18118 12522 Corporation tax  839 Other taxes and social security  949 Other payables and deferred revenue 1837 712 Accruals 5392 3944 25347 18966 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Current
Bank overdraft 6626 Term loan 200 400 Committed facility 1 6825 400
Term loan  200 Committed facility  4 Total borrowings 6825 596 In December 2015 the Group entered into a new 12500000 multicurrency revolving credit facility with Barclays Bank PLC for a fiveyear period and cancelled the existing receivables facilities.
The agreement also includes a 10000000 accordion facility option to further increase available credit which provides substantial headroom for future growth.
An initial bank arrangement fee of 100000 and an additional 40000 incurred during the year is amortised over the life of the loan.
The total facilities from Barclays Bank PLC comprises a variable rate term loan secured on the Groups freehold property which is being repaid on a fiveyear profile and a revolving credit facility which may be drawn down in either sterling or euro.
The total Barclays Bank PLC facilities are capped at 22700000 2016 23100000 the utilisation of the facilities at the year end was 6825000 2016 596000.
The term loan bears interest at variable rates based on a margin above the Bank of England base rate.
The revolving credit facility bears interest at a variable rate based on a margin above LIBOR for sterling loans or the EURIBOR for euro loans.
Under the Barclays Bank PLC facilities the Group is subject to a financial covenant which applies to the term loan being interest cover.
The revolving credit facility is also subject to compliance of two financial covenants being interest cover and leverage.
Any noncompliance with covenants could if not remedied or waived constitute an event of default with respect to any such arrangements.
The Group has reported to Barclays Bank PLC that it was in full compliance with its covenants throughout each of the periods presented and expects to be for the remaining term of the agreement.
For the Groups cash at bank and the receivable component of derivative financial instruments the counterparty to the financial instruments is a major UK bank and the Group does not consider there to be any significant credit risk from holding these financial assets.
The fair value of current borrowings approximates their carrying amount as the impact of discounting is not significant.
The carrying amounts and fair value of the noncurrent borrowings are as follows Carrying amount Fair value Term loan  200  201 Committed facility  4 The fair values are based on cash flows discounted using a weighted average rate based on the borrowing rate of 1.75% 2016 1.75%.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BORROWINGS CONTINUED The table below analyses the Groups financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period to contractual maturity at the Balance Sheet date.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows.
The maturity profile of undiscounted cash flows on variable interest rate borrowings has assumed interest rates as at the Balance Sheet date.
31 January 2017 Less than 1 year
1 to 2 years
2 to 5 years
5 years Borrowings 6825 Trade and other payables 25347 Provision for other liabilities and charges 2652 1609 1867 34824 1609 1867 31 January 2016 Less than 1 year
1 to 2 years
2 to 5 years
5 years Borrowings 400 204 Trade and other payables 17178 17578 204 The carrying amounts of the Groups borrowings are denominated in the following currency Sterling 6825 596 RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATION DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SCHEMES The Group contributes to the defined contribution section of the Abaris Holdings Limited Pension Scheme and to a Group Personal Pension Plan which is also a defined contribution scheme.
Contributions are charged to the Income Statement as incurred and amounted to 405000 2016 495000.
There are no outstanding or prepaid contributions at 31 January 2017 2016 nil.
Active members of the schemes are also able to make contributions.
DEFINED BENEFIT SCHEMES Walker Greenbank PLC operates two defined benefit schemes in the UK which both offer pensions in retirement and death benefits to members the Walker Greenbank Pension Plan and the Abaris Holdings Limited Pension Scheme.
Pension benefits are related to the members final salary at retirement and their length of service.
The schemes are closed to new members and to future accrual of benefits.
This disclosure excludes any defined contribution assets and liabilities.
The Groups contributions to the schemes for the year beginning 1 February 2017 are expected to be 1907000.
Plan assets held in the fund are governed by local regulations and practice in the UK.
Responsibility for the governance of the plan including investment decisions and contributions schedules lies with the Trustees of the schemes.
Actuarial valuations of the schemes were carried out as at 31 January 2017 based on membership data at 5 April 2015 updated to take account of benefit outgo since 5 April 2015 using actuarial assumptions at 31 January 2017.
The major assumptions used by the actuary were in nominal terms as follows 2017 2016 Discount rate 2.80% 3.75% Inflation assumption RPI 3.35% 2.85% Inflation assumption CPI 2.35% 1.85% Rate of increase in salaries 3.35% 2.85% Rate of increase to pensions in payment that increase in line with RPI subject to a maximum of 5% p.
3.10% 2.80% Rate of increase to pensions in excess of GMP in deferment 2.35% 1.85% NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The mortality assumptions imply the expected future lifetime from age 65 as follows 2017 2016 Nonpensioner male currently 45 23.3 23.3 Pensioner male currently 65 22.0 22.0 Nonpensioner female currently 45 26.0 25.9 Pensioner female currently 65 24.5 24.4 The fair value of the assets which are not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to significant change before they are realised and the present value of the schemes liabilities which are derived from cash flow projections over long periods and thus inherently uncertain were Equities absolute return and property 26226 23845 Fixed interest gilts 16569 14785 Fixed interest bonds 3982 4671 Indexlinked gilts 10813 9435 Insured annuities 951 983 Cash and cash equivalents 5960 1979 Fair value of scheme assets 64501 55698 All assets are invested in the UK.
The assets do not include the Groups financial instruments or property connected with the Group.
The actual return on assets over the year was a gain of 10171000 2016 loss of 1794000.
Present value of funded obligations 71914 60011 Fair value of scheme assets 64501 55698 Deficit in funded scheme 7413 4313 Net liability in Balance Sheet 7413 4313 Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the present value of the defined benefit obligation Benefit obligation at beginning of year 60011 68966 Interest cost 2199 2134 Remeasurement lossesgains  changes in financial assumptions 12615 5448 Remeasurement lossesgains  changes in demographic assumptions  1298 Remeasurement gains  experience 169 1914 Benefits paid 2742 2429 Benefit obligation at end of year 71914 60011 Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the fair value of plan assets Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year 55698 58614 Interest income on scheme assets 2064 1829 Return on assets excluding interest income 8107 3623 Contributions by employers 1766 1687 Benefits paid 2742 2429 Scheme administrative cost 392 380 Fair value of scheme assets at end of year 64501 55698 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATION CONTINUED Remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability to be shown in the Statement of Comprehensive Income Net remeasurement  financial 12615 5448 Net remeasurement  demographic  1298 Net remeasurement  experience 169 1914 Return on assets excluding interest income 8107 3623 Total remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability 4339 5037 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS The table below shows the impact on the defined benefit obligation of changing each of the most significant assumptions in isolation.
The figures in the table as at 31 January 2017 have been calculated using the same valuation method that was used to calculate the defined benefit obligation above and are consistent year on year.
Impact on scheme liabilities 2017 m Impact on scheme liabilities 2016 m Change in assumption Increase Decrease Increase Decrease Discount rate 0.25% movement 3.1 3.3 2.4 2.5 Rate of inflation RPI 0.25% movement 1.6 1.2 1.1 1.1 Rate of inflation CPI 0.25% movement 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.6 Assumed life expectancy 1 year movement 3.0 3.0 2.1 2.2 Extrapolation of the sensitivity analysis beyond the ranges shown may not be appropriate.
With corresponding changes to the salary and pension increase assumptions.
RISK EXPOSURE Through its defined benefit pension plans the Group is exposed to a number of risks the most significant of which are detailed below Asset volatility The plan liabilities are calculated using a discount rate set with reference to corporate bond yields if plan assets underperform this yield this will create a deficit.
Changes in bond yields A decrease in corporate bond yields will increase plan liabilities although this will be partially offset by an increase in the value of the plans bond holdings.
Inflation risks Some of the Groups pension obligations are linked to salary inflation and higher inflation will lead to higher liabilities although in most cases caps on the level of inflationary increases are in place to protect the plan against extreme inflation.
The majority of the plans assets are either unaffected by fixed interest bonds or loosely correlated with equities inflation meaning that an increase in inflation will also increase the deficit.
Life expectancy The majority of the plans obligations are to provide benefits for the life of the member so increases in life expectancy will result in an increase in the plans liabilities.
The weighted average duration of defined benefit obligations is 17 years.
PROVISION FOR OTHER LIABILITIES AND CHARGES Contingent liability arising on business combination At 1 February Provision on acquisition of Clarke and Clarke note 33 5148 Unwind of discount note 7 181 At 31 January 5329 Analysis of total contingent liability Noncurrent 2677 Current 2652 Total 5329 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The accounting policies for financial instruments have been applied to the line items below 31 January 2017 Loans and receivables Assets at fair value
Total
Assets as per Balance Sheet Trade and other receivables 15170   15170 Cash and cash equivalents 1516   1516 Total 16686   16686 31 January 2017 Liabilities at fair value
Derivatives used for hedging
Liabilities as per Balance Sheet Derivative financial instruments Borrowings  6825  6825 Trade and other payables  25347  25347 Provision for other liabilities  5329  5329 Total  37501  37501 31 January 2016 Loans and receivables Assets at fair value
Total
Assets as per Balance Sheet Trade and other receivables 14962   14962 Cash and cash equivalents 2902   2902 Total 17864   17864 31 January 2016 Liabilities at fair value
Derivatives used for hedging
Liabilities as per Balance Sheet Derivative financial instruments   26 26 Borrowings  596  596 Trade and other payables  17178  17178 Total  17774 26 17800 OFFSETTING OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES The following financial assetsliabilities are subject to offsetting enforceable master netting arrangements and similar arrangements.
31 January 2017
Gross amounts of recognised financial assets set off in the
Sheet
Net amounts of financial assets liabilities included in the
Sheet
Cash and cash equivalents 9289 9289 Bank overdraft 14868 9289 5579 31 January 2016
Gross amounts of recognised financial assets set off in the
Sheet
Net amounts of financial assets liabilities included in the
Sheet
Cash and cash equivalents 5337 2708 2629 Bank overdraft 2708 2708  Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED For the financial assets and liabilities subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar arrangements above each agreement between the Group and the counterparty allows for the net settlement of the relevant financial assets and liabilities when both elect to settle on a net basis.
In the absence of such an election financial assets and liabilities will be settled on a gross basis however each party to the master netting agreement or similar agreement will have the option to settle all such amounts on a net basis in the event of default of the other party.
SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares of 1p each Number of shares Authorised share capital 1 February 2015 31 January 2016 and 31 January 2017 85000000 850000 Allotted and fully paid 31 January 2017 69551678 695517 31 January 2016 60172521 601725 1 February 2015 59762559 597626 All holders of ordinary shares have the right to vote at general meetings of the Company and to distributions from dividends or on winding up of the Company.
As detailed in note 33 in order to finance the initial cash consideration to acquire 100% of the issued share capital of Clarke and Clarke a placing of a total of 8947369 new ordinary shares of 1p each in the Company was announced on 12 October 2016.
These shares which represented approximately 12.9% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital on admission to trading on AIM excluding treasury shares were placed on 12 October 2016 at a price of 190.0 pence per share raising proceeds of approximately 17000000.
On 16 May 2016 773393 shares vested under the Companys LongTerm Incentive Plan.
To satisfy the vesting 431788 shares of 1 pence each were allotted at par value.
Following these transactions Walker Greenbanks issued ordinary share capital with voting rights consists of 69551678 2016 60172521 ordinary shares of which no 2016 nil ordinary shares are held in treasury and 4909 2016 nil ordinary shares are held by the Walker Greenbank PLC EBT.
Shares held in treasury or by the EBT are treated as cancelled when calculating EPS.
On 18 May 2015 1090326 shares vested under the Companys LTIP of which 188272 shares were issued from the Walker Greenbank PLC EBT.
The market value of shares held by the EBT at 31 January 2017 was 9941 2016 nil.
The total number of shares held in the EBT at the period end represented 0.01 % 2016 nil of the issued shares.
Shares held by the EBT and the treasury shares are held for the purpose of satisfying awards under longterm incentive plans to Executive Directors and senior management.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS LTIPS The Group operates an LTIP.
There have been 10 awards under this plan in which Executive Directors and senior management of the Group participate.
The first award vested during 2009 the second vested during 2011 the third fourth fifth sixth and seventh vesting in subsequent years.
The LTIP has previously been approved by the shareholders at an Annual General Meeting.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Awards under the scheme are granted in the form of nilpriced share options and are to be satisfied either using marketpurchased shares or by the issuing of new shares.
The awards vest in full or in part dependent on the satisfaction of specified performance targets at the end of the vesting period applying to each plan.
The number of awards that vest is dependent upon both the adjusted profit before tax PBT achieved for the relevant year or the Groups Total Shareholder Return TSR during the vesting period within a comparator group.
Details are set out below Award Eight Award Eight Award Nine Award Nine Award Ten Award Ten Grant date of awards 28 May 2014 28 May 2014 26 May 2015 26 May 2015 1 Dec 2016 1 Dec 2016 Grant date fair value of award pence per award Vesting date of awards 28 May 2017 28 May 2017 26 May 2018 26 May 2018 30 Nov 2019 30 Nov 2019 Maximum number of awards 344591 344591 323465 323465 362189 362189 Vesting condition based on TSR with PBT floor EPS growth TSR with PBT floor EPS growth TSR with PBT floor EPS Relevant date for determination of vesting conditions TSR as at 28 May 2017 PBT for year ending 31 January 2017 EPS for year ending 31 January 2017 TSR as at 26 May 2018 PBT for year ending 31 January 2018 EPS for year ending 31 January 2018 TSR as at 30 Nov 2019 PBT for year ending 31 January 2019 EPS for year ending 31 January 2019 Further details of vesting conditions are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 38 to 41.
Awards Eight and Nine have half the award based on vesting conditions that are market based and half based on the growth in adjusted EPS.
Award Ten has half the award based on vesting conditions that are market based and half based on the absolute adjusted EPS.
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year Award Ten that related to marketbased vesting conditions was determined using the MonteCarlo valuation model was 119.33p per option.
The significant inputs into the model were weighted average share price of 204.5p at the grant date exercise price shown above dividend yield of 1.47% an expected option life of three years and an annual riskfree interest rate of 0.24%.
The volatility measured at the standard deviation of continuously compounded share returns is based on statistical analysis of daily share prices over the last three years.
The fair value of the options granted based on vesting conditions of growth in EPS was determined using the BlackScholes valuation model was 195.70p.
Refer to note 11 for the total expense recognised in the Income Statement for share options granted to Directors and employees.
Movements in the number of awards outstanding assuming maximum achievement of vesting conditions are as follows
Number
At 1 February 2452476 2867104 Granted 724377 734464 Exercised 773294 1090326 Lapsed 363071 58766 At 31 January 2040488 2452476 CAPITAL RESERVE Capital reserve represents 000 Share premium of companies acquired under merger accounting principles 1276 Capital reserve arising on consolidation 293 Capital redemption reserve on capital restructurings 41888 At 31 January 2017 and 2016 43457 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
During the year the Group has paid a final dividend for the year to 31 January 2016 of 2.45p and an interim dividend of 0.55p 333000 for the year to 31 January 2017 2016 0.44p 265000.
The Group will continue to invest in the future growth of the business and continue to pay dividends.
The Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 3.06p per share 2016 2.45p per share which will be payable on 11 August 2017 to shareholders on the register at 21 July 2017 giving a cost of 2128000 2016 1485000.
This brings the total dividend for the year to 3.61p 2016 2.89p.
CASH GENERATED FROM OPERATIONS
Profit before tax 6965 7338 Defined benefit pension charge 527 685 Net borrowing costs 367 179 Depreciation and impairment of property plant and equipment 2172 3024 Insurance reimbursements 12250 4683 Amortisation 1019 602 Gainloss on disposal of property plant and equipment  3 Charge for LTIP recognised in equity 658 790 LTIP vesting 664 967 Unrealised foreign exchange lossesgains included in operating profit 56 227 Defined benefit pension cash contributions 1766 1687 Cash used ingenerated from operating activities pre insurance proceeds 2916 5057 Insurance proceeds relating to operating activities 13165 Cash generated from operating activities post insurance proceeds 10249 5057 Changes in working capital Increasedecrease in inventories 5976 3900 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 2728 279 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 5380 1575 Cash generated from operations 12381 7103 The 2016 cash generated from operations has been restated to show noncash insurance reimbursements included within other receivables.
ANALYSIS OF NET FUNDS 1 February Cash and cash equivalents acquired note 33 Cash flow
Other
31 January Cash and cash equivalents 2902 2663 4049   1516 Bank overdraft   6626   6626 Cash and cash equivalents and bank overdraft 2902 2663 10675   5110 Term loan due within one year 400  400 200 1 199 Term loan due after one year 196   200 4 Net fundsdebt 2306 2663 10275  3 5309 Other noncash changes are capitalisation and amortisation of the issue costs relating to the borrowings.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
A CAPITAL COMMITMENTS Capital expenditure contracted for at the Balance Sheet date but not yet incurred is as follows Property plant and equipment 95 1960 B LEASE COMMITMENTS Operating lease payments represent rentals payable by the Group for certain office properties.
Land and building leases are negotiated for an average of 14 years 2016 14 years and rentals are fixed for an average of five years 2016 five years.
Other leases are negotiated for an average term of three years 2016 three years and rentals are fixed for an average of three years 2016 three years.
Total commitments due under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Land and buildings
Total
Land and buildings
Total
Within one year 2021 477 2498 1768 389 2157 Between one and five years 8189 592 8781 5309 465 5774 Over five years 4118  4118 3034 2 3036 14328 1069 15397 10111 856 10967 Other leases include hire of plant machinery and motor vehicles.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS On 12 October 2016 the Group conditionally acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Globaltex 2015 Limited a company registered in the UK for an initial cash consideration of 25000000 and a contingent consideration of up to 17500000 in aggregate payable in the Companys shares linked to the performance of the acquired business over a fouryear period giving a total potential consideration of up to 42500000 excluding working capital adjustments.
The completion date for the transaction was 31 October 2016.
Globaltex 2015 Limited is the parent entity and owns 100% of the issued share capital of Globaltex Limited trading as Clarke and Clarke which is a UKbased designer and worldwide distributor of interior fabrics and wallpapers.
In order to finance the initial cash consideration a placing of a total of 8947369 new ordinary shares of 1p each in the Company was announced on 12 October 2016.
These shares which represented approximately 12.9% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital on admission to trading on AIM excluding treasury shares were placed at a price of 190.0 pence per share raising proceeds of approximately 17000000.
The remaining portion of the cash consideration is being funded from the Companys existing accordion tranche of its bank facilities and from the Companys existing cash resources.
The following tables summarise the consideration for Clarke and Clarke the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date.
Initial cash consideration 25000 Working capital adjustments to purchase consideration 5400 Total cash consideration 30400 Contingent consideration 5148 Total consideration 35548 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED Fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed Note 000 Brand 5566 Customer relationships 4427 Total acquired identifiable intangible assets b 9993 Property plant and equipment 322 Inventories c 5936 Trade and other receivables d 6450 Cash and cash equivalents 2663 Trade and other payables 1667 Deferred tax liabilities 2885 Net identifiable assets acquired 20812 Goodwill e 14736 Total consideration 35548 a Acquisitionrelated costs charged to the Income Statement for the year ended 31 January 2017 are detailed in note 7. b The fair value of the acquired identifiable intangible assets of 9993000 is provisional pending receipt of the final valuations of those assets. increased cost of sales in the postacquisition period.
1061000 cost in respect of unwind of the fair value uplift adjustment is considered an exceptional cost of sale note 7.
The balance of the fair value uplift which is still to be unwound included within inventories as at 31 January 2017 was 182000. d Included in trade and other receivables were trade receivables with a carrying value of 3524000 expected to be recoverable in full.
The fair value of trade receivables acquired approximates their carrying value. expected to arise.
None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes. business combination.
The contingent consideration arrangement requires the Group to pay in shares to the former owners of Clarke and Clarke for four years from 2017 to 2020 based on a target EBITDA number up to a maximum undiscounted amount of 17500000 in Group shares.
The fair value of the contingent consideration arrangement of 5148000 was estimated by applying the income approach.
The fair value estimates are based on a discount rate of 10.9% and assumed probabilityadjusted profit in Clarke and Clarke of 22100000 to 22600000.
This is a level 3 fair value measurement.
The key unobservable assumptions in calculating this profit are the EBITDA projections of the Clarke and Clarke business for the four years from 2017 to 2020 and the discount rate applied 10.9%.
As of 31 January 2017 there was an increase of 181000 recognised in the Income Statement for the contingent consideration arrangement as the assumed probability adjusted contingent consideration was recalculated to be approximately 5329000.
Assuming all other variables are held constant an increase of 10% in EBITDA projections would result in an increase in contingent consideration of 127000 and a decrease of 1 % in the discount rate would result in an increase in contingent consideration of 74000.
An increase of 10% in revenue would result in an increase in contingent consideration of 317000.
7276000.
Clarke and Clarke also contributed a profit before tax of 1014000 over the same period.
21509000 and profit before tax of 3462000.
Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Total cash consideration paid 29736 Less cash and cash equivalents acquired 2663 Net cash outflow 27073 The results of Clarke and Clarke are included within the Brands segment in note 4.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS The principal Group operating companies that traded during the year and are wholly owned and which are included in these consolidated financial statements are as follows Name of subsidiary undertaking Country of incorporation and place of business Registered office Abaris Holdings Limited UK Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX Globaltex 2015 Limited UK Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX Globaltex Limited trading as Clarke and Clarke UK Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX Walker Greenbank Inc US 800 Huyler Street Teterboro New Jersey 07608 Arthur Sanderson and Sons SARL France 19 Rue de Mail Paris 75002 Shares held by subsidiary company.
Investments in Group companies are ordinary shares.
The principal activities of the Group including all subsidiaries are design manufacture marketing and distribution of wallcoverings furnishing fabrics and associated products for the consumer market.
For a full list of subsidiary companies refer to note 6 to the financial statements of the Company as an entity pages 101 to 103.
EVENTS AFTER THE REPORTING PERIOD Following the flooding at Standfast the Group experienced a period of disrupted production and a loss of stock machinery and profits.
After the reporting period the Group has been reimbursed 1500000 as an interim payment which has been recognised and included within other receivables as at 31 January 2017 bringing the total cash received to date to 16933000 to cover the costs of stock and machinery loss and other incremental costs along with business interruption losses.
Further business interruption reimbursements are expected to cover future loss of profits up to a period of two years following the flood.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REPORT ON THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OUR OPINION In our opinion Walker Greenbank PLCs Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Companys affairs as at 31 January 2017 have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
WHAT WE HAVE AUDITED The financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report comprise the Company Balance Sheet as at 31 January 2017 the Company Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year then ended the Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the financial statements is United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting
In applying the financial reporting framework the Directors have made a number of subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates.
In making such estimates they have made assumptions and considered future events.
OPINIONS ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In addition in light of the knowledge and understanding of the Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we are required to report if we have identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Report of the Directors.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF WALKER GREENBANK PLC OTHER MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION ADEQUACY OF ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND INFORMATION AND EXPLANATIONS RECEIVED Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THE AUDIT OUR RESPONSIBILITIES AND THOSE OF THE DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on page 37 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland ISAs UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 WHAT AN AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INVOLVES We conducted our audit in accordance with ISAs UK and Ireland.
An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the Companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
We primarily focus our work in these areas by assessing the Directors judgements against available evidence forming our own judgements and evaluating the disclosures in the financial statements.
We test and examine information using sampling and other auditing techniques to the extent we consider necessary to provide a reasonable basis for us to draw conclusions.
We obtain audit evidence through testing the effectiveness of controls substantive procedures or a combination of both.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the Annual Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Report of the Directors we consider whether those reports include the disclosures required by applicable legal requirements.
OTHER MATTER We have reported separately on the Group financial statements of Walker Greenbank PLC for the year ended 31 January 2017.
John Minards Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors St Albans 25 April 2017 The maintenance and integrity of the Walker Greenbank PLC website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Profit for the year 693 278 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Corporation tax credits recognised in equity 22 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Cash flow hedge 26 169 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 48 169 Total comprehensive income for the year 741 447 The notes on pages 95 to 108 form an integral part of these financial statements.
COMPANY STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AT 31 JANUARY 2017
Fixed assets Property plant and equipment 5 1 4 Investments 6 83560 44622 83561 44626 Current assets Trade and other receivables 7 1853 11718 Deferred income tax assets 8 260 434 2113 12152 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 10 16532 7559 Derivative financial instruments 9  26 Provision for other liabilities and charges 12 2652 Net current liabilitiesassets 17071 4567 Total assets less current liabilities 66490 49193 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 11  196 Provision for other liabilities and charges 12 2677 Net assets 63813 48997 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 14 696 602 Share premium account 16390 457 Retained earnings 4839 6076 Capital reserve 15 41888 41888 Hedge reserve  26 Total shareholders funds 63813 48997 A profit of 693000 2016 278000 has been included within these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 92 to 108 were approved by the Board of Directors on 25 April 2017 and signed on its behalf by John Sach
Registered number 61880 Mike Gant
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY YEAR ENDED 31 JANUARY 2017 Called up share capital
Retained earnings
Hedge reserve note 9
Balance at 1 February tel7412 41888 195 50160 Profit for the year   278   278 Other comprehensive income Cash flow hedge     169 169 Total comprehensive income   278  169 447 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity Dividends   1444   1444 Allotment of share capital 4  4 Longterm incentive plan charge   790   790 Longterm incentive plan vesting   967   967 Related tax movements on longterm incentive plan   11   11 Balance at 31 January tel6076 41888 26 48997 Profit for the year   693   693 Other comprehensive income Corporation tax credits recognised in equity   22   22 Cash flow hedge     26 26 Total comprehensive income   715  26 741 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity Dividends   1818   1818 Allotment of share capital 94 15933 4   16023 Longterm incentive plan charge   658   658 Longterm incentive plan vesting   664   664 Related tax movements on longterm incentive plan   124   124 Balance at 31 January 2017 696 16390 4839 41888  63813 Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ACCOUNTING POLICIES BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION These financial statements present information relating to the entity Walker Greenbank PLC the Company and are not consolidated.
The consolidated financial statements of Walker Greenbank PLC and its subsidiaries the Group of which the Company is the parent are separately presented within the Annual Report and Accounts and are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs.
BASIS OF PREPARATION These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and the Companies Act 2006.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the valuation of derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss and with the accounting policies set out below which have been consistently applied to all periods presented unless otherwise indicated.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Therefore the Company continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its financial statements.
No Income Statement is presented for the Company as it has applied the exemption provided by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
In accordance with FRS 101 the following exemptions from the requirements of IFRSs have been applied in the preparation of these financial statements Paragraphs 45b and 46 to 52 of IFRS 2 Sharebased payment details of the number and weightedaverage exercise prices of share options and how the fair value of goods or services received was determined IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures Paragraphs 91 to 99 of IFRS 13 Fair value measurement disclosure of valuation techniques and inputs used for fair value measurement of assets and liabilities Paragraph 38 of IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements comparative information requirements in respect of i paragraph 79aiv of IAS 1 ii paragraph 73e of IAS 16 Property plant and equipment iii paragraph 118e of IAS 38 Intangible assets reconciliations between the carrying amount at the beginning and end of the period and iv paragraphs 76 and 79d of IAS 40 Investment Property 101p8g  The following paragraphs of IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements i 10d statement of cash flows ii 10f a statement of financial position as at the beginning of the preceding period when an entity applies an accounting policy retrospectively or makes a retrospective restatement of items in its financial statements or when it reclassifies items in its financial statements iii 16 statement of compliance with all IFRS iv 38A requirement for minimum of two primary statements including cash flow statements v 38BD additional comparative information vi 40AD requirements for a third statement of financial position vii 111 cash flow statement information and viii 134136 capital management disclosures.
IAS 7 Statement of cash flows Paragraphs 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting policies changes in accounting estimates and errors requirement for the disclosure of information when an entity has not applied a new IFRS that has been issued but is not yet effective Paragraph 17 of IAS 24 Related party disclosures key management compensation The requirements in IAS 24 Related party disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group Paragraphs 130fii 130fiii 134d to 134f and 135c to 135e of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets The requirements of paragraphs 62 B64d B64e B64g B64h B64j to B64m B64nii B64oii B64p B64qii B66 and B67 of IFRS 3 Business Combinations The preparation of financial statements requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the financial statements are disclosed in note 2.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Since the Companys previous annual financial statements for the year ended 31 January 2016 the following pronouncements are now effective and have been adopted by the Company Amendment to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements on disclosure initiative effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 Amendments to IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets  Amendments relating to Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation  effective periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 There has been no material effect on the Companys financial statements following the introduction of the above.
FOREIGN CURRENCIES For the purpose of the financial statements the results and financial position are expressed in sterling which is the functional and presentation currency of the Company.
Transactions in foreign currencies which are those other than the functional currency of the Company are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are translated at the rate ruling at the Balance Sheet date.
All unhedged exchange differences are recognised in the Income Statement for the period within administration expenses.
Further disclosures of the Groups financial risk management policies are included in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements of the Group which are presented separately from these financial statements.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Historical cost comprises the purchase price and costs directly incurred in bringing the asset into use.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed annually and adjusted if appropriate at each Balance Sheet date.
Depreciation is charged on a straightline basis on the original costs after deduction of any estimated residual value.
The principal annual rates are Plant equipment and vehicles Between 5% and 33% Computer hardware 33%
Investments in subsidiary undertakings are recorded at cost plus incidental expenses less any provision for impairment.
Impairment reviews are performed by the Directors when there has been an indication of potential impairment.
IMPAIRMENT OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Property plant and equipment are tested for impairment if events or changes in circumstances assessed at each reporting date indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Where impairment triggers are identified the recoverable amount of the relevant asset or group of assets within a cashgenerating unit is determined being the higher of value in use and net realisable value.
If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its recoverable amount an impairment loss is calculated.
Any impairment is recognised in the Income Statement in the year in which it occurs.
Nonfinancial assets that suffer impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date.
FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  MEASUREMENT BASIS In accordance with FRS 101 financial assets and liabilities are recognised on the date on which the Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument giving rise to the asset or liability.
Financial assets and liabilities are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs and are continually reviewed for impairment going forward.
Any impairment of a financial asset is charged to the Income Statement when incurred.
Financial assets are derecognised when the Companys rights to cash inflows from the asset expire financial liabilities are derecognised when the contractual obligations are discharged cancelled or expire.
Nonderivative financial assets are classified as loans and receivables according to the purpose for which the asset was acquired.
This category includes trade and other receivables  these are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise when the Company provides goods directly to a customer or advances money with no intention of trading the loan or receivable.
Subsequent to initial recognition loans and receivables are included in the Balance Sheet at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any amounts written off to reflect impairment with changes in the carrying amount recognised in the Income Statement within distribution and selling or administration expenses and cash at bank and in hand  this comprises deposits repayable on demand with banks and financial institutions bank balances and cash in hand.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Companys nonderivative financial liabilities are classified as other liabilities.
Other liabilities are financial liabilities with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise when the Company receives goods or services directly from a payable or supplier or borrows money with no intention of trading the liability.
This category includes creditors  these are typically noninterest bearing and following initial recognition are included in the Balance Sheet at amortised cost using the effective interest method bank loans and overdrafts  these are initially recorded at fair value based on proceeds received net of issue costs and subsequently held at amortised cost using the effective interest method and borrowings  these are recorded initially at the fair value net of direct issue costs and are subsequently stated at amortised cost.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are accounted for in the Income Statement using the effective interest method and are included within the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Company has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the end of the reporting period.
Borrowing costs are capitalised as an increase to the carrying value of software or property plant and equipment on major projects where their impact is material.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGE ACCOUNTING  MEASUREMENT BASIS The Groups activities expose it to the financial risks of changes in exchange rates and the Company uses forward exchange rate contracts and swap exchange rate contracts to manage these exposures.
The use of derivative financial instruments is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board of Directors which provide written principles on the use of derivative financial instruments.
The Company documents at the inception of the transaction the relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items.
The Company also documents its assessment both at hedge inception and on an ongoing basis of whether the derivatives that are used in hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in fair values or cash flows of hedged items.
The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges is recognised in equity.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Income Statement within administration expenses.
Amounts accumulated in equity are released to the Income Statement when the hedged item affects the Income Statement and are also classified in the Income Statement within administration expenses.
Derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting under IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement are classified as financial assets or liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
They are initially recognised at fair value with fair value being remeasured at each reporting date.
The fair value of the derivative is based on market price of comparable instruments at the Balance Sheet date.
Changes in fair value are included in the Income Statement within finance costs.
The Company has no embedded derivatives that are not closely related to the host instrument.
OFFSETTING FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the Balance Sheet when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
The legally enforceable right must not be contingent on future events and must be enforceable in the normal course of business and in the event of default insolvency or bankruptcy of the company or the counterparty.
LEASES
Leases are classified as finance leases where the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the Company.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Operating lease rentals are charged to the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Rentfree periods receivable on entering an operating lease are released on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS The Walker Greenbank Group operates both defined benefit and defined contribution pension schemes for the benefit of its employees.
Further details of these schemes are included in note 24 of the consolidated financial statements of the Group.
Defined benefit pension schemes are accounted for within the separate financial statements of the Companys trading subsidiary Abaris Holdings
The Company recognises contributions to defined contribution schemes in respect of its employees as expenses when incurred.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED EMPLOYEE SHARE OWNERSHIP PLAN ESOP Where the Companys issued share capital is acquired by an ESOP trust sponsored by the Company the cost of acquisition is deducted from retained earnings.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  SHAREBASED PAYMENTS UNDER LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS LTIP The Company issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees which must be measured at fair value and recognised as an expense in the Income Statement with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair values of these payments are measured at the date of grant taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the awards are granted.
The fair value is recognised over the period during which employees become conditionally entitled to the awards subject to the Companys estimate of the number of awards which will lapse either due to employees leaving the Company prior to vesting or due to nonmarket based performance conditions not being met.
The total amount recognised in the Income Statement as an expense is adjusted to reflect the actual number of awards that vest.
National insurance contributions related to the awards are recognised as an expense in the Income Statement with a corresponding liability on the Balance Sheet.
The financial effect of awards by the Company of options over its equity shares to employees of subsidiary undertakings are recognised by the Company as an increase in its investment in subsidiaries with a credit to equity equivalent to the IFRS 2 cost in subsidiary undertakings.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  SHORTTERM BONUS PLANS The Company recognises a liability and an expense for bonuses where contractually obliged or where there is a past practice that has created a constructive obligation.
SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Dividend distribution is set by the Board on a regular basis so long as sufficient funds are available.
SHARE PREMIUM Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
TREASURY SHARES Consideration paid including any directly attributable incremental costs net of income taxes on the purchase of the Companys equity share capital treasury shares is deducted from equity attributable to the Companys equity holders until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently reissued any consideration received net of any directly attributable incremental transaction costs and the related income tax effects is included in equity attributable to the Companys equity shareholders.
The EBT is treated as an agent of the Company and as such EBT transactions are treated as being those of the Company.
TAXATION INCLUDING DEFERRED TAX The tax expense represents the sum of the current tax and deferred tax charges or credits.
Current tax is based on the taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from the net profit as reported in the Income Statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Companys liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the Balance Sheet date.
Current tax includes withholding taxes from sales and licensing income in overseas territories.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the tax profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the Company is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 IAS 12 Income taxes requires that the measurement of deferred tax should have regard to the tax consequences that would follow from the manner of expected recovery or settlement at the Balance Sheet date of the carrying amount of its assets and liabilities.
In calculating its deferred tax liability the Companys policy is to regard the depreciable amount of the carrying value of its property plant and equipment to be recovered through continuing use in the business unless included within assets held for resale where the policy is to regard the carrying amount as being recoverable through sale.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each Balance Sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Income Statement except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax relating to retirement benefit obligations is also recognised in equity where the tax relief arises from contributions paid to fund deficits arising in previous periods that were recognised in equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities and there is an intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
DIVIDEND INCOME Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established.
DIVIDEND DISTRIBUTIONS Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Companys financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS The Company makes estimates and assumptions concerning future events.
The resulting accounting estimates will seldom precisely equal the related actual results.
The Company applies its best endeavours in setting accounting estimates and uses historical experience and other factors including input from experienced and specialist management.
Estimates and assumptions are periodically reevaluated and the resulting accounting balances updated as new information including actual outcomes become apparent.
The estimates and judgements that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
A IMPAIRMENT OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever impairment triggers are apparent.
The recoverable amounts of cash generating units are determined based on value in use VIU calculations.
These calculations require use of estimates of future sales margins and other operating and administration expenses and of discount rates.
The carrying values of the nonfinancial assets are not considered to be sensitive due to the nature of the assets.
B DEFERRED TAX RECOGNITION The Company considers it appropriate to recognise at the Balance Sheet date deferred tax assets resulting from historical trading losses and other temporary differences including pension deficits and the impact of awards under the longterm incentive plan.
The amount of deferred tax recognised is based on estimates of the timing and amount of future taxable profits of the Company which in turn relies upon estimates of future operating profits and the occurrence timing and tax treatment of significant items of income and expenditure including contributions to pension schemes and the vesting of LTIP payment awards.
Further disclosures relating to the amount of deferred tax asset recognised and other relevant disclosures are included in note 8.
The Company considers the sensitivity on deferred tax recognition to be based on profits generated by the Company and tax rates substantively enacted.
There has been no material impact on sensitivity in the current or previous financial year.
C LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLAN PAYMENT AWARDS The Company has granted awards to Executive Directors and senior management which include vesting conditions relating to the future financial performance of the Group as measured by adjusted profit before tax PBT and the relative performance of the Groups Total Shareholder Return TSR against comparator companies.
The fair value of the awards granted is charged against the Income Statement over the vesting period the amount of that charge including the national insurance component of the charge is dependent upon the Companys estimates of how many awards will ultimately vest which is linked directly to its estimates regarding future PBT and TSR achievement.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS CONTINUED The financial effect of awards by the Company of options over its equity shares to employees of subsidiary undertakings are recognised by the Company as an increase in its investment in subsidiaries with a credit to equity equivalent to the IFRS 2 cost in subsidiary undertakings.
D CONTINGENT CONSIDERATION ON BUSINESS COMBINATIONS For business combinations the Company estimates the fair value of the consideration transferred which includes assumptions about the future performance of the business acquired and an appropriate discount rate to determine the fair value of any contingent consideration.
There is some sensitivity in determining this accounting estimate as there is a range of outcomes.
If the EBITDA of the acquired business increases by 10% then the contingent consideration would be 127 000 higher and if it decreased by 10% it would be 127 000 lower.
Judgement is also applied in determining whether any future payments should be classified as contingent consideration or as remuneration for future services.
The fair value of the contingent consideration recognised in business combinations is reassessed at each reporting date using updated inputs and assumptions based on the latest financial forecasts for the relevant business.
Judgement is applied as to whether changes should be applied at the acquisition date or as postacquisition changes.
Fair value movements and the unwinding of the discounting is recognised within finance costs in the Income Statement.
AUDITORS REMUNERATION Audit fee  fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the parent Company and the consolidation of the Group financial statements 58 60 Corporate finance services 536 EMPLOYEE INFORMATION Wages and salaries 1648 1517 Social security costs 292 183 Other pension costs 87 153 Sharebased payment awards including NIC thereon 445 536 Employee benefit expense 2472 2389 The average monthly number of employees including Directors during the year
Number
Corporate and administration 12 11 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Computer hardware
Cost
1 February 2015 and 31 January Additions 31 January Accumulated depreciation 1 February Charge January Charge January Net book amount 31 January 2017  1 1 31 January  January The total depreciation expense of 3000 2016 9000 is included in administration expenses.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Shares in subsidiary undertakings
At 1 February 45660 45339 Assignment of receivable to subsidiary 3432 Acquisition of Globaltex 2015 Limited 35239 IFRS 2 cost relating to sharebased payments 267 321 At 31 January 84598 45660 Provision for impairment At 1 February 1038 1038 At 31 January 1038 1038 Net book amount at 31 January 83560 44622 On 11 May 2016 the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary Abaris Holdings Limited Abaris entered into a Deed of Assignment assigning to Abaris absolutely and with full title guarantee the intercompany balance of US5 million payable to the Company by its US subsidiary the
The Receivable was always intended to be equity to help fund the US business with no expectation of payment.
In consideration Abaris made an allotment against the fair value of the Receivable and issued to the Company 2400000 ordinary shares of 1 each at a premium of 0.43 per share.
Consequently the Company derecognised the Receivable and recorded an investment of 3432000 US5 million.
Since the assignment of the Receivable was an interGroup transaction there has been no effect on the consolidated financial statements of the Walker Greenbank Group for the year ended 31 January 2017.
On 12 October 2016 the Company conditionally acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Globaltex 2015 Limited a company registered in the UK for an initial cash consideration of 25000000 and a contingent consideration of up to 17500000 in aggregate payable in the Companys shares linked to the performance of the acquired business over a fouryear period giving a total potential consideration of up to 42500000 excluding working capital adjustments.
The completion date for the transaction was 31 October 2016.
Full details of the acquisition are included in note 33 of the consolidated financial statements of the Group which are separately presented within the Annual Report and Accounts.
During the year the Company disposed of seven 2016 none wholly owned subsidiaries which did not trade in any of the periods presented.
The cost and net book amount of these subsidiaries held by the Company had already been written off in prior years and therefore their disposal had no impact on the Companys equity or profit for the current and previous year.
Name of subsidiary undertaking disposed Country of incorporation Status as at 31 January Status as at 31 January Alkar International Limited UK Dissolved Dormant Hampshire Medical Developments Limited UK Dissolved Dormant Old English Wallpapers Limited UK Dissolved Dormant OrthoMed Limited UK Dissolved Dormant The Whittington Wallpaper Company Limited UK Dissolved Dormant WG Tendercare Limited UK Dissolved Dormant Whittaker and Woods Limited UK Dissolved Dormant Indicates that shares were held by a subsidiary company.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INVESTMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC is registered and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
It is the parent Company of the Walker Greenbank Group.
The
Companys related undertakings all of which are wholly owned are as follows Name of subsidiary undertaking Country of incorporation and place of business Holding Proportion of voting rights shares held by the Company Nature of business Abaris Holdings Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Luxury interior furnishings Globaltex 2015 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Holding company Globaltex Limited trading as Clarke and Clarke UK Ordinary shares 100% Luxury interior furnishings Walker Greenbank Inc US Ordinary shares 100% Luxury interior furnishings Arthur Sanderson and Sons SARL France Ordinary shares 100% Luxury interior furnishings Abaris Trading Company B.
Netherlands Ordinary shares 100% Luxury interior furnishings Alkar Display Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Anstey Wallpaper Company Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Anthology Fabrics and Wallcoverings Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Arthur Sanderson and Sons Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Barracks Fabric Printing Company Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Boyle and Son Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Bryant Corporation Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Cirka Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Design Edition Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Forestand Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 G Johnson Cirencester Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 G Johnson Bros Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Greenbank Engineering Overseas Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Harlequin Fabrics and Wallcoverings Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Harris Fabrics Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Melody Wallcoverings Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Morris and Co.
Artworkers Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Pepys Wallpapers Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Prestake Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Sanderson of London Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Scion Fabrics and Wallcoverings Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Scion Living Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Standfast Dyers and Printers Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Strines Textiles Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Style Library Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant
Strike1 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 1 March 2017
Strike2 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant in liquidation
Strike3 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 1 March 2017
Strike4 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 1 March 2017
Strike5 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 1 March 2017
Strike6 Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 1 March 2017 WG Fabrics Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Walker Greenbank Distribution Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Warner Archive Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 1 March 2017 William Morris Wallpapers Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Zoffany House Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dissolved 28 February 2017 Zoffany Limited UK Ordinary shares 100% Dormant Indicates that the shares are held by a subsidiary company.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Registered offices of the Companys related undertakings all of which are wholly owned are as follows Name of subsidiary undertaking Registered office All undertakings other than the ones listed below Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX Walker Greenbank Inc 800 Huyler Street Teterboro New Jersey 07608 Arthur Sanderson and Sons SARL 19 Rue de Mail Paris 75002 Abaris Trading Company B.
Postbus 372 1970 AJ IJmuiden Netherlands Indicates that the shares are held by a subsidiary company.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings  10543 Corporation tax 22 22 Other taxes and social security 1461 843 Other receivables 370 310 1853 11718 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings are noninterest bearing and are unsecured.
These loans are repayable on demand by the Company should payment be required but have no fixed date of repayment.
DEFERRED INCOME TAX A net deferred tax asset of 260000 2016 434000 is recognised in respect of future deductions for LTIP payments.
Temporary differences on LTIP payments 260 434 The deferred tax asset on LTIP payments is expected to unwind after more than one year.
At 31 January 2017 the Company has gross unused UK tax losses of 3225000 2016 3225000 available for offset against future profits.
Potential deferred tax assets at 31 January 2017 of 613000 2016 674000 relating to UK tax losses and deductible temporary differences have not been recognised as it is not considered probable that recovery of the potential deferred tax asset will arise under existing tax legislation.
Unutilised tax losses  UK 548 645 Other deductible temporary differences  UK 65 29 Derivative financial instruments  UK  5 There are also unutilised capital tax losses at 31 January 2017 of 4881000 2016 4881000 but no deferred tax asset has been recognised as it is not considered probable that these losses will be utilised.
The deferred tax balance at 31 January 2017 included within these financial statements has been calculated at a rate of 17% as this is the rate at which the majority of the balances are expected to unwind.
A change to the UK corporation tax rate was announced in the Chancellors Budget on 16 March 2016 and became substantively enacted in the Finance Bill 2016 on 6 September 2016 to reduce the main rate to 19% from 1 April 2017 and to 17% from 1 April 2020.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash flow hedges  liability  26 FORWARD FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS The Groups USbased subsidiary Walker Greenbank Inc. sells products to local customers with sales invoiced in US dollars.
As the Groups presentation currency is sterling it is exposed to changes in the reported sterling value of these sales.
The Group considers that it is highly probable that future sales of this nature will continue to arise over at least the next 12 months.
The Company enters into monthly forward foreign exchange contracts with a third party to buy sterling and sell US dollars.
The Group designates these contracts as cash flow hedges of the foreign currency risk arising from the highly probable future forecast sales transactions.
As at the reporting date there were no US dollar forward exchange contracts and therefore the fair value of the forward foreign currency contracts relating to the benefit on these anticipated future transactions was nil 2016 liability of 26000.
The amounts deferred in equity are released into the Income Statement in the period or periods during which the hedged forecast transactions impact the Income Statement which is normally within one month of the Balance Sheet date.
The Brands make more purchases from the eurozone than sales made to the eurozone.
As the Groups presentation currency is sterling it is exposed to changes in the reported sterling value of the purchases.
The Group considers that the level of this exposure will reduce over the next 12 months.
As at the reporting date there were no euro forward foreign currency contracts.
SWAP FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS The Group uses swap contracts to manage its working capital exchange risk from both the foreign subsidiaries and the balances on receivables payables and cash held in foreign currency.
These swap contracts are designated as fair value through the Income Statement.
The use of swaps are reviewed monthly and renewed when necessary.
As at the reporting date there were no US dollar swap contracts 2016 fair value liability of nil and no euro swap contracts 2016 fair value asset of nil.
CREDITORS AMOUNTS FALLING DUE WITHIN ONE YEAR Bank term loan note 11 199 400 Bank overdraft 116 1639 Trade creditors 276 87 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 13737 4410 Other creditors 755 98 Accruals 1449 925 16532 7559 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings are noninterest bearing and are unsecured.
These loans are payable by the Company on demand should payment be required but have no fixed date of repayment.
There is a setoff arrangement for bank accounts held with the UK clearing bank and accordingly the amount stated as bank overdraft represents the net of accounts in funds and in overdraft.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CREDITORS DUE AFTER MORE THAN ONE YEAR
Term loan 200 400 Committed facility 1
Term loan  200 Committed facility  4 Total borrowings 199 596 In December 2015 the Group entered into a new 12500000 multicurrency revolving credit facility with Barclays Bank PLC for a fiveyear period and cancelled the existing receivables facilities.
The agreement also includes a 10000000 accordion facility option to further increase available credit which provides substantial headroom for future growth.
An initial bank arrangement fee of 100000 and an additional 40000 incurred during the year is amortised over the life of the loan.
The total facilities from Barclays Bank PLC comprises a variable rate term loan secured on the Groups freehold property which is being repaid on a fiveyear profile and a revolving credit facility which may be drawn down in either sterling or euro.
The total Barclays Bank PLC facilities are capped at 22700000 2016 23100000 the utilisation of the facilities at the year end was 6825000 2016 596000.
The term loan bears interest at variable rates based on a margin above the Bank of England base rate.
The revolving credit facility bears interest at a variable rate based on a margin above LIBOR for sterling loans or the EURIBOR for euro loans.
Under the Barclays Bank PLC facilities the Group is subject to a financial covenant which applies to the term loan being interest cover.
The revolving credit facility is also subject to compliance of two financial covenants being interest cover and leverage.
Any noncompliance with covenants could if not remedied or waived constitute an event of default with respect to any such arrangements.
The Group has reported to Barclays Bank PLC that it was in full compliance with its covenants throughout each of the periods presented and expects to be for the remaining term of the agreement.
For the Companys cash at bank and the receivable component of derivative financial instruments the counterparty to the financial instruments is a major UK bank and the Company does not consider there to be any significant credit risk from holding these financial assets.
The fair value of current borrowings approximates their carrying amount as the impact of discounting is not significant.
The carrying amounts and fair value of the noncurrent borrowings are as follows Carrying amount Fair value Term loan  200  201 Committed facility  4 The fair values are based on cash flows discounted using a weighted average rate based on the borrowing rate of 1.75% 2016 1.75%.
The table below analyses the Companys financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period to contractual maturity at the Balance Sheet date.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows.
The maturity profile of undiscounted cash flows on variable interest rate borrowings has assumed interest rates as at the Balance Sheet date.
31 January 2017 Less than 1 year
1 to 2 years
2 to 5 years
5 years Borrowings 200 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 16333 Provision for other liabilities and charges 2652 1609 1867 19185 1609 1867  Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CREDITORS DUE AFTER MORE THAN ONE YEAR CONTINUED 31 January 2016 Less than 1 year
1 to 2 years
2 to 5 years
5 years Borrowings 400 204 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 7159 7559 204 The carrying amounts of the Companys borrowings are denominated in the following currencies Sterling 199 596 PROVISION FOR OTHER LIABILITIES AND CHARGES Contingent liability arising on business combination At 1 February Provision on acquisition of Clarke and Clarke 5148 Unwind of discount 181 At 31 January 5329 Analysis of total contingent liability Noncurrent 2677 Current 2652 Total 5329 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS BY CATEGORY The accounting policies for financial instruments have been applied to the line items below 31 January 2017 Loans and receivables Assets at fair value
Total
Assets as per Balance Sheet Trade and other receivables 370   370 Cash at bank and in hand Total 370   370 31 January 2017 Liabilities at fair value
Derivatives used for hedging
Liabilities as per Balance Sheet Derivative financial instruments Borrowings  200  200 Creditors amounts falling due within one year  16333  16333 Provision for other liabilities  5329  5329 Total  21862  21862 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31 January 2016 Loans and receivables Assets at fair value
Total
Assets as per Balance Sheet Trade and other receivables 10853   10853 Cash at bank and in hand Total 10853   10853 31 January 2016 Liabilities at fair value
Derivatives used for hedging
Liabilities as per Balance Sheet Derivative financial instruments   26 26 Borrowings  596  596 Creditors amounts falling due within one year  7159  7159 Total  7755 26 7781 CALLED UP SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares of 1p each Number of shares Called up and fully paid 31 January 2017 69551678 695517 31 January 2016 60172521 601725 31 January 2015 59762559 597626 On 12 October 2016 the Company conditionally acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Globaltex 2015 Limited a company registered in the
In order to finance the initial cash consideration for this acquisition a placing of a total of 8947369 new ordinary shares of 1p each in the Company was announced on 12 October 2016.
These shares which represented approximately 12.9% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital on admission to trading on AIM excluding treasury shares were placed on 12 October 2016 at a price of 190.0 pence per share raising proceeds of approximately 17000000.
Full details of the acquisition are included in note 33 of the consolidated financial statements of the Group which are separately presented within the Annual Report and Accounts.
On 16 May 2016 773393 shares vested under the Companys LongTerm Incentive Plan.
To satisfy the vesting 431788 shares of 1 pence each were allotted at par value.
Following these transactions Walker Greenbanks issued ordinary share capital with voting rights consists of 69551678 2016 60172521 ordinary shares of which no 2016 nil ordinary shares are held in treasury and 4909 2016 nil ordinary shares are held by the Walker Greenbank PLC EBT.
Shares held in treasury or by the EBT are treated as cancelled when calculating EPS.
On 18 May 2015 1090326 shares vested under the Companys LTIP of which 188272 shares were issued from the Walker Greenbank PLC EBT.
The market value of shares held by the EBT at 31 January 2017 was 9941 2016 nil.
The total number of shares held in the EBT at the period end represented 0.01 % 2016 0% of the issued shares.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS LTIPS The Group operates an LTIP.
There have been 10 awards under this plan in which Executive Directors and senior management of the Group participate.
The LTIP has previously been approved by the shareholders at an Annual General Meeting.
Further details are included in note 27 of the consolidated financial statements of the Group which are separately included within the Annual Report and Accounts.
Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CAPITAL RESERVE Capital reserve represents 000 Capital redemption reserve on capital restructurings 41888 At 31 January 2017 and 2016 41888
During the year the Company has paid a final dividend for the year to 31 January 2016 of 2.45p and an interim dividend of 0.55p 333000 for the year to 31 January 2017 2016 0.44p 265000.
The Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 3.06p per share 2016 2.45p per share which will be payable on 11 August 2017 to shareholders on the register at 21 July 2017 giving a cost of 2128000 2016 1485000.
This brings the total dividend for the year to 3.61p 2016 2.89p.
CONTINGENT LIABILITY The Company is party to a cross guarantee relating to the borrowings of its subsidiary Abaris Holdings Limited under the funding arrangement with Barclays Bank PLC.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS The Company made contributions to the Walker Greenbank Group Personal Pension Plan of 49000 for the year ended 31 January 2017 2016 110000.
LEASE COMMITMENTS Operating lease payments represent rentals payable by the Company for certain office properties.
Land and building leases are negotiated for an average of 14 years 2016 14 years and rentals are fixed for an average of five years 2016 five years.
Other leases are negotiated for an average term of three years 2016 three years and rentals are fixed for an average of three years 2016 three years.
Total commitments due under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Land and buildings
Total
Land and buildings
Total
Within one year  656 Between one and five years 1684 15 1699 2624  2624 Over five years 1312  1312 2453  2453 3417 25 3442 5733  5733 Other leases include hire of motor vehicles.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FIVE YEAR RECORD Revenue 75725 78434 83373 87839 92373 Overseas revenue by location of customer 27192 28244 27923 30330 36309 Underlying profit from operations 5831 6543 7335 8202 9842 Profit from operations 5831 6543 7335 8202 7859 Underlying EBITDA 7175 8903 9684 10155 12164 Underlying profit before income tax 4934 5495 6329 7338 9129 Capital expenditure 3119 4753 3250 2510 6768 Earnings per ordinary share 6.89p 8.63p 8.60p 9.79p 8.55p Average number of employees 58tel681 Dividends paid in year 711 900 1144 1444 1818 Shareholders funds 24182 26852 26937 35284 51293 Dividend per share Final prior year end  paid 1.00p 1.25p 1.57p 1.96p 2.45p Interim current year end  paid 0.23p 0.28p 0.35p 0.44p 0.55p Final current year end  proposed   1.96p 2.45p 3.06p Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Financial Calendar Annual General Meeting 21 June 2017 Announcement of halfyear results October 2017 Walker Greenbank PLC Chalfont House Oxford Road
UB9 4DX
Ftel site Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES Walker Greenbank PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES CORPORATE ADVISERS STOCKBROKER AND NOMAD Investec Bank Plc 2 Gresham Street London EC2V 7QP INDEPENDENT AUDITORS PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors 10 Bricket Road St Albans Herts AL1 3JX TAX ADVISERS PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 10 Bricket Road St Albans Herts AL1 3JX PUBLIC RELATIONS Buchanan Communications Ltd 107 Cheapside London EC2V 6DN
DLA Piper Noble Street London EC2V 7EE
Capita Registrars The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU
Barclays Commercial Bank Ashton House 497 Silbury Boulevard Milton Keynes MK9 2LD WALKERGREENBANK.
OM
Chalfont House Oxford Road Denham UB9 4DX
