Annual Report and Accounts 201617 DIRECTORS AND ADVISERS
Debbie Hewitt EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Brian Brick Chief Executive Tony Bennett Finance Director NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Maurice Helfgott Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Bryan Portman Independent NonExecutive Director Zoe Morgan Independent NonExecutive Director
Tony Bennett REGISTERED OFFICE 8 St Johns Hill
SW11 1SA
Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall
EC2Y 5ET
Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU
Deloitte LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor 2 New Street Square London EC4A 3BZ COMPANY REGISTRATION NUMBER MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 1
STRATEGIC REPORT 2 Headlines
3 Chairmans Statement
5 Strategic Review
8 Chief Executives Review
13 Key Performance Indicators 14 Principal Risks and Uncertainties 17 Corporate Social Responsibility DIRECTORS REPORT 19 Board of Directors 20 Directors Report 23 Corporate Governance Report 30 Directors Responsibilities Statement 32 Annual Statement on Directors Remuneration 34 Directors Remuneration Policy 41 Annual Report on Remuneration
53 Independent Auditors Report
59 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 60 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 61 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 62 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 63 Company Balance Sheet 65 Notes to the Financial Statements SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION 92 Notice of Annual General Meeting 99 Form of Proxy 2 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Total Group revenue excluding VAT was up 5.7% on the previous year to 127.9m.
Group likeforlike sales of 131.5m including VAT up 5.3% 201516 up 8.2% Likeforlike retail sales up 6.0% 201516 up 7.6% Likeforlike hire sales representing 13.7% of sales up 1.5% 201516 up 11.7% Ecommerce sales including VAT up 15.7% 201516 up 36.3% now 11% of total sales Mobile and tablet sales growth strong and now 43% of total ecommerce sales Prot before tax up 20.3% at 7.1m 201516 5.9m before exceptional items.
EBITDA up 8.8% to 13.6m 201516 EBITDA 12.5m driven by improved sales more targeted discounting and tight control of costs.
Gross margin improved in total for the year by 1.5% to 61.3% due to lower levels of discounting.
Strong cash balance of 19.5m 30 January 2016 17.3m through close management of working capital and notwithstanding a further 8.8m capital investment across the business.
Cash generated from operating activities of 16.0m 201516 11.6m.
Basic earnings per share of 5.51 pence up 17% 201516 4.71 pence before exceptional items 201516 4.65 pence after exceptional items.
Final dividend proposed of 3.98 pence total dividend for the year 5.89 pence up 6.1% on the previous year 201516 total dividend 5.55 pence.
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
Benets from ongoing investment in a strong brand identity and store ret programme continue delivering an environment to showcase our enhanced product range.
Ecommerce sales continue to grow leveraging the process improvements and backend infrastructure investments made during the year.
Tailor Me custom tailoring service gaining traction with customers nationwide.
Senior team strengthened during the year with the recruitment of a new Finance Director Chief Operating Ofcer and Customer Director driving our focus on service delivery.
CURRENT TRADING Retail likeforlike sales including VAT in the rst 7 weeks of the new nancial year are up 4.3% 7 week period avoids a non LFL Easter bank holiday in week 8 last year.
Easter which marks the start of the wedding season falls 3 weeks later in 2017 temporarily delaying some hire order collections and therefore revenues by three weeks.
Hire orders booked for collection in 201718 are currently 1% on the previous year.
Hire like for like reported on a cash taken basis is 14.3% in the rst 7 weeks due to the implementation of our 10 deposit offer in store.
This clearly impacts LFL revenues and means that during the early part of the Hire season we are holding a materially smaller value of deposits on a cash taken basis.
Early responses to the Spring Summer 2017 range across Retail and to the new Hire ranges have been good.
We continue to grow our presence on the high street and online.
The Groups trading performance continues in line with the Boards expectations.
Likeforlike including VAT represents nancial information for ecommerce and stores open during both the current and prior nancial periods and compares 52 weeks against 52 weeks except for stores retted in the period where the period closed for ret is excluded from both the current and prior nancial periods.
Likeforlike Hire and Tailor Me sales are calculated on cash receipts in the period before adjustment for the movement in the level of deposits held.
EBITDA is earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and exceptional items.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 3
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
I am pleased to report another year of considerable progress for the Group.
Total likeforlike sales including VAT reected a 5.3% increase on the prior year.
Prot before taxation was up 20.3% to 7.1m compared with 5.9m in the previous year.
EBITDA continued on a positive trend to 13.6m compared with 12.5m in the previous year.
Similarly our cash position continues to be very strong despite the ongoing ret programme.
The retail environment became one of the most highly competitive we have seen for some considerable time with heavy and intense discounting.
We remained focused on our multibranded and segmented pricing architecture and traded our way through what was an unforgiving market which saw a number of new branded entrants to the Menswear market and the exit or reduction in market share for a couple of long established brands reinforcing the need for us to keep close to consumer trends and to modernise our offer accordingly.
The core Moss Bros master brand is now well established and we saw reasonable growth in each of our supporting subbrands of Moss London Moss 1851 and Moss Esq with Moss London expanding our reach to a younger customer capitalising on the growing trend of occasions like School Proms.
Actions to develop our product offer have included the growth of Tailor Me which is achieving signicant traction as a more accessible form of bespoking enabling a signicant proportion of our suit range to be personalised.
This unique proposition is now available across our entire estate and we have grown sales throughout the last 12 months undoubtedly adding to our growth in market share.
We have almost completed our store ret programme this year completing 11 rets which means almost all of our store estate has now been modernised over the last four years.
This increased investment has impacted cash in the short term as planned but the proven payback means we are achieving the returns predicted and we turn our attention now to maintaining and rening our estate to reect the more premium positioning of our brands amongst our target customers.
We opened a further 7 stores in Westeld Stratford City the Merry Hill shopping centre Worcester Belfast Harrogate Newbury and on Teesside.
We also relocated our Hateld store and closed 4 stores giving us an overall store count of 127 stores compared with 124 last year.
We continued the development of the organisation and talent by the recruitment of a new Group Finance Director Tony Bennett who joined us in August 2016.
We have also recruited a new Buying Director Nick Reed who joins us from Charles Tyrwhitt the multichannel Menswear retailer which he joined in 2000.
He has a strong product brand and commercial background in online multisite and international consumer businesses with highly relevant experience in Menswear.
He will join us in April 2017.
We have a strong and stable team of NonExecutive Directors and continue to review our succession plans with rigour to be sure we manage the succession of the Board and its various Committees in a seamless way ensuring we retain the highest levels of governance.
The team continues to apply strong cash and working capital controls and the business continues to be debt free with a healthy cash balance supporting the Boards progressive dividend and investment policies.
Likeforlike including VAT represents nancial information for ecommerce and stores open during both the current and prior nancial periods and compares 52 weeks against 52 weeks except for stores retted in the period where the period closed for ret is excluded from both the current and prior nancial periods.
Likeforlike Hire and Tailor Me sales are calculated on cash receipts in the period before adjustment for the movement in the level of deposits held.
EBITDA is earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and exceptional items.
4 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
CONTINUED
The Board is proposing the payment of a nal dividend of 3.98 pence per share to be paid on 23 June 2017 to all shareholders on the register on 2 June 2017 ex dividend date 1 June 2017.
The recommended total dividend for the year will be 5.89 pence per share an increase of 6.1% on the previous year.
It is our intention to continue this progressive dividend policy balanced against the wider investment needs of the business.
In the coming year we will leverage our roll out of Tailor Me accelerate the reinvention of our Hire offer and leverage and continue to build the infrastructure to modernise our multichannel offer whilst investing more in our colleague and service propositions.
This will be done in the context of signicant external cost pressures from the increases in the National Living Wage the Apprenticeship Levy the revaluation of business rates and increased purchasing costs due to the combined effects of a devalued pound.
We expect the trading environment for the business in 2017 to remain challenging.
Although we recognise external macro challenges we are well placed to leverage our specialist credentials and to enhance our position as the rst choice for mens tailoring.
Finally I would like to recognise the fact that we differentiate ourselves through the highest levels of customer service which is the result of substantial training and hard work of all of our people.
I would like to thank them all for their continued dedication and contribution to another successful year for the Group.
DEBBIE HEWITT
5 April 2017 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 5 STRATEGY AND OBJECTIVE Moss Bros Group PLC the Group retails and hires formal wear for men predominantly in the UK.
The Group operates mainly through Moss Bros branded mainstream stores promoting a number of own branded sub brands and third party brands.
The Group also trades through the premium Savoy Taylors Guild fascia where there is a historical link in areas such as the Strand in London.
The Groups vision is to be the rst choice for mens tailoring through creating a multichannel menswear business focused on our target customer groups.
There are three pillars to this strategy Implement a clear brand strategy leveraging the Moss Bros master brand and complementary sub brands.
2 Achieve full omnichannel capability so that customers can shop seamlessly across all channels.
Deliver a consistently outstanding customer experience across all channels through great service and great environments.
Through the customer insight project completed in 2013 our customers have told us very clearly how much they value the Moss Bros brand for its expertise heritage product quality and value for money.
Some potential customers lacked awareness of our retailing credentials and product offer.
We have therefore continued to develop the positioning of the brand and we relaunched our subbrands under the master brand of Moss Bros in Autumn 2014.
Our subbrands now comprise Moss London  Slim t styles targeted at younger style conscious Moss 1851  Great quality suits with a tailored t for business and leisure Moss Esq.
Great value suits for everyday wear with regular t A key objective of our ecommerce initiatives is to provide a full omnichannel offer to all customers offering a number of ways to shop.
The project to create a single customer database including full customer transaction history is complete and offers signicant customer relationship management CRM opportunities for the business.
Our online performance continues to grow with signicant increases in conversion rates and sales driven by the launch of our fully responsive website particularly through mobile and tablet channels.
There are also opportunities to exploit online international growth and to grow and develop our UK store estate.
The UK store refurbishment programme is nearing completion with positive results seen from retted stores compared to nonretted stores.
Retted stores are achieving our three year payback target and an enhanced customer experience.
STRATEGIC REVIEW 6 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site STRATEGIC REVIEW
MULTICHANNEL BUSINESS MODEL
Hire
Stores
Ecommerce
People
The first choice for mens tailoring Supply chain and Infrastructure In order that staff throughout the business are inspired and motivated to work to achieve the strategy and objectives of the business we have launched an initiative to articulate these to the wider business.
The initiative titled The Moss Bros Way is centred on four themes Proud to Sell Customer for Life Passionate Experts Winning Teams
There are 105 Moss Bros stores 201516 101 in total and 22 Moss Bros outlet stores 201516 23 as at 28 January 2017 which trade Moss Bros own brands and carefully selected third party brands including Hugo Boss Canali Ted Baker DKNY and French Connection where the store prole demonstrates a demand for this type of product.
The vast majority of the stores also have a Moss Bros Hire store within a store operation within them.
In parallel with operational improvements we have continued to review the positioning of the Moss Bros brand with current and potential customers and the overall perceived value of the offering.
The concept of Moss Bros for Hire Ready to Wear or Bespoke underpins our vision to be the rst choice for mens tailoring.
HIRE
Moss Bros Hire is the market leader in the UK hire market and the number one recognised name for hire.
We had 124 Moss Bros Hire outlets as at 28 January 2017 201516120 all contained within core Moss Bros Retail and Savoy Taylors Guild Stores.
The gross margin for Hire has seen a small decline in recent years as a result of improvements in quality assurance and more thorough garment nishing within the dry cleaning process along with the shorter life of ner fabrics used for our most contemporary Hire ranges.
This has improved customer experience and underpinned the Hire business.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 7
During 2016 we launched a fully responsive website which automatically optimises itself for the device upon which a customer is browsing.
We are seeing improved customer conversion as a result.
Our
Australia.
Our transactional Hire website continues to grow with group booking functionality gaining traction.
Whilst still at an early stage of growth the results are encouraging and there is strong evidence of wedding hire customers beginning their journey online before engaging with our store estate to complete the transaction.
Based on experience to date a number of further enhancements are planned for 2017 to improve customer experience and grow the business.
SUPPLY CHAIN AND COSTS The buying team continually assesses supplier performance to ensure the most commercially benecial results for the Group and to minimise lead times.
Over the last few years we have broadened direct sourcing from China and neighbouring countries and continued to achieve better buying margins and product quality.
Costs remain tightly controlled with all expenditure carefully planned and monitored.
With a continued increase in sales the focus has shifted to process efciencies enabling us to further simplify the business.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Appropriate deployment of information technology is vitally important to the success of our business and in enabling the establishment of a multichannel shopping environment.
We will continue to ensure that we have a exible resilient and scalable technology platform which will underpin our future business growth.
Additionally we need to ensure that our customer facing technology facilitates the delivery of a consistently outstanding customer service through whichever channel a customer chooses to shop with us.
The operational efciency of our distribution centre based in Barking is closely monitored.
Options for improving its performance including space management are continually appraised by the operations team to streamline the business.
PEOPLE
The need for talented and committed people across all areas of the Group requires a continuing focus on effective recruitment induction and performance appraisal and management.
Developing and nurturing talent will play a central and enhanced role in the business going forward with our People strategy gaining momentum in 2016.
The launch of the Moss Bros Way in 2016 focused our culture and behaviours around common goals to further build the business and our annual companywide staff survey will help to benchmark progress.
Employment policies do not discriminate between employees or potential employees on the grounds of gender colour race nationality ethnic origin national origin religion religious beliefs sexual orientation or age.
It remains the Groups policy to give full and sympathetic consideration to the employment training career development and promotion of disabled employees.
Special consideration is given to the continuity of employment of any employee becoming disabled after their employment has commenced and where practicable to the provision of alternative employment.
8 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS The Group has continued to make strong progress throughout the year.
The ongoing store ret programme in 201617 means that 97 of our 127 stores were trading in the new format at the year end.
This combined with our ongoing focus on product and brand development has meant that our customer offer continues to go from strength to strength.
Building brand equity in this way alongside signicant improvements in our multichannel proposition leaves us well placed to capitalise on the tailoring expertise which we possess instore and online.
Our Tailor Me personalisation service further adds to our proposition making us the ideal destination whether a customer wishes to buy rent or tailor their perfect suit.
RETAIL
We continued to pursue operational improvements across the business which when combined with our ongoing investment in store rets during the year beneted likeforlike sales which were up by 6.0% on the previous year 201516 up by 7.6%.
Retail gross margins improved on the previous year by 2.2% as a result of more focused promotional activity.
Stock levels were kept closely under control throughout the year.
We opened 7 brand new stores and closed 4 in the UK during the year.
A further store was relocated into a larger and better location.
We are considering additional new store opening opportunities in the UK in the next 12 months and currently have 4 conrmed openings for 2017.
The Group now trades from 127 stores 30 January 2016 124 stores.
The inherent exibility in our property estate gives us options in what we anticipate will be a fast changing retail landscape.
The average lease length across the store portfolio is only 56 months and we are targeting improved lease terms on renewal of a 10 year term with a tenant only break clause at year 5.
The underpinning of hire and the demand for ecommerce click and collect and click and return points together with advantageous lease deals means there is an opportunity to expand our store footprint on a selective and cost effective basis with good returns.
HIRE
Overall likeforlike hire sales increased by 1.5% in the year following very strong growth in the previous nancial year 201516 11.7%.
The broadening of the range to include lounge suits has proved very successful and has received enthusiastic positive customer feedback.
We continue to invest in our Hire business both in terms of additional Hire product lines and improvements in our underlying Hire systems.
Although currently small our online Hire offer is increasing in its contribution to the overall Hire business.
We are condent our position as the leading hire brand will be maintained through the product and technology initiatives currently underway.
ECOMMERCE
Sales grew very strongly up 15.7% on the previous year.
Online sales now represent 11% of total sales 201516 10%.
Visitor conversion shows strong growth across all electronic devices and is growing particularly rapidly from customers reaching us via mobile devices since the introduction of a fully device responsive website in the second half of 2016.
Mobile and tablet sales growth was particularly strong and now comprises 43% of total ecommerce sales.
Investment of both capital and expertise into the ecommerce customer experience has seen a signicant reduction in the number of customer contacts received regarding their online shopping experience.
This improvement has provided us with the condence to actively acquire additional new customers and also focus attention on building on our existing customer repurchase behaviour.
Likeforlike including VAT represents nancial information for ecommerce and stores open during both the current and prior nancial periods and compares 52 weeks against 52 weeks except for stores retted in the period where the period closed for ret is excluded from both the current and prior nancial periods.
Likeforlike Hire and Tailor Me sales are calculated on cash receipts in the period before adjustment for the movement in the level of deposits held.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 9 The Hire website continues to gain traction and we believe it will achieve further growth with wedding hire customers more frequently beginning their journey online before engaging with our stores to complete their transaction.
We will continue to invest in enhancements to the Hire website in order to further improve the customer experience and subsequent conversion rates.
SUPPLY CHAIN AND COSTS The effective clearance of residual stock through stores and online has enabled new seasons stock to be introduced into stores earlier improving the customer offer and enabling much greater scope for tactical promotions.
The increase in direct sourcing of stock from the Far East has increased our exposure to foreign exchange risk but this was fully mitigated by our hedging policy during 201617.
We increased capacity at our warehouse during 2016 both in terms of volumes of stock which we can hold and also the volume of ecommerce orders which we can process.
PEOPLE
Ongoing plans are in place to establish a stronger service culture within the business to support our aim to become the rst choice for mens tailoring.
Investment in people through recruitment induction and performance management continues with a broad range of programmes available to all of our colleagues.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Performance improvement across the business continued in 201617 with strong likeforlike sales growth and continued control over costs.
Prot before taxation on continuing operations was 7.1m compared with an underlying prot of 5.9m in the previous year an increase of 20.3%.
REVENUE
Overall revenue was up 5.7% up 5.3% likeforlike on the previous year to 127.9m.
Retail was up 6.7% up 6.0% likeforlike on the previous year .
Hire was 0.4% lower up 1.5% likeforlike on the previous year .
GROSS MARGIN Underlying overall gross margin increased by 1.5% in the year 61.3% vs 59.8% due to removal of the Spring 2016 midseason sale and more targeted promotional campaigns leading to lower levels of discounting.
COSTS
Administrative and shops selling and marketing costs before exceptional items increased by 7.3% on the prior year as planned.
Costs remain tightly controlled with expenditure focused on areas that will add value and support the development of the strategic goals of the Group.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Exceptional items are signicant items of an unusual or nonrecurring nature which are disclosed separately in the Income Statement to provide a clearer understanding of the underlying nancial performance in the period.
See note 6 for further details.
There were no exceptional items during the year 201617.
Last year an exceptional credit and an exceptional debit were incurred during the year and in accordance with our accounting policies have been separately reported as exceptional due to their size and oneoff nature.
Likeforlike including VAT represents nancial information for ecommerce and stores open during both the current and prior nancial periods and compares 52 weeks against 52 weeks except for stores retted in the period where the period closed for ret is excluded from both the current and prior nancial periods.
Likeforlike Hire and Tailor Me sales are calculated on cash receipts in the period before adjustment for the movement in the level of deposits held.
10 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
CONTINUED
EARNINGS PER SHARE Basic earnings per share on total earnings were 5.51 pence compared with 4.65 pence after exceptional items per share last year.
Diluted earnings per share on total earnings were 5.39 pence per share compared with 4.50 pence after exceptional items per share last year.
TAXATION
The Groups effective tax rate for 201617 is 22.7% compared with 21.2% for 201516.
The increase in 201617 is mainly due to timing differences between depreciation charged and capital allowances.
DIVIDEND
Given the strong progress made in 201617 and ongoing cash generation the Board feels it is appropriate to propose the payment of a nal dividend of 3.98 pence per share 201516 3.75 pence bringing the total for the year to 5.89 pence per share compared with 5.55 pence per share for the year ended 30 January 2016 an increase of 6.1%.
The nal dividend is to be paid on 23 June 2017 to all shareholders on the register as at 2 June 2017 ex dividend date 1 June 2017.
INVESTMENT
Total capital expenditure in the year was 8.8m 201516 9.6m and depreciation and amortisation was 6.5m 201516 6.6m.
This included the opening of 7 new stores 1 store relocation and the refurbishment of 11 stores.
The total capital expenditure included further investment in new Moss Bros hire inventory of 1.9m 201516 2.4m whilst depreciation on hire inventory was 1.6m 201516 1.5m.
CASH AND LIQUIDITY The year end cash balance was 19.5m compared with 17.3m last year after investment in new stores store rets and hire stock and payment of dividends in line with our progressive dividend policy.
Reduction in working capital partly results from timing of year end.
INVENTORY
The mix and volume of inventory in the business was reviewed during the year to ensure sufcient inventory was available to support sales across the business including earlier intake of new seasons lines to maximise full price sales and gross margin.
Stock at the year end was 16.7m 201516 14.4m.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES The terms and conditions with our suppliers are regularly reviewed and adjusted so as to maximise the average cash balance whilst improving the product gross margin.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS The Board continues to believe Moss Bros has an exciting future with the growth of ecommerce underpinning the move to full omnichannel retailing.
The adoption of Moss Bros as the master brand supported by complementary sub brands and introduction of carefully targeted marketing activity has proved very successful.
In order to maximise this opportunity and with the increasing role that digital has to play in marketing we will add further resource and investment during 2017 to support our omni channel proposition.
Continuity of brand presentation and pricing across all our channels is paramount in ensuring excellent customer service and therefore customer experience.
The introduction of customer relationship management CRM and the leveraging of our customer database will enhance communication with the customer and perception of the brand.
Our ongoing investment in our People Strategy continues to establish a service culture across the business our people are critically important to the future of the business.
Our Tailor Me personalisation service is available in all stores  a simplied set of bespoke options offering a custom made suit ready for collection within 30 days of placing an order.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 11
The store ret programme is now entering its sixth year with 97 new or retted stores trading in the new look store format.
Given the strength of our combined retail and hire offer we are continuing to seek expansion opportunities both through new outlets and relocations where we move to larger better positioned sites.
HIRE
We will continue to leverage the opportunities to grow our market share through all distribution channels including online.
Investment in new product areas in 2016 such as lounge suits has proved very successful and more investment is planned for 2017.
Investment in new hire stock totalled 1.9m in 2016 and is planned at a further 1.8m in 2017.
Early season booking numbers for collection in the current year FY 201718 are 1% last years bookings at this point.
It should be noted that Easter which typically marks the start of the wedding season falls three weeks later this year.
The newly introduced product areas continue to show the most rapid growth.
The business continues to be in excellent shape to gain market share.
Moss Hire provides us with a rich source of customer data many of whom are currently unaware of or do not consider the Moss Retail or Tailor Me offer.
We continue to believe the opportunities for CRM in the context of a multichannel offer are signicant.
ECOMMERCE
We plan to exploit further growth opportunities both in the UK and overseas by strengthening our ecommerce capability and building on our success leveraging the advantages that full omnichannel capability will bring including investment in CRM to better communicate with both existing customers and potential new customers.
SUPPLY CHAIN and COSTS Our supply chain continues to be of signicant importance in delivering service and efciencies.
In the year ahead in common with many retailers we expect to see higher input costs in product from a weaker pound business rates and employee costs.
We are therefore preparing the company for a more competitive trading environment and we are seeking to nd ways in which to mitigate these rising costs whilst protecting the investment we are making in building and sustaining growth.
We anticipate central costs will increase broadly in line with turnover in 201718 as we maintain our investment in our omnichannel capability our people and our technology infrastructure alongside increases in our occupational and employment related costs.
Capital expenditure for 201718 is estimated at 10.2m including 4.5m for investment in 17 new or retted stores 2.9m in Technology and 1.8m for hire stock.
INFRASTRUCTURE
We successfully upgraded our retail website and commenced integration of our Hire system into our core business systems during 2017.
We will continue to invest in IT as appropriate to ensure that we have a resilient and scalable platform on which to support the development of the business in all areas.
As well as introducing the latest technology the IT investments will focus on improving business efciency and delivering a better customer experience.
PEOPLE
During 2016 we have continued to develop our key people initiatives and have made good progress in establishing a strong training and development portfolio The Moss Bros.
Academy.
We have integrated The Moss Bros.
Way our values framework across key people processes and in particular recruitment.
12 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
CONTINUED
We have established an employee recognition scheme a communication platform and an engagement survey which is now in its second year.
We have made progress on internal promotions including Store career paths and appointments from Stores to Head Ofce.
The focus for 2017 is building management capability change management and embedding customer behaviours and to support this we are equipping 4 Centres of Excellence model stores that will showcase a multifunctional store with the customer experience at its core.
These regional training stores will signicantly increase our training reach and further boost the cultural change that is vital to delivering our growth.
OUTLOOK
We continue to make good progress in the delivery of our strategic priorities.
The modernisation of the store portfolio is achieving the anticipated returns and we are continuing to make good progress on the implementation of our omnichannel proposition which is reected in continued growth in our online sales.
Our people strategy is an important part of the future development of the Moss Bros brand through improvements in our customer experience leading to improved customer satisfaction and retention.
The retail landscape in 2017 will undoubtedly be tough with an uncertain consumer environment set against the wider political backdrop and alongside rising costs of operation and a weaker pound.
We continue to anticipate and prepare for a more competitive trading environment whilst ensuring that we protect our ongoing investment in the business in order to sustain growth.
The early response to the 2017 SpringSummer ranges is positive with retail likeforlike sales continuing to improve year on year.
The Groups trading performance continues in line with the Boards expectations.
BRIAN BRICK
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
5 April 2017 This Strategic report has been prepared solely to provide information to shareholders to assess how the directors have performed their duty to promote the success of the company.
The Strategic report contains certain forwardlooking statements.
These statements are made by the directors in good faith based on the information available to them up to the time of their approval of this report and such statements should be treated with caution due to the inherent uncertainties including both economic and business risk factors underlying any such forwardlooking information.
Likeforlike including VAT represents nancial information for ecommerce and stores open during both the current and prior nancial periods and compares 52 weeks against 52 weeks except for stores retted in the period where the period closed for ret is excluded from both the current and prior nancial periods.
Likeforlike Hire and Tailor Me sales are calculated on cash receipts in the period before adjustment for the movement in the level of deposits held.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 13 Management monitors progress by reference to a number of key performance indicators KPIs.
These
KPIs are applied on a Groupwide basis across all stores.
Management are satised that these KPIs are in line with internally assessed targets.
First choice for mens tailoring 201617 201516
Growing our market by becoming fully multichannel units per customer transaction average selling price per item Ecommerce share of Group revenue 11% 10% Revitalise our customer offer through our store presentation average transaction value ATV inventory turnover weeks
Total group revenue excluding VAT
Hire
Total
Up 6.7% Down 0.4% Up 5.7% Up 5.5% Up 5.6% Up 5.5% LFL sales growth including VAT
Hire
Total
Up 6.0% Up 1.5% Up 5.3% Up 7.6% Up 11.7% Up 8.2% Gross prot margins
Hire
Total
58.6% 78.8% 61.3% 56.4% 80.5% 59.8% Return on store capital investment on retted stores Payback trend on retted stores months Corporate Social Responsibility Carbon emissions 000 tonnes Scope 1 Directly controlled Scope 2 Indirectly controlled Return on store capital investment on retted stores is calculated based on the increased monthly gross prot on retted stores divided by capital expenditure incurred based on a target payback period of 36 months.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 14 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site The Board monitors principal risks and uncertainties and implement measures to mitigate their risk on the business.
An assessment of these is shown below.
Business area Risk to Company Mitigation of risk Assessment of change in risk year on year Hire The Hire business demands the highest level of customer service.
This is delivered through a highly developed and efcient infrastructure which enables consistent delivery to promise.
Any disruption to this infrastructure would affect our ability to maintain customer service levels.
We have a dedicated customer service team which actively seek to resolve any customer service issues arising.
We are continually refreshing and replenishing our stock of hire garments to ensure we are able to cater for all occasions whenever they fall due.
We have previously strengthened our market position through the introduction of a new transactional Hire website and backend system improvements are in development.
The risk is ongoing however we have expanded our customer service team and have carried out a full review of all systems and processes.
Retail and Tailor Me Factors outside our control such as an economic downturn affecting the UK or any wider economic downturn as a result of the vote to leave the EU may have a material adverse effect on results.
As a retail business based and operating predominantly in the UK we are particularly exposed to any economic downturn in the UK which could affect consumer condence and therefore spending.
We continually focus on maintaining our product quality customer service and supplier relationships whilst retaining our competitive position including value and pricing.
Foreign currency exposure principally the US Dollar is hedged for between 6 to 9 months in advance.
The risk has remained consistent.
The macro risks associated with the EU referendum are difcult to quantify until we have further clarity on timelines and approach from both UK government and EU negotiators.
ECommerce Customer satisfaction is as important online as ofine.
Ease of navigationability to transact quickly on the website is key to generating sales online.
Maintaining a competitive edge through customers being able to interact with the product online offering product choice and availability and allowing multiple payment and delivery options are important in growing our online presence.
Ensuring a secure online marketplace is also vital for customers to be able to transact safely.
We are continually developing our website offering in order to become fully multichannel.
Our Retail website has continued to see increases in conversion rates and average order values.
We have developed a fully responsive website during the year which provides a more appropriate browsing experience for the increasing proportion of visitors to the site using mobile or tablet technology.
We have security policies rules and technical measures in place to protect customer data.
With the continuous increase in trade through ecommerce and the market trend on moving to a fully multichannel operation the risk has increased during the year.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 15 Business area Risk to Company Mitigation of risk Assessment of change in risk year on year Brand image Maintaining our store presentation is important for attracting customers and growing our brand.
The historical underinvestment in the store estate in previous years has meant that some of our stores lack the level of presentation that we require to grow the business and the brand.
We are undergoing a store redevelopment programme to both modernise the look and feel of the stores and to meet more routine maintenance that has been deferred for many years.
The development and launch of a new sub brand line up under the master brand Moss Bros in Autumn 2014 has strengthened the brand identity.
The risk has been reduced during the year with the progression of the store redevelopment programme.
Costs Supply chain cost price increases and currency uctuation could have a materially adverse affect on results.
A uctuation in currency rates could materially affect the Groups cost base and margins.
A reemergence of general price ination could affect protability.
There are signicant external cost pressures from the increases in the National Living Wage the National Minimum Wage the Apprenticeship Levy the revaluation of business rates higher energy taxes and increased purchasing costs due to the combined effects of a devalued pound.
Management mitigates cost price risk by continual review of supplier arrangements.
In addition the Group operates a treasury policy which hedges a signicant proportion of the foreign exchange risk from such direct sourcing arrangements.
Management closely monitor the effectiveness of these arrangements.
If general price ination returns this may allow an increase in retail selling prices albeit subject to market conditions.
Ongoing review of store protability combined with shorter lease durations.
Remuneration policies are under review to ensure we remain competitive in the marketplace.
The risk is ongoing however and is continually monitored and addressed.
The risk has increased but we continually monitor and evaluate planned and proposed expenditure to ensure that it remains commercially sensible.
Supply chain A disruption to supplier continuity may adversely affect our operation.
Suppliers going out of business could have a signicant impact on our ability to meet demand in store and online.
We are continually reviewing and refreshing our supplier list.
The diversication of product buying across a range of suppliers limits the Groups over reliance upon any individual supplier.
The risk is ongoing however and is continually monitored and addressed.
Supplier dependency Failure of major supplier In an uncertain economic environment supplier failure and subsequent failure to supply product or services will impact business performance.
Monitor supplier nancial performance through constant dialogue to reveal evidence of supplier in difculty.
Review ability to source productservices from alternative supplier at pace.
Review and document contingency plans should supplier fail.
Risk likely to increase with greater uncertainty in macroeconomic environment.
16 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site Business area Risk to Company Mitigation of risk Assessment of change in risk year on year
Operating our distribution centre from one location leaves the Group exposed to business catastrophes occurring at that location.
Any business catastrophe affecting our distribution centre could severely affect the Groups ability to supply to stores and customers.
We continually review and monitor our disaster recovery plan to ensure that all business risks are adequately covered.
Our nancial risk of operating from one location is mitigated through our comprehensive insurance cover.
With new and increased operating pressures on the DC through multichannel the reliance and consequent exposure to risk of the DC failing has increased during the year.
Cyber crime A cyber crime attack could disable the Groups key IT systems and compromise data security.
Customer bank or payment card details are not processed or stored in the Groups IT systems.
Comprehensive security measures are in place with regular tests carried out.
Development in cyber crime and preventative strategies are constantly reviewed.
Frequency and severity of cyber crime attacks against companies have increased signicantly.
People The Groups reliance on key management and other personnel could put pressure on the business if they were to leave.
Attracting and retaining high calibre people is a key priority and a central focus in striving for excellent customer service across the Groups business channels.
Effective recruitment policies and people development means the Group can take full advantage of the recovery in its performance.
Longterm incentive share awards were granted to senior employees during the year to more closely align their interests to those of the Group and a SAYE scheme is in operation.
The risk is ongoing however is continually monitored and addressed.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 17 The Board recognises its responsibilities in respect of social environmental and ethical SEE matters with the Chief Executive Ofcer having overall Board responsibility for Group Environmental Management.
TRAINING
We are committed to developing and training our employees and place great importance on harnessing talent and driving business performance.
We have continued to deliver training to our store management teams including selling skills product knowledge recruitment skills and performance management.
DIVERSITY
Employment policies do not discriminate between employees or potential employees on the grounds of gender colour race nationality ethnic origin national origin religion religious beliefs sexual orientation or age.
It remains the Groups policy to give full and sympathetic consideration to the employment training career development and promotion of disabled employees.
Special consideration is given to the continuity of employment of any employee becoming disabled after their employment has commenced and where practicable to the provision of alternative employment.
During the period ended 28 January 2017 the number of employees were as follows EMPLOYEES FTE Male % Female % Total Executive Directors NonExecutive Directors Senior Leadership Team Other Employees Employees below Director level who have authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the Company
The Group recognises the benets of keeping employees informed of the progress of the business and of involving them in the Companys performance.
During the period employees were provided with information about the Groups performance and on other matters of concern to them as employees through our online communication portal telephone conference calls regular newsletters notice boards reports team briengs and conferences.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 18 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS STATEMENT The Group does not operate in a business sector which gives rise to signicant pollution but the Board recognises that the business could have an impact on the environment.
The Board is committed to managing and improving the ways in which its activities affect the environment.
ASSESSMENT PARAMETERS Baseline year 201617 Consolidation approach Operational control Boundary summary All facilities under operational control were included.
Consistency with the nancial statements The use of the operational control approach causes a variation to those assets used and controlled by the Group as discussed in our nancial statements.
The business operates from a portfolio of high street shopping centre and factory outlet stores all held under operating leases.
These are included in our emissions table however are not listed on our Statement of Financial Position.
However 9 leases have areas sublet to tenants.
These areas sublet are not under our operational control and therefore are not included in our emissions table.
GHG measurement basis used Defra 2014 Assessment methodology Defra guidance Materiality threshold The Group has not applied a materiality threshold.
Therefore there are no exclusions.
Intensity measurement Tonnes of CO per m revenue.
SUMMARY GHG EMISSIONS DATA FOR 201617 tCO em Activity tCO e revenue Scope 1 Stores distribution 222 1.73 Business travel 77 0.60 Air conditioning 11 0.08 Scope 2 Purchased electricity 3293 25.73 Statutory total Scope 1 and 2 3684 28.77 Intensity measurement 201617 201516 Tonnes of CO e per m revenue Revenue m Statutory carbon reporting disclosures required by Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 19
Debbie Hewitt MBE  NonExecutive Chairman.
Joined the Board on 1 June 2009 as an Independent NonExecutive Director and became NonExecutive Chairman on 27 April 2010 acting Chairman from 25 March 2010.
She became NonExecutive Chairman of The Restaurant Group plc in May 2016 and is also a NonExecutive Director of NCC Group plc and Redrow plc.
She also holds a NonExecutive Director role in private companies White Stuff Visa UK Domestic and General and BGL Group.
She was previously the Managing Director of RAC plc.
Brian Brick  Chief Executive Ofcer.
Joined the Board as an Independent NonExecutive Director on 1 September 2008 and was appointed Chief Executive on 19 March 2009 having been acting Chief Executive since 19 January 2009.
He is a Director of Ambleside Consulting Limited Ambleside Estates Limited Ambleside Investments Limited Hattrick Properties and of dormant Company Brijon Limited.
He successfully sold Specialty Retail Company Limited in 2005.
Tony Bennett from August 2016  Finance Director.
Joined the Board on 15 August 2016 as Finance
He was previously the Finance Director for Charles Tyrwhitt which he joined in 2009.
Prior to that he was the Head of Commercial Finance at Selfridges Retail Ltd and Chief Financial Ofcer at Confetti Network Ltd.
He has a deep commercial background in online multisite and international consumer businesses with highly relevant experience in Menswear.
Robin Piggott  Finance Director.
Joined the Board on 28 June 2010 as Finance Director.
He joined Alexon Group plc in 1987 holding a variety of nancial and commercial roles and becoming Finance Director in 1995.
Prior to this he held senior nancial roles at Granada Group plc and Geest Industries plc.
Mr Piggott retired from the Board at the 2016 AGM.
Thereafter he remained employed as Finance Director until 12 August 2016.
Maurice Helfgott  Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
Joined the Board on 19 October 2010 as Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
He is the Founder Director of Amery Capital Chairman of Oliver Sweeney Long Tall Sally and Unforgettable. rg.
He is also a NonExecutive Director of END.
He was previously a main Board Director of Marks and Spencer plc.
Bryan Portman  NonExecutive Director.
Joined the Board on 1 July 2011 he also chairs the Audit
Bryan has been Finance Director of a number of retail and Financial Services businesses.
His most recent executive role was as Chief Financial Ofcer of the CoOperative Group until he left in 2007 and prior to joining the CoOperative Group was Chief Executive at Britannic Group plc.
Before that he held senior management and nancial roles within Lloyds TSB Group plc and Safeway plc.
He is also Chairman of Family Action charity.
Zoe Morgan  NonExecutive Director.
Joined the Board on 1 November 2012.
Zoe has been Marketing Director of a number of signicant retail consumer and Financial Services businesses including Marketing Director of the CoOperative Group Boots plc and HBoS.
She has a broad commercial background in multisite retail businesses with a strong skill set in strategy brand management and CRM.
She holds other nonexecutive directorships in Kind Consumer Limited The Good Care Group and Burbidge and Son Limited.
AUDIT COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD REMUNERATION COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD NOMINATION COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD B Portman Chairman Z Morgan Chairman D Hewitt Chairman M Helfgott D Hewitt M Helfgott Z Morgan B Portman B Portman M Helfgott Z Morgan BOARD OF DIRECTORS 20 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site The Directors of Moss Bros Group PLC present their Annual Report and Accounts and audited nancial statements for the period ended 28 January 2017.
The Group is also required to set out in this report a review of the business of the Group during the period ended 28 January 2017 and of the position of the Group at the period end together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties facing it.
The information which fulls these requirements can be found in the Strategic Report.
DIVIDENDS
Given the excellent progress made in 201617 and the exciting prospects for further growth the Board feels it is appropriate to propose the payment of a nal dividend.
A dividend of 3.98 pence per share 201516 3.75 pence per share is proposed to be paid on 23 June 2017 to all shareholders on the register as at 2 June 2017 ex dividend date 1 June 2017 and in line with the Boards policy will be monitored to ensure we achieve robust dividend cover over time.
It is the Boards intention to achieve a onethird twothird split for the interim and nal dividend in future years.
SHARE CAPITAL The Company has 100799873 ordinary shares of 0.05 in issue as at 28 January 2017.
There are no restrictions on the size of individual holdings or on the transfer of these shares or on the voting rights attached to them.
Each share carries the right to one vote at a general meeting of the Company.
Section 992 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act which implements the EU Takeovers Directive requires the Group to disclose certain information.
These requirements are dealt with elsewhere in the Annual Report and Accounts however the following additional disclosures are required.
The Board of Directors is responsible for the management of the business of the Group and may exercise all the powers of the Group subject to the provisions of the relevant statutes the Companys existing Memorandum of Association and the Articles of Association the existing Articles.
The existing Articles contain specic provisions and restrictions regarding the Companys power to borrow money.
Powers relating to the issuing and buying back of shares are also included in the existing Articles and such authorities are renewed by shareholders annually at the Companys Annual General Meeting.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDERS The Group had been notied of the following signicant shareholders and interests in shares being shareholders holding more than 3% of the Companys share capital of the Group in March 2017 pursuant to Section 793 of the Act % of voting Number of rights and issued shares share capital Legal and General Investment Management 10835880 10.75 Hargreave Hale 10699416 10.61 SFM UK Management LLP 8994200 8.92 Cavendish Asset Management 4964544 4.93 Chelverton Asset Management 4685000 4.65 Schroder Investment Management 4610597 4.57 Artemis Investment Management London 4587020 4.55 Artemis Investment Management Edinburgh 4423029 4.39 ETX Capital 3980800 3.95 Moss Bros Group Director and Related Holdings 3867810 3.84 NFU Mutual Investment Managers 3526848 3.50 DIRECTORS REPORT MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 21 The Group is not aware of any agreements between holders of these shares which may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or voting rights.
No person holds shares with specic rights regarding control of the Company.
The Company currently does not operate any employee share schemes in relation to which there are shares with rights with regard to the control of the Company.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees which provide for compensation for loss of ofce or employment which occurs because of a takeover bid.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The Resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting which will be held on 19 May 2017 together with explanatory notes appear in the Notice of Meeting sent to all shareholders with a Form of Proxy.
The following Resolutions will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting as Special Resolutions Disapplication of preemption rights  authorise the Directors of the Company to issue equity securities of the Company for cash without rst offering them to existing shareholders.
Authority to buy in shares  authorise the Directors of the Company to make market purchases of the Companys shares.
Notice of Meeting  approve the calling of a general meeting of the Company on not less than 14 clear days notice.
The Directors are of the opinion that all the Resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting are in the interests of the Companys Shareholders as a whole and for reasons explained within this Annual Report and the Notice of Meeting they recommend Shareholders to vote in favour of the Resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
DIRECTORS
The current Board of Directors is shown on page 19 of this Annual Report.
All served as Directors throughout the period unless stated otherwise.
Appointments to the Board are recommended by the Nominations Committee and are made in accordance with the provisions of the Articles.
In line with best practice all Executive Directors and NonExecutive Directors have offered themselves for reelection or elections as appropriate by the shareholders at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
The Board conrms that following a review of the skills and experience of the Directors it is satised that Maurice Helfgott Bryan Portman and Zoe Morgan and the Chairman Debbie Hewitt remain independent of the management of the Group.
During the year the Group maintained liability insurance for its Directors and Ofcers which remains in force at the date of this report.
In accordance with the Act Conicts of Interests provisions which came into force on 1 October 2008 a Register of Conicts has been established.
The Groups existing Articles give the Directors authority to approve a Directors conict or potential conict of interest.
22 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site DIRECTORS REPORT
The interests of the Directors in the ordinary shares of the Group on 28 January 2017 were Number of shares at Number of shares at 28 January 2017 30 January 2016 Debbie Hewitt 720893 720893 Brian Brick 1787534 2231453 Robin Piggott 276513 270513 Tony Bennett Maurice Helfgott 400727 400727 Bryan Portman 100000 100000 Zoe Morgan 76897 76897 No Director has any interests in the shares of any subsidiary undertaking.
There has been no change in the benecial interests held by the Directors since the balance sheet date.
No other Directors have interests in the Group.
Brian Brick and Tony Bennett also participate in the Groups LongTerm Incentive Plan.
Details are set out in the Directors Remuneration Policy on pages 34 to 40.
By order of the Board BRIAN BRICK TONY BENNETT CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FINANCE DIRECTOR AND COMPANY SECRETARY 5 April 2017 5 April 2017 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 23
CHAIRMANS INTRODUCTION
The Board has a wide range of responsibilities and my overall objective is to ensure that the Board has the right mix of skills and experience to leverage the opportunities and overcome the challenges that the Company faces and that it works effectively as a team to identify prioritise communicate and review the delivery of the goals of the Company.
We ensure that there is the right mix of enquiry and support to the Executive Directors from the NonExecutives.
The NonExecutive Directors discuss and agree the strategy with the Executive Directors and hold the Executives accountable for its execution we ensure that we have the most talented team to execute this strategy and we set the tone for governance.
The Board is committed to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance specically ensuring that we send out consistent messages on the core values of the Company and acceptable behaviours.
We have made good progress in achieving best practice and we regularly review the context progress and maintenance of these standards for the benet of all of our stakeholders.
DEBBIE HEWITT
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE 2014 the Code The Group is committed to the principles of corporate governance contained in the UK Corporate Governance Code that was issued in 2012 by the Financial Reporting Council the Code for which the Board is accountable to shareholders.
The Board regularly reviews the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems which is further discussed on pages 28 and 29.
Compliance with the Code reviewed regularly and throughout the period ended 28 January 2017 the Board conrms that it has fully complied with the provisions set out in the code.
The Company has applied the principles set out in the Code including both the main principles and the supporting principles by complying with the Code as reported above.
Further explanation of how the principles have been applied is set out below and in the Directors Remuneration Report and Audit Committee Report.
LEADERSHIP
THE ROLE OF THE BOARD At 5 April 2017 the Board consisted of the Chairman three NonExecutive Directors and two Executive
The Chairman of the Board is Debbie Hewitt who joined the Board as an Independent Non Executive Director on 1 June 2009 and was appointed acting Chairman from 25 March 2010 and Chairman from 27 April 2010.
Maurice Helfgott is the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
The Group considers Maurice Helfgott Bryan Portman Zoe Morgan and the Chairman Debbie Hewitt to continue to display all of the qualities of independence as set out in the Code.
Board papers containing relevant commercial and nancial information are normally provided to all Board members in the week prior to a Board meeting to enable the Directors to consider the issues for discussion.
The Board regularly reviews the type and amount of information provided.
The Board plans to meet at least six times a year including two meetings to review and discuss the strategic issues facing the Company.
The Board also holds meetings as appropriate to full the ongoing requirements of the business during the year.
BOARD COMMITTEES In accordance with the Code and corporate governance best practice the Board has established a number of committees.
All of the committees have written terms of reference approved by the Board.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT 24 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site AUDIT COMMITTEE The Audit Committee is chaired by Bryan Portman MBA FCCA FCIS and also comprises Zoe Morgan and Maurice Helfgott MBA.
The terms of reference for the Audit Committee provide that the Chief Executive Ofcer and Finance Director are invited to attend the meetings as appropriate.
There is an opportunity for any employee in condence to raise any concerns with management about possible impropriety in nancial or other matters.
The Company has established an internal condential helpline which is independent of line management.
The Board has delegated to the Audit Committee responsibility for ensuring the nancial statements when taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable.
The Audit Committee has considered all matters brought to its attention during the year.
The Audit Committee has also considered whether there were any areas where they required more information in order to decide if the annual report is fair balanced and reasonable and made arrangements for this information to be reported to them.
The
Committee met three times during the year and reported to the Board on all matters relating to the regulatory and accounting requirements affecting the Group together with the nancial reporting and internal control procedures including the annual and interim nancial statements.
In addition the Audit Committee ensures that an objective and professional relationship is maintained with the external auditor.
The external auditor may attend all meetings of the Audit Committee and have direct access to the Audit Committee and its Chairman.
The Audit Committee also reviews the possible risks facing the Group the risk management function and internal controls.
The Committees review of the interim and full year nancial statements focused on the following key areas affecting the Groups nancial reporting Valuation of property plant and equipment The estimated useful lives of noncurrent assets is considered to be a key area of judgement particularly given the nature of the business.
Valuation of inventory and related provisions Inventory is a signicant value on the Groups statement of nancial position and there is an element of judgement relating to the inventory provision.
Measurement and accounting for sharebased payments The assumptions behind the Groups estimate of equity instruments that will eventually vest is considered a key area of judgement.
Revenue recognition on hire and bespoke deposits Revenue is deferred until collection of goods arises.
The movement and amount deferred is signicant to the nancial statements.
Other areas of focus considered by the Committee were Onerous leases The assumptions underlying these calculations are highly sensitive to small changes.
Deferred taxation The carrying amount of deferred tax assets are reviewed at each balance sheet date and a judgement made over the probability of there being sufcient taxable prots arising in the future to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Dilapidations
The estimation of costs arising from dilapidations is considered a key area of judgement given the nature of the business.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 25 A memorandum was prepared by the Board at the interim and year end which was reviewed by the Audit Committee which sets out these key risks and judgements and how they have been addressed by the Board in their preparation of the nancial statements.
These areas of focus were also addressed at the planning stage of the external audit and the external auditors conclusions were closely monitored by the
The terms of reference for the Audit Committee are available from the Company Secretary and at http corp. iteaboutgovernance.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Zoe Morgan and during the nancial year also comprised Debbie Hewitt Bryan Portman and Maurice Helfgott.
The Annual Statement on Directors Remuneration is set out on pages 32 and 33.
The terms of reference for the Remuneration Committee are available from the Company Secretary and at httpcorp. iteaboutgovernance.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE The Nomination Committee is chaired by Debbie Hewitt and all the NonExecutive Directors are members.
It monitors and reviews the membership of the succession to the Board of Directors.
It identies and recommends potential Executive and NonExecutive Directors to the Board.
The terms of reference for the Nomination Committee are available from the Company Secretary and at httpcorp. iteaboutgovernance.
EXECUTIVE TRADING COMMITTEE The Executive Management team of the Group consists of the two Executive Directors and senior members of the management team.
The Executive Management team as well as monitoring and controlling the daytoday management of the business regularly reviews the strategic aims of the Group and capital and revenue expenditure.
DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITIES Brian Brick is the Chief Executive Ofcer and together with the Executive Management team is responsible for coordination of the Groups business activities.
The structure of the Board provides a balance whereby no individual or group can dominate the Boards decision making.
Brief details of each Directors other directorships are disclosed on page 19.
The Board is responsible for setting the Groups strategic direction the establishment of Group policies and internal controls and the monitoring of operational performance.
It meets regularly throughout the year and in addition to the routine reporting of nancial and operational issues reviews each of the trading areas and key functions.
The Board has a schedule of matters specically reserved to it for decision and delegates certain issues and powers to the Board Committees.
The schedule of reserved matters is reviewed by the Board annually.
EFFECTIVENESS
THE COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD The Articles provide that onethird of the Directors shall retire from ofce by rotation.
Furthermore
Article 92 of the existing Articles requires a Director to stand for reelection if they were not appointed or reappointed at either of the last two Annual General Meetings and article 90 requires Directors to stand for reelection if they have served as a Director for a continuous period of more than nine years.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Articles in compliance with best practice all Directors offer themselves for reelection annually.
26 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site Evaluation of the Boards performance has been conducted through individual questionnaires followed by a review of the output by the Board and an action plan of improvements.
This includes a review of progress on the actions agreed in the previous years review a review of the individual contribution of NonExecutives and a review of the Chairman.
APPOINTMENTS TO THE BOARD Board members are appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Nomination Committee which is chaired by the Chairman and consists of the NonExecutive Directors although the Chief Executive Ofcer is invited to meetings as appropriate.
Copies of the Executive Directors service contracts with the Company and copies of the NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment with the Company are available from the Company Secretary.
TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT On appointment to the Board and to any Board Committee every Director is provided with appropriate induction and training to enable them to discharge their duties as a Director.
Additional training may be sought as necessary.
The Board has conducted a review of its effectiveness and the effectiveness of each individual Director.
The conclusions of the review have been presented to and discussed by the Board as a whole and actions resulting from this review will be kept under review during the forthcoming year.
The Senior Independent Director separately reviews the performance of the Chairman with input from Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
REELECTION
Subject to reelection at the rst AGM after which they were appointed NonExecutive Directors are appointed initially for a three year term.
The Group will take into account the balance of skills and experience on the Board their contribution and level of independence when considering whether to extend their appointment beyond the initial term.
The Board may ask a NonExecutive Director to remain for a further term.
The NonExecutive Directors contracts are terminable on three months notice and the Chairmans on six months notice.
MEETINGS AND ATTENDANCE The Board held six meetings during the year.
The attendance of each of the Directors at these meetings and committee meetings where appropriate is detailed below Committee meetings Board meetings Audit Remuneration Nomination Number of meetings Debbie Hewitt 6   2 Maurice Helfgott Brian Brick 6 Tony Bennett 3 Robin Piggott 3 Bryan Portman Zoe Morgan Both attended meetings they were eligible for.
INFORMATION AND SUPPORT All Directors have access to the advice of the Company Secretary who is responsible to the Board for ensuring that procedures are followed.
In addition the Directors are able to seek appropriate independent professional advice at the Groups expense.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 27 The Board takes signicant measures to ensure that all Board members are kept aware of both the views of the major shareholders and changes in the major shareholdings of the Group.
The Board ensures twoway communication with major shareholders through Broker briengs and feedback from the Executive Directors following meetings with major shareholders.
The Chairman also meets with major shareholders on a regular basis.
AUDIT COMMITTEE AND AUDITOR During the period ended 28 January 2017 the Groups external auditor Deloitte LLP provided advice to the Group.
In addition the senior statutory audit partner was rotated in the year.
The fees paid to Deloitte for nonaudit services were 7000 201516 7000.
The use of Deloitte LLP for nonaudit work was carefully evaluated by the Audit Committee and the Board.
The Audit Committee views the independence and objectivity of the Groups auditor as essential and ensures that Deloitte is not instructed on any issues which would prejudice this.
The Audit Committee obtains written conrmation on at least an annual basis of the independence of the external auditor.
To full its responsibility regarding the independence of the external auditor the Audit Committee also reviewed the external auditors plan for the current year noting the role of the senior statutory audit partner and any changes in the key audit staff the arrangements for daytoday management of the audit relationship the overall extent of nonaudit services provided by the external auditor and the past service of the auditor that was rst appointed for the year ended 31 January 2009.
It is also the Committees policy to consider every year whether there should be an audit tender process.
To assess the effectiveness of the external auditor the Audit Committee reviewed the arrangements for ensuring the external auditors independence and objectivity the external auditors fullment of the agreed audit plan and any variations from the plan the robustness and perceptiveness of the external auditor in their handling of the key accounting and audit judgements and the content of the external auditors reporting on internal control.
ACCOUNTABILITY
Each person who is a Director at the date of approval of this Annual Report conrms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This conrmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of s418 of the Act.
Deloitte LLP have expressed their willingness to continue in ofce as auditor and a Resolution to re appoint them will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
28 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site GOING CONCERN The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Chairmans Statement and the Chief Executives Business
The latter describes the nancial position of the Group its cash ows liquidity position together with the Groups objectives key risks and uncertainties.
The Groups nancial risk management objectives and its exposures to credit risk and liquidity risk are described in note 24.
As also highlighted in note 24 to the nancial statements the Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through surplus cash balances.
The Board of Directors has undertaken a recent thorough review of the Groups budgets and forecasts and has produced detailed cash ow projections which take account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance showing that the Group is expected to operate within the level of its current surplus cash balances.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group and Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Accounts for the 52 weeks ended 28 January 2017.
LONGER TERM VIABILITY STATEMENT The Directors have assessed the Groups viability over the three year period to January 2020.
This is based on the Groups strategic planning time horizon and reects the period over which longterm operational decisions are assessed.
In making their assessment the Directors have taken into account the Groups current nancial and operational position plans for future development and the principal risks and uncertainties that face the Group as set out on pages 14 to 16.
The most relevant of these risks and uncertainties in terms of potential nancial and operational impact viability were included in the scenario analysis.
Sensitivity analysis was also performed which modelled the impact of the risks occurring individually or in unison in order to stresstest the resilience of the Group.
Based on their assessment of the results of this analysis the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to meet their liabilities as they fall due until January 2020.
RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL The Board has applied principle C.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code by establishing a continuous process for identifying evaluating and managing the signicant risks the Group faces and for determining the nature and extent of the signicant risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
The
Board regularly reviews the process which has been in place from the start of the year to the date of approval of this report and which is in accordance with revised guidance on internal control published in October 2005 the Turnbull Guidance.
The Board is also responsible for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
Such a system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
In compliance with provision C.2.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Board regularly reviews the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems.
The Boards monitoring covers all material controls including nancial operational and compliance controls.
It is based principally on reviewing reports from management to consider whether signicant risks are identied evaluated managed and controlled and whether any signicant weaknesses are promptly remedied and indicate a need for more extensive monitoring.
The Board has also performed a specic assessment for the purpose of this annual report.
This assessment considers all signicant aspects of risk management CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 29 and internal control arising during the period covered by the report including the work of internal audit and loss prevention function.
The audit committee assists the Board in discharging its review responsibilities.
During the course of its review of the risk management and internal control systems the Board has not identied nor been advised of any failings or weaknesses which it has determined to be signicant.
Therefore a conrmation in respect of necessary actions has not been considered appropriate.
The Board recognises that no system of internal control can provide absolute assurance against losses arising from mismanagement and that the Groups systems must be designed to manage rather than eliminate risk.
Internal control and risk management is an ongoing process designed to identify evaluate and manage the signicant risks faced by the Group.
The system of internal control includes internal nancial controls operational procedures risk management and compliance matters.
The system has been in place throughout the period ended 28 January 2017 and up to the date of this Report.
The signicant risks the Board has identied are detailed in the Chief Executives Business Review.
During the period the Board has reviewed the adequacy of the current internal audit department in accordance with the Code.
In view of the size and scale of the Group the Board decided it was not appropriate to expand the current scope of the internal audit function which focuses on inventory and cash control.
The Groups work to review the risk management structure and ensure a robust mechanism is in place for logging and monitoring risks continues.
By order of the Board BRIAN BRICK TONY BENNETT CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FINANCE DIRECTOR AND COMPANY SECRETARY 5 April 2017 5 April 2017 30 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site IN RESPECT OF THE ANNUAL REPORT THE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Directors Remuneration Report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have chosen to prepare the parent Company nancial statements under IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the prot or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing these nancial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that Directors properly select and apply accounting policies present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specic requirements in IFRSs are insufcient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys nancial position and nancial performance and make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufcient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the Company and to enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT We conrm that to the best of our knowledge the nancial statements prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities nancial position and prot or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 31 The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Having taken advice from the Audit Committee the Board considers the report and accounts taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and that it provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board BRIAN BRICK TONY BENNETT CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FINANCE DIRECTOR AND COMPANY SECRETARY 5 April 2017 5 April 2017 32 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the Directors remuneration report for the period ended 28 January 2017.
During the year we continued to operate within the Remuneration Policy that was put to a binding shareholder vote at the 2014 AGM.
This policy was adopted for three years.
As this period is coming to an end the Committee has reviewed the policy during the year to assess its appropriateness and alignment to business strategy.
As a result of this review including consultation with major shareholders the Committee have decided that the current policy remains appropriate and no changes are proposed to the structure of remuneration or the quantum of incentives.
Some minor amendments have been made to clarify areas of exibility in the policy and to add to some of the measures.
In this Annual Statement which precedes our Annual Report on Remuneration I have summarised our performance in 201617 and how this relates to remuneration decisions and outcomes.
Performance has continued to improve throughout 201617.
We have remained focused on delivering a clear strategy to leverage the Moss Bros brand growing our ecommerce business and continuing to implement our store ret programme.
Careful management of stock and strong cash generation contributed to the team delivering a robust nancial performance with annual pretax prot growth before exceptional items of 20.3% and a 6.1% increase in the annual dividend payment.
The Committees underlying policy on salary increases is that they will normally be in line with increases for employees within the business.
This approach has been applied consistently by the Committee for all executive directors in recent years and this year too.
It is worth noting that the Committee may award larger increases where appropriate such as to reect change in the size and complexity of the Company or the scope of the role or to reect market positioning following a new less experienced appointment.
This is relevant to our newly appointed Finance Director in the coming years.
The annual bonus performance targets for 201617 were based 50% on prot targets and 50% on strategic performance objectives.
The 20.3% growth meant that the team hit the maximum prot target and 50% of bonus entitlement will be paid for this target.
The strategic objectives included brand development net promoter score development of the hire strategy ecommerce growth and employee engagement.
The business made progress on some but not all of these measures and 25% of bonus entitlement will be paid for progress on these measures.
A total bonus payment of 75% of entitlement will be paid.
The detail of this is described in the Annual Report on Remuneration that follows.
The April 2014 LTIP award has matured the performance condition for which was based on the 3 year cumulative prot before tax from 26 January 2014 to 28 January 2017.
50% of the original share award will vest.
Detail of this award is described in the Annual Report on Remuneration that follows.
Looking forward the Committee intends to keep the same annual bonus structure in 201718 with strategic performance objectives alongside prot targets.
These objectives will include brand development hire and ecommerce performance and customer satisfaction.
The prot and strategic targets will each account for half of the bonus entitlement.
As in prior years the bonus will continue to be selffunding and as such no bonus will be payable if the minimum prot target is not met.
In relation to the LTIP for 201720 the Committee intends to make awards which up to 70% will vest after 3 years if a demanding cumulative PBT performance target is satised.
We will also add a measure of Total Shareholder Return TSR for the rst time this coming year to further align executive incentives with outcomes for shareholders.
Up to 30% of the potential will relate to this measure.
ANNUAL STATEMENT ON DIRECTORS REMUNERATION MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 33 At the 2017 Annual General Meeting the Annual Statement and Annual Report on Remuneration for 201617 will be put to an advisory vote and the new Directors Remuneration Policy will be put to a binding shareholder vote which if approved will apply for the next three years.
This meeting provides shareholders with the opportunity to vote on how the Committee has implemented the previous remuneration policy and on the proposed remuneration policy.
201617 was another year of good progress for Moss Bros and in this context we look forward to receiving your support on our approach to Remuneration at the Annual General Meeting.
Zoe Morgan CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE 34 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site The Remuneration Committee determines the Companys policy on the remuneration of the Executive Directors and other senior executives.
The principles which underpin the remuneration policy for the Company are to ensure Executive Directors rewards and incentives are directly aligned with the interests of the shareholders in order to reinforce the strategic priorities of the Group optimise the performance of the Group and create sustained growth in shareholder value without encouragement to take excessive undue risk provide the level of remuneration required to attract retain and motivate Executive Directors and senior executives of an appropriate calibre ensure a proper balance of xed and variable performance related components linked to short and longerterm objectives and reect market competitiveness taking account of the total value of all the benet elements.
Remuneration for the Executive Directors is structured so that the variable pay elements annual bonus and longterm incentives form a signicant proportion of the overall package.
This provides a strong link between the remuneration paid to Executive Directors and the performance of the Company.
This also provides a strong alignment of interest between the Executive Directors and shareholders particularly as half of the annual bonus and all of the longterm incentive is payable in the form of shares.
For the purposes of section 226D6b of the Companies Act 2006 this policy will take effect from the date of the 2017 AGM which is scheduled to be held on 19 May 2017.
FUTURE POLICY TABLE FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
Purpose and link to strategy Operation including framework to assess performance
Salary This is the core element of pay.
Ensuring we are competitive in the market allows us to attract and retain executives to achieve our key objectives whilst managing costs.
Salaries for the Executive Directors are determined by the Remuneration Committee taking into account the experience and performance of the individual and comparing the levels of remuneration with the salaries of comparable UK based retailers.
They also reect the overall package in relation to xed and variable pay.
Base salaries are reviewed annually unless responsibilities change.
In setting appropriate salary levels for the Executive Directors and considering whether there should be any increases the Committee takes into account pay and employment conditions of employees elsewhere in the Group.
We would only expect a material adjustment of salaries in the event that the scale and complexity of the business changed substantially over time.
The salaries of any newly appointed Executive Director would reect the scale and nature of the role and the relevant experience of any newly appointed individual.
There may be annual adjustments as a newly recruited Executive develops into a role.
Annual increases are normally capped at the general scope of the business.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 35
Purpose and link to strategy Operation including framework to assess performance
Benets To provide market competitive benets which drive employee engagement and commitment to our business.
Benets typically comprise a car allowance private medical insurance life assurance and group income protection.
Additional benets may be provided if the Committee deems the expense to be reasonable and business related.
Executive Directors are also eligible for benets introduced to all other staff.
For example Executive Directors may be invited to participate in the Sharesave scheme approved by HMRC.
Market competitive benet level.
Sharesave scheme subject to HMRC approved limits.
Annual
Bonus
To drive and reward market leading short term operating performance of the
Provide a strong focus on share price performance over the deferral period.
Based on a range of stretching targets measured over one year.
These might include but not exclusively PBT brand development cash management customer satisfaction and retention channel sales growth and employee engagement.
Bonus payments are determined as follows Performance below the threshold performance target results in zero payment.
Achievement of the threshold performance target results in a threshold payment no greater than 20% of the maximum opportunity.
Payments rise from the threshold payment to 100% of the maximum opportunity for levels of performance between the threshold and maximum targets.
The committee has discretion to reduce or amend the formulaic bonus outcome if individual performance is determined to be unsatisfactory or if the individual is the subject of disciplinary action.
50% of any bonus payment is invested in shares and deferred for a three year period.
Dividend equivalents are paid on vesting shares.
Clawback provisions are in place for both cash and deferred elements.
100% of salary for the
80% of salary for other Executive Directors.
36 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
Purpose and link to strategy Operation including framework to assess performance
LongTerm
Incentive
Plan
To drive longterm performance in line with Group strategy and incentivise through share ownership.
Awards have a performance period of three years.
The level of vesting is determined by measures appropriate to the strategic priorities of the business.
At least half of any award will be subject to nancial performance measures.
The remuneration committee has the discretion to determine this to be based on a single measure or a number of measures.
Performance below the threshold target results in no vesting.
For performance between the threshold target and maximum target vesting starts at 25% and rises to 100% of the shares.
Any awards granted under this policy to Executive Directors which vest and are exercised after the completion of the three year performance period must be held for a further two years after vesting.
Malus and Clawback provisions are in place.
Award over shares with a face value at grant of 100% of salary for the
70% of salary for other Executive Directors.
Pension To remain competitive within the market place and to encourage exible retirement planning for individuals.
Executive Directors are entitled to receive a pension contribution.
20% of salary for CEO and 15% of salary for other Executive
CHOICE OF PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND TARGET SETTING For the annual bonus and longterm incentive our policy is to choose performance measures which help drive and reward the achievement of our strategy and also provide alignment between employees and shareholders.
The Committee reviews metrics each year to ensure they remain appropriate and reect the future strategic direction of the Group.
Targets for each performance measure are set by the Committee with reference to internal plans and external expectations.
Performance is generally measured on a sliding scale so that incentive pay outs increase prorata for levels of performance in between the threshold and maximum performance targets.
Performance measures and targets are disclosed in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
In cases where targets are commercially sensitive for example annual prot targets for the annual bonus they will only be disclosed retrospectively.
DIFFERENCES IN PAY POLICY FOR EMPLOYEES AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS No benet of the Executive Director remuneration policy is operated exclusively for Executive Directors and as stated in the introduction to this Policy Report on page 34 the principles applied to the remuneration of Executive Directors are the same as those for the Company.
The difference between pay for Executive Directors and employees is that Executive Director pay is structured so that the variable pay element forms a signicant proportion of the overall package and the total remuneration opportunity is higher to reect the increased responsibility of the role.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 37 EXECUTIVE SHAREHOLDING GUIDELINES In any event 50% of the value awarded as part of the annual bonus scheme will be awarded as deferred shares to be held for a period of no less than three years and shares vesting under the LTIP scheme if exercised to be held for a minimum of two years after the vesting date.
Furthermore to encourage Executive Directors to use vested LTIP shares to build and maintain a signicant shareholding executives who receive a longterm incentive award which exceeds 50% of salary are required to retain all of the posttax number of shares until a minimum shareholding of 100% has been achieved.
Executives who receive a longterm incentive award of 50% of salary are expected to build a holding of 50% of salary along the same lines as above.
Executives who receive an award below 50% of salary are expected to build a holding of 15% of salary along the same lines as above.
For the purpose of this calculation the value of shares is calculated using the higher of their acquisition price and current market price.
NED POLICY TABLE
Purpose and link to strategy Operation
Fees Attract and retain high calibre NonExecutive
Fees for the NonExecutive Directors are determined by the Board within the limits set by the Articles of Association and are based on information on fees paid in similar companies taking into account the experience of the individuals and the relative time commitments involved.
Any reasonable business related expenses can be reimbursed.
Fees for the NonExecutive Directors are normally reviewed in alternate years.
Current fee levels are set out in the Annual Report on
Annual fee increases can be made but overall fee limit will be within the limit set out in the Companys Articles of
NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to bonus payments any other benets except where the benet is historical or pension arrangements nor do they participate in the Companys longterm incentive schemes.
APPROACH TO RECRUITMENT The principle applied in recruitment of a new Executive Director is for the remuneration package to be set in accordance with the terms of the approved remuneration policy for existing directors in force at the time of appointment.
In addition the Committee may offer additional cash andor sharebased buy out awards when it considers these to be in the best interests of the Company and therefore shareholders including awards made under Listing Rule 9.4.2 R.
Any such buy out payments would be based solely on remuneration lost when leaving the former employer and would reect the delivery mechanism i. cash shares options time horizons and performance requirements attaching to that remuneration.
Shareholders will be informed of any such payments at the time of appointment.
As a result of this policy the maximum ongoing variable remuneration i. which could be granted to a new Executive Director is 200% of salary.
38 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site In the case of an internal appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role may be allowed to pay out according to its terms on grant adjusted as relevant to take into account the appointment.
In addition any other ongoing remuneration obligations existing prior to appointment may continue provided that they are put to shareholders for approval at the rst AGM following their appointment.
Other aspects of our recruitment policy include Where it is appropriate to offer a below median salary initially a series of increases to the desired salary positioning may be given over the proceeding few years subject to individual performance and experience in role.
Different performance measures may be set initially for the annual bonus taking into account the responsibilities of the individual and the point in the nancial year that they joined.
An LTIP award can be made shortly after a new Director is appointed.
A new Director may receive fees for professional advice as appropriate.
A new Director may receive relocation assistance if applicable.
POLICY ON PAYMENT FOR LOSS OF OFFICE Elements of xed remuneration are treated as follows Upon termination by either party the Executive Directors are entitled to salary and benets for the duration of the notice period.
It is the policy of the Remuneration Committee to seek to mitigate termination payments.
In addition the Company can make a payment in lieu of notice equal to base salary that would have been paid over the notice period.
In addition any statutory entitlements or sums to settle or compromise claims in connection with the termination would be paid as necessary.
Elements of variable remuneration would be treated as follows Annual bonus Under the Annual Incentive Plan an employee who ceases employment or is under notice prior to the payment of bonus typically will not receive any payment.
However the Committee has discretion where an individual is considered a good leaver to make a bonus payment payable in cash but prorated for the period of time served from the start of the nancial year to the date of termination and not for any period in lieu of notice or garden leave.
Any such bonus payment typically would be subject to the normal bonus targets tested at the end of the year and would take into account performance over the notice period.
LongTerm Incentive Plan Under the LTIP unvested awards will normally lapse upon cessation of employment.
However in line with the plan rules the Committee has discretion where an individual is considered a good leaver to allow awards to vest at the normal vesting date or earlier if circumstances warrant it.
If the Committee exercises this discretion awards are normally prorated to reect time served since the date of grant and based on the achievement of the performance criteria.
SAYE
The Executive Directors participate on the same basis as for other employees.
APPROACH TO SERVICE CONTRACTS AND LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT The Committees policy is to offer service contracts for Executive Directors with notice periods of six to twelve months.
In addition the Executive Directors are subject to a six month noncompete clause from the date of termination.
For the Chairman appointment is terminable on six months notice.
All other NonExecutive Directors appointments are terminable on three months notice on either side.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 39 ILLUSTRATION OF REMUNERATION SCENARIOS The charts below show scenarios for the CEO and current FD based on 201617 remuneration CEO remuneration scenarios Max Target Minimum
Annual Bonus  Shares Annual Bonus  Cash Pension and benefits
1053k 22% 78% 49% 14% 12% 12% 12% 30% 9% 15% 15% 30% FD remuneration scenarios Max Target Minimum
Annual Bonus  Shares Annual Bonus  Cash Pension and benefits
17% 83% 56% 11% 11% 11% 10% 37% 7% 15% 15% 26% Note that the charts are indicative as share price movement and dividend accrual for deferred shares relating to the annual bonus have been excluded.
Assumptions made for each scenario are as follows Minimum xed remuneration only i. salary benets and pension.
Benets based on 201617 disclosed benet amounts.
40 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site Target xed remuneration plus half of maximum annual bonus opportunity plus 25% vesting of the maximum award under the LongTerm Incentive Plan.
Maximum xed remuneration plus maximum annual bonus opportunity plus 100% vesting of the maximum award under the LongTerm Incentive Plan.
STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION OF EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS ELSEWHERE IN THE GROUP The Moss Bros Remuneration Committee does not consult directly with employees when determining remuneration policy for Executive Directors.
However remuneration and pay increases across the Group are taken into account when setting pay levels for Directors.
STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDER VIEWS The Remuneration Committee considers shareholder feedback received in relation to the AGM each year.
When any material changes are proposed to the remuneration policy the Remuneration Committee Chairman will inform major shareholders in advance and will generally offer a meeting to discuss these.
KEY AREAS OF DISCRETION Finally we have chosen to highlight key areas of discretion in the application of our remuneration policy.
These discretions are implicit in the policy stated above but we have listed them for clarity.
Key areas of discretion include but are not limited to Whether annual bonus is paid to Executive Directors once notice has been served Discretion in exceptional circumstances to amend previously set annual incentive targets or to adjust the proposed payout to ensure a fair and appropriate outcome.
Certain decisions relating to the LongTerm Incentive Plan awards for which the Committee has discretion as set out in the rules of the relevant share plans which have been approved by shareholders.
The decisions on exercise of malus andor clawback rights.
LEGACY ARRANGEMENTS For the avoidance of doubt in approving this Policy Report authority is given to the Company to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Executive Directors before this remuneration policy came into force or before an individual became an Executive Director such as the payment outstanding incentive awards and clothing allowance for Directors even where it is not consistent with the policy prevailing at the time such commitment is fullled.
Details of any payments to former Executive Directors will be set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration as they arise.
EXTERNAL DIRECTORSHIPS FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The Company believes that there are benets to the Company and for Executive Directors accepting nonexecutive directorships in other organisations.
Executive Directors may accept one nonexecutive directorship with the prior agreement of the Board provided it does not conict with the Groups interests and the time commitment does not impact upon the Executive Directors performance.
The Executive Directors may retain the fees from their external directorship.
In the case of the CEO the Committee approved two nonexecutive directorships which were held prior to him joining the Board and which were fullled through Mr Bricks consulting Company Ambleside Consulting Limited.
Brian Brick has stepped down from one of these roles.
The second role which he retains is with SFD a visual display and merchandising company.
In the view of the Committee this role is not overly burdensome on his time and the Committee has approved him retaining these fees.
The Committee keeps this role under review and reserves the right to ask him to step down if time commitments require him to do so.
In any case no Executive Director including the CEO would be allowed more than one paid NonExecutive Directorship.
Details of outside directorships held by the Executive Directors and any fees that they received are provided on pages 45 and 46 of the Annual Report on Remuneration.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 41 This part of the report has been prepared in accordance with Part 3 of The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 and 9.8.8R of the Listing
The Annual Remuneration Report will be put to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2017 AGM which is scheduled to be held on 19 May 2017.
The information on pages 41 to 52 has been audited except for the disclosure under payments for other directorship on pages 45 and 46.
IMPLEMENTATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY IN 201718 Executive Directors Base Salaries The Remuneration Committee has awarded a cost of living salary increase of 2.0% for the forthcoming year with effect from 1 February 2017.
This increase will take Brian Bricks base salary from 321000 to 327500 and Tony Bennetts base salary from 220000 to 224500. increase awarded to all other employees which is 2.6%.
Pension and Benets There will be no changes to pension or benets provision.
Annual Bonus The annual bonus in 201718 will be consistent with the policy detailed in the Directors Remuneration Policy in relation to the maximum bonus opportunity.
Similar to last year performance measures will be based 50% on the achievement of PBT targets and 50% on the achievement of strategic objectives.
To ensure that the bonus is selffunding no bonus will be payable if the minimum PBT target is not met.
The performance measures together with the level of performance against each objective will be disclosed in the 201718 Annual Report on Remuneration.
The targets relating to the 201617 bonus payments are shown below and as this is a transistion year to our new policy we are also disclosing 201516 and 201415 bonus targets and achievement against those targets.
Clawback will apply to any bonus payments from the 201415 nancial year onwards.
Longterm Incentive Plan LTIP LTIP Awards will be made in April 2017 on the same terms as set out in the policy table.
These will be subject to clawback provisions and a two year holding period for executive directors.
For Brian Brick this award will be equivalent to 100% of salary and for Tony Bennett this award will be equivalent to 70% of salary.
As well as the holding period the executives have to achieve a shareholding guideline of 100% of salary post shares sold to cover any tax before they can sell any shares that vest.
The performance conditions are anticipated to be as follows 201718 Award LTIP Target Performance period Performance measure Cumulative Prot before Tax TSR Target for 25% vesting 10% per annum Compound Annual Growth Rate Target for 50% vesting Target for 75% vesting Target for 100% vesting 20% per annum Compound Annual Growth Rate For levels of performance in between these targets vesting is determined using interpolation.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION 42 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site Cumulative Prot Before Tax for these purposes means operating prot after any charges arising from the LTIP excluding exceptional prots onerous lease provision release movement in hire deposits and other material accruals unless the Remuneration Committee considers them appropriate to include.
TSR for these purposes is the percentage increase over the performance period of the value of a holding of shares assuming that any dividends are reinvested and appropriate adjustments made to reect changes in share capital.
It is intended that the calculation of TSR will be based on data provided by an external nancial information provider.
Note that the Committee may adjust the targets in order to neutralise the effect of any changes to the capital base.
NonExecutive Directors Remuneration In line with the policy and the approval to review fees in alternate years there are no changes for 201718.
Annualised fees 201718 201617 Debbie Hewitt 120000 120000 Maurice Helfgott 44000 44000 Bryan Portman 44000 44000 Zoe Morgan 44000 44000 SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION The detailed emoluments received by the Executive and NonExecutive Directors for the period ended 28 January 2017 are detailed below
Base Salary Fees Benets
Contributions
Annual
Bonus
Longterm incentive
Brian Brick 2016tel 244 642 Tony Bennett 2016  177 Robin Piggott 2016tel 111 359 Debbie Hewitt Maurice Helfgott 201617 44     44 201516 41     41 Bryan Portman 201617 44     44 201516 41     41 Zoe Morgan 201617 44     44 201516 41     41 Taxable benets include the provision to every Executive Director of private medical insurance life assurance group income protection and car allowance.
A clothing allowance benet is available to Debbie Hewitt and Brian Brick.
Annual Bonus payments for performance in the relevant nancial year.
Note that this includes the 50% of payment element deferred in shares for three years.
Longterm incentive awards vesting under the LTIP.
The gure for 201617 represents the vesting of awards relating to the 201417 LTIP which will vest in April 2017.
Further detail is set out on page 45.
Note that awards which will vest for performance periods ending in 201617 were valued using the average share price over the three month period to 28 January 2017.
These amounts reect Tony Bennetts joining date of 15 August 2016.
These amounts reect Robin Piggotts leaving date of 12 August 2016.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 43 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION IN RESPECT OF THE SINGLE FIGURE TABLE Annual Bonus Our previous policy was to disclose annual bonus targets retrospectively after two years.
Following a review of our policy the Committee has decided to disclose annual bonus targets in the annual report to which the annual bonus payment relates.
As a result this year is a transition year in which we are disclosing the targets for three annual bonus awards the 201617 annual bonus the 201516 annual bonus and the 201415 annual bonus.
These disclosures are set out below 201617 Annual Bonus For 201617 the maximum bonus opportunity for Brian Brick was 100% of salary and for Tony Bennett was 80% of salary paid pro rata to the number of full months of service he had completed in the year.
The bonus opportunity for Robin Piggott was 80% but no bonus was payable as outlined in Payments for Loss of Ofce.
The bonus was payable 50% on the achievement of PBT targets and 50% based on the achievement of strategic objectives subject to the achievement of a minimum level of PBT.
A total bonus of 75% of potential was paid 50% of which was in deferred shares.
The performance measures targets and payments are set out below
Threshold target Payment for threshold
Payment for maximum
Payment
Adjusted
PBT
20% of maximum 50% of maximum 7.0m 50% Adjusted PBT for annual bonus purposes for 201617 means operating prot after any charges arising from the LTIP and excludes exceptional prots onerous lease provision release movement in revenue deposits and other material accruals unless The Remuneration Committee considers them appropriate to include.
The strategic objectives included progress on our brand awareness customer and employee engagement development of our Hire and Digital business and operating platforms.
Across these measures 25% out of a maximum potential award of 50% was made as follows Strategic Objective % Bonus Potential % Bonus Paid Brand Awareness 5% 5% Customer Engagement 5% 5% Employee Engagement 5% 5% Hire performance and progress on strategic plan 20% 2% Digital Performance 15% 8% Total 50% 25% 44 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site 201516 Annual Bonus For 201516 the maximum bonus opportunity for Brian Brick was 100% of salary and for Robin Piggott was 80% of salary.
The bonus was payable 50% on the achievement of PBT targets and 50% based on the achievement of strategic objectives subject to the achievement of a minimum level of PBT.
No bonus was paid as the threshold PBT was not achieved.
The performance measures targets and payments are set out below
Threshold target Payment for threshold
Payment for maximum
Payment
Adjusted
PBT
20% of maximum 50% of maximum 5.8m Nil Adjusted PBT for annual bonus purposes for 201516 means operating prot after any charges arising from the LTIP and excludes exceptional prots onerous lease provision release movement in revenue deposits and other material accruals unless the Remuneration Committee considers them appropriate to include.
The strategic objectives included brand development customer and employee engagement developing our Digital platform and Hire business including new products.
Across these measures 0% out of a maximum potential award of 50% was made because the threshold prot required was not achieved.
Strategic Objective % Bonus Potential % Bonus Paid Implement Brand Tracking 5% 0% Customer Engagement 5% 0% Employee Engagement 5% 0% Development of Hire 20% 0% Development of Digital 15% 0% Total 50% 0% No bonus was payable for the strategic objectives as the minimum bonus payment for meeting threshold would have had the effect of reducing PBT below threshold.
201415 Annual Bonus For 201415 the maximum bonus opportunity for Brian Brick was 100% of salary and for Robin Piggott was 80% of salary.
The bonus was payable 50% on the achievement of PBT targets and 50% based on the achievement of strategic objectives subject to the achievement of a minimum level of PBT.
No bonus was paid as the threshold PBT was not achieved.
The performance measures targets and payments are set out below
Threshold target Payment for threshold
Payment for maximum
Payment
Adjusted
PBT
20% of maximum 50% of maximum 4.1m Nil Adjusted PBT for annual bonus purposes for 201415 means operating prot after any charges arising from the LTIP and excludes exceptional prots onerous lease provision release movement in revenue deposits and other material accruals unless the Remuneration Committee considers them appropriate to include.
The incentive performance targets for 201415 introduced strategic performance objectives alongside the prot targets for the rst time.
These objectives included the development of our Hire strategy Online growth and brand and customer satisfaction tracking.
Across these measures 0% out of a maximum potential award of 50% was made because the threshold prot required was not achieved.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 45 Strategic Objective % Bonus Potential % Bonus Paid Developing Brand and Customer Tracking 15% 0% Developing the Hire Strategy 20% 0% Online Growth 15% 0% Total 50% 0% No bonus was payable for the strategic objectives as the threshold PBT target was not met.
Longterm incentive plan vesting Moss Bros cumulative adjusted PBT for the three years to 28 January 2017 of 16.6m exceeded the threshold performance target of 15.5m relating to outstanding share awards made under the 2014 2017 LTIP Award but fell below the maximum performance target of 18m.
As a result 50% of the shares awarded under the LTIP in April 2014 will vest to Brian Brick and to Robin Piggott prorated to reect the full months of service whilst the remainder will lapse
Number of LTIP awards Cumulative adjusted PBT performance target and corresponding % of shares vesting cumulative adjusted PBT % of shares vesting
Brian Brick 260692 25% 50% 75% 100% 16.6m 50% 129068 Robin Piggott 78949 25% 50% 75% 100% 16.6m 50% 39087 Valued using the daily average share price over the three month period to 28 January 2017 of 99 pence.
Cumulative adjusted PBT performance target for the 20142017 LTIP Award means operating prot after any charges arising from the LTIP.
It excludes exceptional prots onerous lease provision release interest movement in hire deposits and other material accruals unless the Remuneration Committee considers them appropriate to include.
Robin Piggotts award has been prorated to reect full months of service as outlined in Payments for Loss of Ofce.
PAYMENTS FOR LOSS OF OFFICE Robin Piggott stepped down from the Board at the 2016 AGM.
Thereafter he remained employed as Finance Director until 12 August 2016 when Tony Bennett joined as his replacement.
No compensation was paid for his loss of ofce.
He was treated as outlined in the 201516 Remuneration Report and in line with the remuneration policy and his contract.
As a result he received his base salary pension and benets up to 12 August 2016 but he was not granted an LTIP award in 2016 and will not receive an annual bonus for performance during 201617.
His outstanding LTIP awards were prorated based on the nancial years and full months of service he served during the vesting period and will vest subject to performance at the normal vesting dates and his deferred bonus awards will vest in full on their normal vesting dates.
PAYMENTS TO PAST DIRECTORS No payments were made to past Directors during the year.
PAYMENTS FOR OTHER DIRECTORSHIPS Brian Brick is a director of Ambleside Consulting Limited.
He is the only fee earning Director of Ambleside Consulting Limited.
His continuation as a Director of Ambleside was agreed by the Board when he became CEO of Moss Bros in March 2009.
At that time Ambleside had two consulting assignments one with SFD a visual display and merchandising company and one with Admiral Recruitment a recruitment company.
The work to Admiral Recruitment ceased during 2012.
The Board has continued to allow Brian Brick to provide the consultancy services to SFD on the understanding that the consulting work has no conict with his responsibilities as a Director and CEO of Moss Bros.
In reviewing the potential for any conicts the Committee established that SFD had been a supplier of visual display and merchandise to Moss Bros from 1998 until March 2012.
During the period that Brian Brick has been CEO of Moss Bros SFD has invoiced Moss Bros 82742 inc VAT.
This was invoiced during the period September 2008 to March 2012.
46 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site SFD has provided no services to Moss Bros since March 2012.
Brian Brick received total fees during the period to 28 January 2017 of 90300 relating to the consulting activities of Ambleside Consulting Limited which was entirely for the services provided to SFD.
The Board has reviewed and considers that the work he performs has no conicts with Moss Bros and that the time committed has no detrimental impact on his role as CEO of Moss Bros.
The Committee have approved him retaining the fees earned from consulting with SFD.
In reviewing Brian Bricks time commitment and fees during 2017 the Committee noted that Brian Brick has received fees from SFD every year since his appointment as CEO.
Whilst his directorship of Ambleside Consulting Limited had been disclosed the specic fees received by Brian Brick that relate to this activity have not been.
The Committee is disclosing these fees in line with its policy.
Brian Bricks fees earned from Ambleside Consulting Limited since he became CEO are listed below.
With the exception of FY 2010 2011 and 2012 all fees quoted have been earned exclusively from his consultancy work with SFD.
Financial Year End Fees Jan 2010 129845 Jan 2011 44490 Jan 2012 29049 Jan 2013 53302 Jan 2014 87851 Jan 2015 67080 Jan 2016 103434 Jan 2017 90300 Includes fees for consultancy services of 41000 paid by Moss Bros prior to becoming CEO disclosed in the 2009 Directors Report on Remuneration 35845 paid by other companies prior to becoming CEO 26000 paid by SFD and 27000 for consultancy services to Admiral Recruitment.
For the sake of clarity as per the disclosure on page 19 Brian Brick is also a director of three property companies Ambleside Estates Ambleside Investments and Hattrick Properties and of a dormant Company Brijon Ltd.
These Companies arehave been personal investment vehicles for Brian Brick.
SCHEME INTERESTS AWARDED DURING THE YEAR LTIP awards granted in the year On 12 April 2016 and 31 October 2016 Executive Directors received awards under the LTIP.
Robin Piggott did not receive any award as outlined in Payments for Loss of Ofce.
These awards were in line with the policy set out in the Policy Report and details of these awards are set out opposite.
The vesting proportion of these awards will be included in the single gure table in the 201819 remuneration report once the performance period has ended.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 47
Number of LTIP awards
Face value % of award vesting for different levels of cumulative PBT over the performance period
Brian Brick 310445 100% of base salary 25% 50% 75% 100% 1 February 2016 to 26 January Tony Bennett 61228 70% of base salary 25% 50% 75% 100% 1 February 2016 to 26 January LTIP awards are structured as nilcost options.
Based on a share price of 103.4p which was the share price used to calculate the share allocation.
Based on prorata basis of 5 months and share price of 104.8p which was the share price used to calculate the share allocation.
Deferred share awards granted in the year There were no deferred share awards granted in 2016 as no annual bonus was paid for 201516.
During April 2017 Executive Directors will receive awards of nilcost options with regard to the deferral of half of their annual bonus award for 201617.
These awards will vest on 5 April 2020 subject to continued employment and will be subject to the Malus and Claw back provisions outlined in the Remuneration
Their value is included in the 201617 row of this years single gure table.
SAYE options granted in the year The Group operates a SAYE scheme which is approved by HM Revenue and Customs.
All eligible employees including Executive Directors may be invited to participate on similar terms to save up to a maximum of 500 each month for a xed period of three years.
During the year Brian Brick participated in this scheme and Tony Bennett and Robin Piggott did not participate in this scheme.
DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN SHARES The table on page 48 sets out details of Executive Directors outstanding share awards which will vest in future years subject to performance andor continued service.
48 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
At
30 January
Exercised
Lapsed during the period
28 January Date of award
Exercise period Share price on date of grant
Share price on date of exercise
Brick
489321  489321  11.04.2013 26.01.2013 30.01.2016 04.04.2016 04.04.2023 0.5802 260692   260692 14.04.2014 25.01.2014 28.01.2017 04.04.2017 04.04.2024 1.1400 286439   286439 14.04.2015 01.02.2015 27.01.2018 04.04.2018 04.04.2025 1.0500 310445  310445 12.04.2016 31.01.2016 26.01.2019 04.04.2019 04.04.2026 1.0200 1036452 310445 489321 857576
Piggott
222341  222341  11.04.2013 26.01.2013 30.01.2016 04.04.2016 04.04.2023 0.5802 118424  39475 78949 14.04.2014 25.01.2014 28.01.2017 04.04.2017 04.04.2024 1.1400 130119  86746 43373 14.04.2015 01.02.2015 27.01.2018 04.04.2018 04.04.2025 1.0500 470884  348562 122322
Bennett
61228  61228 31.10.2016 31.01.2016 26.01.2019 04.04.2019 04.04.2026 0.9925 61228  61228 Awards have lapsed due to cessation of employment.
All awards granted under the LTIP are subject to continued employment and the satisfaction of the performance conditions set out below.
In the case of Robin Piggott continued employment was not valid and as such good leaver status was applied.
All awards have a nil exercise price.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS Outstanding LTIP awards are as follows Year of grant Grant % of salary Condition Threshold 25% vesting
50% vesting 75% vesting Maximum 100% vesting Performance period 2014 CEO 100% CFO 70% Cumulative PBT 15.5m 16.5m 17.5m 18.0m 3 nancial years ending January 2017 2015 CEO 100% CFO 70% Cumulative PBT 18.5m 20.0m 22.0m 24.0m 3 nancial years ending January 2018 2016 CEO 100% CFO 70% Cumulative PBT 22.5m 25.5m 27.0m 29.0m 3 nancial years ending January 2019 The Remuneration Committee considered that the performance condition should be based on PBT and that the targets may be adjusted in order to neutralise the effect of any changes to the capital base.
The
Committee did consider the inclusion of measures like TSR in the past but given the stage at that time of the Companys turnaround the Companys scale and the absence of direct competitors in this market the Committee felt that for the current time PBT was an appropriate measure.
Furthermore by making it a cumulative measure it would avoid a windfall from the performance of one particular year and therefore promotes reward for a more progressive growth pattern.
Going forward as highlighted in the Annual Statement TSR will be introduced as a performance condition.
The awards are based on a number of ordinary shares in the Company issued in the future at a nil exercise price subject to continued employment regular dividend payments and consistent underlying prot performance.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 49 Share ownership As set out in the Policy Report executives will be required to retain all of the posttax number of shares until a minimum shareholding has been achieved.
Executives who receive an award which exceeds 50% of salary are expected to build a holding equal in value to 100% of salary before they are allowed to sell the vested shares.
Executives who receive an award of 50% of salary are expected to build a holding of 50% of salary along the same lines as above.
Executives who receive an award below 50% salary are expected to build a holding of 15% of salary along the same lines as above.
As at 28 January 2017 Brian Brick met the guideline.
Tony Bennett was appointed to the Board in 2016 and will be required to retain all vesting share awards until he complies with the ownership guideline.
Interests in ordinary shares
Share awards subject to performance conditions
Share awards subject to service conditions
SAYE options
Total
No. shares 30 January 28 January 30 January 28 January 30 January 28 January 30 January 28 January 30 January 28 January Brian Brick 2231453 1787534 1036452 857576 308389 69696 13727 18528 3590021 2733334
Piggott
270513 276594 470884 122322 159883 35930 13727  915007 434846
Bennett
61228 61228
Hewitt
720893 720893 720893 720893
Helfgott
400727 400727 400727 400727
Portman
100000 100000  100000 100000 Zoe Morgan 76897 76897 76897 76897 The benecial and nonbenecial interests of the directors in the share capital of Moss Bros at 28 January 2017 are set out above These awards represent the outstanding LTIP interests which are included in the table on page 42.
These awards represent the nilcost options awarded in respect of deferred annual bonus.
Brian Brick has one award outstanding which will vest subject to continued employment on 11 April 2016.
Robin Piggott has one award which will vest on a prorated basis on 14 April 2017.
Represents the SAYE scheme interest which will vest on 1 June 2017 and 1 June 2018.
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE SPEND ON PAY The following table sets out the percentage change in distributions to shareholders and employee remuneration costs.
201617 201516 % Change Employee remuneration costs 000 23151 22427 3.2% Distributions to shareholders 000 5687 5300 7.3% Based on the gure shown in Note 8 to the Financial Statements.
Based on the cash returned to shareholders in 201617 through dividends as shown in Note 12 to the Financial Statements.
Note that no share buyback programmes are in operation.
50 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site PERCENTAGE INCREASE IN THE REMUNERATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE The table below shows the movement in the salary benets and annual bonus for the Chief Executive between the current and previous nancial year compared to all employees of the Company.
Element of remuneration % Change in % Change in % Change in
Chief executive 3.4% 3.2% 3.0% Average per FTE employee 6.2% 1.6% 3.9% Taxable benets Chief executive 2.8% 0.6% 2.1% Average per FTE employee 7.7% 12.4% 6.8% Annual Bonus Chief executive NA NA 100% Average per FTE employee 25.0% 12.0% 9% FTE means the average monthly number of fulltime equivalent staff employed by the Company during the period.
PERFORMANCE GRAPH AND SINGLE FIGURE TABLE The graph below shows the total cumulative shareholder return for the Group since 1 February 2010.
The index selected was the FTSE Small Cap Index as this was the index of which the Group was a constituent for most of the period shown.
The table beneath the chart sets out the CEO single gure over this period.
01022017 01022016 02022015 03022014 01022013 01022012 01022011 01022010 7 YEARS CUMULATIVE TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN FTSE Small Cap Moss Bros Group SevenYear Historical TSR Performance Growth in the Value of a Hypothetical 100 Holding Over Seven Years FTSE All Share Comparison Based on Spot Value.
The table below shows the total remuneration for the Chief Executive over the same seven year period.
Note that all LTIP share awards are valued at the year end date prior to the date of vest.
All deferred bonus shares are valued at the date of grant of the award.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 51 Year Ending CEO
Remuneration
Annual Bonus % of max
28012017 Brian Brick 781 75% 50% 30012016 Brian Brick 642 0% 50% 31012015 Brian Brick 779 0% 75% 25012014 Brian Brick 1498 55% 25% 26012013 Brian Brick 652 100% 0% 28012012 Brian Brick 2422 100% 75% 29012011 Brian Brick 471 60% 0% 30012010 Brian Brick 315 20% 0% Note that this shows the annual bonus payments as a percentage of the maximum opportunity.
Shows the number of shares which vested as a percentage of the maximum number of shares which could have vested.
MEMBERSHIP AND ATTENDANCE During the period ended 28 January 2017 the Committee consisted of the following NonExecutive Directors Zoe Morgan Chairman Maurice Helfgott Debbie Hewitt Chairman of the Company Bryan Portman Maurice Helfgott Bryan Portman and Zoe Morgan are independent NonExecutive Directors.
The
Company Chairman Debbie Hewitt who is considered independent is also a member of the
Moss Bros Group PLC falls under the category of a small company as dened by the UK Corporate Governance Code which only requires two independent NonExecutive Directors to sit on the Remuneration Committee.
The Committee met three times during the year.
Committee attendance is set out on page 26.
Adviser to the committee During 201617 the Committee received advice from New Bridge Street a trading name of AON Corporation on senior executive remuneration and employee share schemes.
Neither New Bridge Street nor AON Corporation provided other services to the Company during the period.
New Bridge Street is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and complies with its code of conduct.
The Committee is comfortable that NBSs advice remains objective and independent.
For the year under review NBSs total fees charged were 10400.
52 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
CONTINUED
SERVICE CONTRACTS AND LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT Brian Bricks contract of service which is dated 16 April 2009 is terminable on twelve months notice by either party and subject to a noncompete clause of six months.
Tony Bennetts service contract which is dated 10 February 2016 is terminable by either party on six months notice and also subject to a noncompete clause of six months.
NonExecutive Directors appointment dates and notice periods are set out below Details of their current appointments are as follows Appointment date Notice Period Debbie Hewitt 1 June 2009 Appointed Chairman 25 March 2010 6 months Maurice Helfgott 19 October 2010 3 months Bryan Portman 1 July 2011 3 months Zoe Morgan 1 November 2012 3 months
The LTIP has a dilution limit for new and treasury shares of 15% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company in any 10 year period for any share option scheme operated by the Company.
As at 28 January 2017 the Company had utilised 9284679 201516 9570915 ordinary shares through LTIP and SAYE awards counting towards the 15% limit which represents 9.2% 201516 9.5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company.
STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDER VOTING At last years AGM the Directors Remuneration Report received the following votes from shareholders 2016 AGM Votes cast in favour 5806062899.15% Votes cast against 4967090.85% Total votes cast 58557337100% Zoe Morgan CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE 5 April 2017 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 53 OPINION ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MOSS BROS GROUP PLC In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 28 January 2017 and of the groups prot for the period then ended the group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The nancial statements comprise the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of Financial Position the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement and the Group Statement of Changes in Equity and the related notes 1 to 26.
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company nancial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
SUMMARY OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Key risks The key risks that we identied in the current year were Store impairments The valuation of inventory and related provisions The measurement and accounting for sharebased payments The accounting for property leases Revenue recognition in relation to hire and Tailor Me deposits and the provision for customer returns The key risks in the current year are consistent with those identied in the prior year.
Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 0.59m which was determined on the basis of Prot Before Tax.
Scoping The scope of our work is a full audit of the Group which consists of Moss Bros Group PLC as the only trading entity and a number of dormant subsidiaries which are subject to analytical procedures.
All audit work for the group was performed directly by the audit engagement team.
Signicant changes in our audit approach There have been no signicant changes in our audit approach compared to the prior year.
GOING CONCERN AND THE DIRECTORS ASSESSMENT OF THE PRINCIPAL RISKS THAT WOULD THREATEN THE SOLVENCY OR LIQUIDITY OF THE GROUP As required by the Listing Rules we have reviewed the directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 1 to the nancial statements and the directors statement on the longerterm viability of the group contained within the corporate governance report on page 28.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MOSS BROS GROUP PLC 54 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
CONTINUED
We have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors conrmation on page 28 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the disclosures on pages 1416 that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors statement in note 1 to the nancial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identication of any material uncertainties to the groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the nancial statements the directors explanation on page 28 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualications or assumptions.
We agreed with the directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups ability to continue as a going concern.
INDEPENDENCE
We are required to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standards for Auditors and we conrm that we are independent of the group and we have fullled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with those standards.
We also conrm we have not provided any of the prohibited nonaudit services referred to in those standards.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT The assessed risks of material misstatement described below are those that had the greatest effect on our audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
Risk How the scope of our audit responded to the risk Store Impairments As at 28 January 2017 the group held 16.4m of tangible xed assets excluding hire inventory 30 January 2016 14.6m see Note 14.
As described in the accounting policies in Note 1 and within key sources of estimation uncertainty in Note 2 there is a risk that the carrying value of these assets may be higher than the recoverable amount particularly where stores are loss making or performing below budget.
Management has performed an assessment of indicators of impairment for each store.
Impairments are subject to an element of judgement due to the assumptions made within cash ow projections.
These assumptions relate to forecast sales growth and margin gures which are based on management estimates.
No impairment charge has been recorded in the period period to 30 January 2016 no charge.
We assessed the impairment model and calculations by challenging the completeness of managements assessment of indicators of impairment to include consideration of stores with declining margins those performing below budget those with a marginal positive income compared with the carrying value of those assets and those being considered for closure or relocation assessing the cash ow projections through comparison of forecasts to historical performance and evaluating managements longerterm plans for each store where there was an indicator of impairment through our knowledge of the business.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 55 Risk How the scope of our audit responded to the risk The valuation of inventory and related provisions Inventory is presented net of provisions for obsolescence and items to be sold at less than cost and shrinkage There is an element of judgement relating to these provisions which are based on historical evidence and the current economic conditions.
The changing trends and economic environment require judgements in respect of provisions to be reassessed at each reporting date.
Total net inventory valuation as at 28 January 2017 is 16.7m 30 January 2016 14.4m with provisions held against inventory of 0.5m 30 January 2016 0.5m see Note 16.
This is identied as a key source of estimation uncertainty in Note 2 and within the accounting policy on page 6570.
We performed testing of the operating effectiveness of key controls around the valuation of provisions within the inventory business cycle.
We visited the Distribution Centre DC in Barking to test controls around the perpetual counting process in addition to attending a sample of ve store counts.
We considered the inventory provision for obsolescence and items to be sold at less than cost through evaluating historical inventory and sales data managements latest forecasts and trading plans and selling prices achieved subsequent to the year end.
We recalculated the shrinkage provision using data from the loss prevention team and attended stock counts where we witnessed the controls in place around recording the volume of shrinkage.
The measurement and accounting for share based payments The share awards are measured at the fair value at the date of the grant and expensed on a straight line basis over the vesting period.
The judgement of the fair value and number of awards expected to vest is based on management estimates.
These estimates include the volatility of the share price and the expected number of options which will vest.
In the period to 28 January 2017 there has been an IFRS 2 charge of 0.4m period to 30 January 2016 0.3m see Note 9.
The ShareBased Payment reserve at 28 January 2017 is 0.6m 30 January 2016 0.8m see Note 19.
See accounting policy on page 6570 and key sources of estimation uncertainty within Note 2.
We assessed managements accounting under the principles of IFRS 2 Sharebased payments.
We tested the fair value calculations for all new share awards granted in the year and the vesting conditions and assessed the ongoing fair value of the existing sharebased payments.
This included a review of the share option award agreements an assessment of the reasonableness of assumptions around the likelihood of meeting vesting conditions an assessment of the reasonableness of inputs including the volatility with analysis provided by internal experts recalculation of the amounts recognised over the vesting period and recalculation of the National Insurance amounts recognised in relation to these awards.
56 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site Risk How the scope of our audit responded to the risk The accounting for property leases Where the Group is the lessee of a property which is either vacant lossmaking or sublet a provision may be required to recognise the onerous element of the lease.
The key judgements in the calculation of the provision are the discount rate applied and forecast earnings at stores.
The total value of the provision at 28 January 2017 was 1.5m 30 January 2016 1.7m see Note 22.
The Group also maintains a provision in respect of dilapidation costs for closed stores and stores anticipated to be closed in the near future.
Management judgement is involved in calculating these provisions which are based on managements best estimate of the future dilapidation costs to be incurred upon exiting these stores.
The dilapidations provision has increased from 0.8m as at 30 January 2016 to 1.1m as at 28 January 2017 see Note 22.
See accounting policy on page 6570 and key sources of estimation uncertainty within Note 2.
We tested the utilisation of the onerous lease provision and assessed whether the year end provision is reasonable given the actual performance of the stores for which there is an onerous lease provision compared to managements forecasts.
We challenged all store forecasts in terms of future earnings projections and costs associated with running stores to determine if the provision is complete.
Where stores do not have a provision we considered managements stated turnaround strategies in relation to the length of the lease remaining or plans to relocate the stores.
We challenged managements assumptions used within the dilapidation provision model.
We have veried the inputs to the provision calculation by agreeing them to supporting documentation where possible.
We also assessed the past accuracy of the provision by assessing previously provided amounts to settled dilapidations payments.
Revenue recognition in relation to hire and Tailor Me deposits and the provision for customer returns Where the Group holds deposits in relation to hire or Tailor Me sales where the suit has not yet been collected by the customer deposits must be held as deferred revenue until collection.
A risk exists that revenue could be released early before the collection has taken place.
As at 28 January 2017 hire and Tailor Me deposits of 1.4m 30 January 2016 1.4m were recognised in deferred revenue in relation to future transactions.
See the accounting policy on page 6570.
The Group offers a full refund on retail sales within 28 days.
Management holds a provision to estimate the value of returns made in the 28 days following the year end where the sale was made during the period.
As at 28 January 2017 the Group held a refund provision of 0.2m 30 January 2016 0.1m.
We tested the deferred revenue balance in relation to hire and Tailor Me deposits through inspection of sales invoices and recalculation of the deferred element.
We assessed the refund provisioning policy with reference to post period end refund information and performed sensitivity analysis on managements assumptions around the proportion of refunds relating to the period to 28 January 2017.
The description of risks above should be read in conjunction with the signicant issues considered by the Audit Committee discussed on page 24.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
CONTINUED MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 57 OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We dene materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the nancial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or inuenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
We determined materiality for the group to be 0.59m 201516 0.55m which is below 0.5% 201516 0.5% of Revenue below 9% 201516 10% of Prot Before Taxation and below 2% 201516 2% of Equity.
The increase in materiality for the period ended 28 January 2017 reects the increased Revenue and Prot Before Tax recorded in the period.
Prot Before Tax has been chosen for the basis for materiality as this is the measure by which stakeholders and the market assess the wider performance of the entity.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 29000 201516 11000 as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We have increased the threshold to reect the low levels of misstatements identied historically.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identied when assessing the overall presentation of the nancial statements.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Our audit work is designed to provide a full audit of the Group which consists of Moss Bros Group PLC as the only trading entity and a number of dormant subsidiaries which are subject to analytical procedures.
All work is performed by the Group audit team at the head ofce where all books and records are kept.
OPINION ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the nancial year for which the nancial statements are prepared is consistent with the nancial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identied any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company nancial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report arising from these matters.
Corporate Governance Statement
Under the Listing Rules we are also required to review part of the Corporate Governance Statement relating to the companys compliance with certain provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report arising from our review.
58 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
CONTINUED
Our duty to read other information in the Annual Report Under International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if in our opinion information in the annual report is materially inconsistent with the information in the audited nancial statements or apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the group acquired in the course of performing our audit or otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to consider whether we have identied any inconsistencies between our knowledge acquired during the audit and the directors statement that they consider the annual report is fair balanced and understandable and whether the annual report appropriately discloses those matters that we communicated to the Audit Committee which we consider should have been disclosed.
We conrm that we have not identied any such inconsistencies or misleading statements.
RESPECTIVE RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS AND AUDITOR As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the nancial statements and for being satised that they give a true and fair view.
Our
We also comply with International Standard on Quality Control 1 UK and Ireland.
Our audit methodology and tools aim to ensure that our quality control procedures are effective understood and applied.
Our quality controls and systems include our dedicated professional standards review team and independent partner reviews.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
SCOPE OF THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the nancial statements sufcient to give reasonable assurance that the nancial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the groups and the parent companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of signicant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the nancial statements.
In addition we read all the nancial and non nancial information in the annual report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited nancial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
CATHERINE LUCY NEWMAN FCA Senior Statutory Auditor FOR AND ON BEHALF OF DELOITTE LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 5 April 2017 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 59 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE 52 WEEKS ENDED 28 JANUARY 2017 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 30 January 2016 28 January
Total Underlying items Total CONTINUING OPERATIONS
127930 121072  121072 Cost of sales 49528 48669  48669 Gross prot 78402 72403  72403 Administrative expenses 6620 6146  6146 Shops selling and marketing costs 64705 60333 748 61081 Operating prot 7077 5924 748 5176 Other gains and losses 6 Investment revenues 4 48 66  66 Financial costs 4 5 51  51 Prot on ordinary activities before taxation 5 7146 5942 98 5844 Taxation charge 10 1623 1273 34 1239 Prot after taxation attributable to equity holders of the parent 19 5523 4669 64 4605 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME ITEMS THAT MAY BE RECLASSIFIED SUBSEQUENTLY INTO PROFIT OR LOSS Cash ow hedges Change in fair value of effective portion Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax Total comprehensive income for the year 5311 4608 64 4544 Earnings per share pence Basic  total 11 5.51p Diluted  total 11 5.39p Underlying earningsloss per share pence Basic  total 11 5.51p 4.71p Diluted  total 11 5.39p 4.56p Underlying represents results before exceptional items as dened in note 1 of the Financial Statements.
Refer to Note 6.
60 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE 52 WEEKS ENDED 28 JANUARY 2017 Share Share Employee Share premium based benet Hedging Retained Total capital account payments trust reserve earnings equity 52 WEEKS ENDED 30 JANUARY 2016 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 BALANCE AT 31 JANUARY 2015 5040 8673 1224 1521 691 23347 37454 Prot for the period      4605 4605 Other comprehensive income Cash ow hedging movement Total comprehensive income for the period     61 4605 4544 Dividends paid      5300 5300 Credit to equity for equity settled sharebased payments   347 Exercise of shares held under option   619   619 Movement on deferred tax on equity settled sharebased payments   177    177 Movement on current tax on exercise of equity settled share  based payments      249 249 Sale of shares by employee benet trust    839 SAYE exercise  employee contributions      220 220 BALANCE AT 30 JANUARY 2016 5040 8673 775 682 630 22901 Share Share Employee Share premium based benet Hedging Retained Total capital account payments trust reserve earnings equity 52 WEEKS ENDED 28 JANUARY 2017 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 BALANCE AT 30 JANUARY 2016 5040 8673 775 682 630 22901 37337 Prot for the period      5523 5523 Other comprehensive income Cash ow hedging movement Total comprehensive income for the period     212 5523 5311 Dividends paid      5687 5687 Credit to equity for equity settled sharebased payments   392    392 Exercise of shares held under option   480   480 Movement on deferred tax on equity settled sharebased payments   50    50 Movement on current tax on exercise of equity settled share  based payments      113 113 Sale of shares by employee benet trust    544  544 SAYE exercise  employee contributions      83 83 BALANCE AT 28 JANUARY 2017 5040 8673 637 138 418 22869 37499 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 61 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AS AT 28 JANUARY 2017 28 January 30 January 2017 2016 Notes 000 000
Intangible assets 13 1443 1796 Property plant and equipment 14 18792 17187 Leasehold improvements 14 1252 1016 Deferred tax assets 10 1200 1189 TOTAL NONCURRENT ASSETS 22687 21188
16 16709 14428 Trade and other receivables 17 3688 3013 Cash and cash equivalents 24 19518 17259 Derivative nancial instruments TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS 40326 35297 TOTAL ASSETS 63013 56485
Trade and other payables 20 17157 11603
22 1252 1076 Current tax liability 1181 229 TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES 19590 12908 Other payables 21 3208 2990
22 1321 1402 Deferred tax liabilities 10 1395 1848 TOTAL NONCURRENT LIABILITIES 5924 6240 TOTAL LIABILITIES 25514 19148 NET ASSETS 37499 37337
Called up share capital 18 5040 5040 Share premium account 19 8673 8673 Sharebased payments Employee benet trust Hedge reserve Retained earnings 19 22869 22901 EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO EQUITY HOLDERS OF PARENT 37499 37337 The nancial statements of Moss Bros Group plc registered number  on pages 59 to 91 were approved by the Board of Directors on 5 April 2017 and were signed on its behalf by BRIAN BRICK TONY BENNETT
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FINANCE DIRECTOR
5 April 2017 5 April 2017 62 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE 52 WEEKS ENDED 28 JANUARY 2017 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 January 30 January 2017 2016 Notes 000 000 OPERATING ACTIVITIES Prot after taxation 5523 4605 Adjustments for Taxation charge 10 1623 1239 Other gains Investment revenues Financial costs Amortisation of intangible assets 13 801 1149 Depreciation of tangible xed assets 14 5905 5654 Amortisation of compulsory purchase compensation receipt Loss on sale of property plant and equipment Increase Decrease in inventories 2281 1308 Increase Decrease in receivables Increase Decrease in payables 5718 2215 Increase in provisions Sharebased payments expense Exercise of share options Exceptional income  lease compensation cash receipt Taxation paid 1072 1143 NET CASH FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 15966 11639 INVESTING ACTIVITIES Interest received Interest paid Purchase of intangible assets Purchase of tangible xed assets 14 8115 8645 Proceeds from the sale of property plant and equipment NET CASH USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES 8584 9549 FINANCING ACTIVITIES Dividends paid 5687 5300 Proceeds of employee benet trust share sale Excess SAYE receipt between cost and exercise price NET CASH USED IN FINANCING ACTIVITIES 5123 4461 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 17259 19630 Net decrease  increase in cash and cash equivalents 2259 2371 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period 19518 17259 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 63 COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AS AT 28 JANUARY 2017 28 January 30 January 2017 2016 Notes 000 000
Intangible assets 13 1443 1796 Property plant and equipment 14 18792 17187 Leasehold improvements 14 1252 1016
15 9502 9502 Deferred tax asset 10 1200 1189 TOTAL NONCURRENT ASSETS 32189 30690
16 16709 14428 Trade and other receivables 17 5839 5164 Cash and cash equivalents 24 19518 17259 Derivative nancial instruments TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS 42477 37448 TOTAL ASSETS 74666 68138
Trade and other payables 20 29339 23785 Provisions falling due within one year 22 1252 1076 Current tax liability 1181 229 TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES 31772 25090 Other payables 21 3209 2991 Provisions falling due after one year 22 1321 1402 Deferred tax liability 10 1395 1848 TOTAL NONCURRENT LIABILITIES 5925 6241 TOTAL LIABILITIES 37697 31331 NET ASSETS 36969 36807
Called up share capital 18 5040 5040 Share premium account 19 8673 8673 Sharebased payments Employee benet trust Acquisition reserve 19 4370 4370 Hedge reserve Prot and loss account 19 17969 18001 EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO EQUITY HOLDERS OF PARENT 19 36969 36807 64 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site COMPANY BALANCE SHEET
The Company prot after taxation for the year ended 28 January 2017 was 5523000 30 January 2016 4605000 after exceptional items.
The nancial statements of Moss Bros Group plc registered number  were approved by the Board of Directors on 5 April 2017 and were signed on its behalf by BRIAN BRICK TONY BENNETT
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FINANCE DIRECTOR
5 April 2017 5 April 2017 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 65 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 52 WEEKS ENDED 30 JANUARY 2017 PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Moss Bros Group PLC the Company is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom under the Companies Act 2006.
The address of the registered ofce is 8 St Johns Hill London SW11 1SA.
The nature of the Groups operations and its principal activities are set out in the Strategic Review on pages 5 to 7.
The consolidated nancial statements of the Company for the 52 weeks ended 28 January 2017 the period comprise the Company and its subsidiaries together the
BASIS OF PREPARATION AND STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE The Group and Company nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards
The nancial statements have also been prepared in accordance with IFRSs adopted by the European Union and therefore the group nancial statements comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
The preparation of nancial information in conformity with IFRSs requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and reported amounts of assets and liabilities income and expenses.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances the results of which form the basis of making the judgements about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting policies are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
The nancial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except where IFRSs require an alternative treatment.
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for the assets.
The Groups signicant accounting policies are set out in this note together with the judgements made by management in applying these policies which have the most signicant effect on the amounts recognised in the nancial statements apart from those involving estimations which are dealt with separately in note 2.
These accounting policies have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these consolidated nancial statements except as set out below.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
The Group and Company nancial statements are presented in sterling because that is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the Group operates and all values in tables are rounded to the nearest thousand pounds except when otherwise indicated.
The accounting policies adopted for the period are consistent with those adopted in the nancial statements for the 52 weeks ended 30 January 2016.
These can be seen via httpcorp.
Management believe the most signicant areas of judgement to be Deferred tax The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and a judgement made over the probability of there being sufcient taxable prots arising in the future to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Sharebased payments The assumptions behind the Groups estimate of equity instruments that will eventually vest is considered a key area of judgement.
Property Plant and Equipment The estimated useful lives of noncurrent assets are considered to be a key area of judgement particularly given the nature of the business.
Onerous property leases The assumptions underlying these calculations are highly sensitive to small changes.
NEW AND REVISED IFRSs IN ISSUE BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE At the date of authorisation of these nancial statements the following Standards and Interpretations which have not been applied in these nancial statements were in issue but not yet effective and in some cases had not yet been adopted by the EU IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 10 and IAS 28 amendments Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture 66 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED IFRS 2 amendments Classication and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions IAS 7 amendments Disclosure Initiative Statement of Cash Flows IAS 12 amendments Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration Beyond the information above it is not practicable to provide a reasonable estimate of the effect of these standards until a detailed review has been completed.
CONSOLIDATION
The consolidated Group accounts incorporate the accounts of Moss Bros Group PLC and its subsidiaries all of which have made up their accounts to 28 January 2017.
Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Company.
Control exists when the Company has the power directly or indirectly to govern the nancial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benets from its activities.
In assessing control potential voting rights that presently are exercisable or convertible are taken into account.
The nancial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated nancial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
All intercompany balances income expenditure and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Company nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU and under the historical cost convention.
The following Company accounting policies have been applied consistently in dealing with items which are considered material in relation to the Companys nancial statements.
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has elected not to present its own prot and loss account for the year.
The Company only cash ow statement is the same as the Group as presented in the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement.
The movements in the Company only equity balances are the same as detailed in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
The Company made a prot after taxation for the 52 week period to 28 January 2017 of 5523000 52 week period to 30 January 2016 prot of 4605000.
GOING CONCERN The Directors have at the time of approving the nancial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources in place for operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the nancial statements.
Further detail is contained in the Corporate Governance Report on page 28.
REVENUE
Revenue comprises sales to third parties excluding VAT and is derived from the retail sale and hire of clothing and ancillary goods.
Revenue is recognised on exchange of goods for the hire of clothing the exchange of goods occurs when the hire clothing and ancillary goods are collected for use by the customer.
At this point it is deemed that all risks and rewards have been transferred.
Hire deposits are held within deferred revenue until this date.
For Tailor Me the exchange of goods occurs upon collection.
Tailor Me advances are held within deferred revenue until this date.
Ecommerce revenue is recognised at despatch date as this is the point where it is deemed all risks and rewards have been transferred.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for goods and services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts VAT and other sales related taxes.
COST OF SALES Cost of sales includes all costs of purchases and costs incurred in bringing inventories to their present location and condition.
Costs of purchase comprise the purchase price other taxes and transport costs.
Inventory write downs are included in cost of sales when recognised.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded using the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date and gains or losses on translation are included in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 67
Leases under the terms of which the Company assumes substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classied as nance leases.
Assets acquired under nance leases are capitalised and the outstanding future lease obligations are shown in payables.
As at 28 January 2017 and 30 January 2016 the Company had no nance leases.
All other leases are dened as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases are recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Amounts payable in respect of contingent rents are recognised in the period to which the sales relate.
Lease incentives are recognised as a liability.
The aggregate benet of incentives is recognised as a reduction of expense on a straightline basis.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The Group enters into foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its exposure to foreign exchange rate risk.
Further details of derivative nancial instruments are disclosed in note 24.
Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value at the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at each balance sheet date.
The resulting gain or loss is recognised in prot or loss immediately unless the derivative is designated and effective as a hedging instrument in which event the timing of the recognition in prot or loss depends on the nature of the hedge relationship.
A derivative with a positive fair value is recognised as a nancial asset whereas a derivative with a negative fair value is recognised as a nancial liability.
A derivative is presented as a noncurrent asset or a noncurrent liability if the remaining maturity of the instrument is more than 12 months and it is not expected to be realised or settled within 12 months.
Other derivatives are presented as current assets or current liabilities.
HEDGE ACCOUNTING Hedges of foreign exchange risk on rm commitments are accounted for as cash ow hedges.
At the inception of the hedge relationship the entity documents the relationship between the hedging instrument and the hedged item along with its risk management objectives and its strategy for undertaking various hedge transactions.
Furthermore at the inception of the hedge and at interim and period end the Group documents whether the hedging instrument is highly effective in offsetting changes in cash ows of the hedged item.
Cash ow hedge The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash ow hedges is recognised in other comprehensive income.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in prot or loss and is included in the other gains and losses line item.
Amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in equity are reclassied to prot or loss in the periods when the hedged item is recognised in prot or loss in the same line of the Statement of Comprehensive Income as the recognised hedged item.
However when the forecast transaction that is hedged results in the recognition of a nonnancial asset the gains and losses previously accumulated in equity are transferred from equity and included in the initial measurement of the cost of the nonnancial asset.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the Group revokes the hedging relationship the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualies for hedge accounting.
Any gain or loss recognised in other comprehensive income at that time is accumulated in equity and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in prot or loss.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the gain or loss accumulated in equity is recognised immediately in prot or loss.
DIVIDENDS
Dividends are not accrued until approved by Shareholders.
TAXATION
Group
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
CURRENT TAX The tax currently payable is based on taxable prot for the year.
Taxable prot differs from net prots as reported in the Statement of Comprehensive Income because it excludes items of income and expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
68 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED DEFERRED TAX Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the nancial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable prot and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable prots will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if a temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable prot nor the accounting prot.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufcient taxable prots will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Statement of Comprehensive Income except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Deferred tax is not discounted.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Exceptional items are those signicant credits or charges which in the opinion of the Directors should be separately disclosed by virtue of their size and oneoff nature to enable a full understanding of the Groups nancial performance.
Therefore such items are disclosed as exceptional on the face of the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and call deposits.
TRADE RECEIVABLES AND DEBTORS Trade receivables and debtors represent amounts due from retailers in respect of subtenant income and concessions from which the Group trades less commissions due.
GOVERNMENT GRANTS Grantscompensation received in respect of expenses incurred are credited to the Statement of Comprehensive Income to match the related expense.
Grantscompensation received in respect of capital expenditure incurred are credited to property plant and equipment and amortised to the Statement of Comprehensive Income over the lives of the related assets.
PENSIONS
Contributions payable to the Group Personnel Pension Plan and other post retirement benets are charged to the Statement of Comprehensive Income in the period to which they relate.
Differences between contributions payable in the period and contributions actually paid are shown as either accruals or prepayments in the balance sheet.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS Equitysettled sharebased payments to employees are measured at the fair value of the equity instrument at the grant date.
Details are set out in note 9.
The fair value determined at grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straight line basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of equity instruments that will eventually vest.
At each balance sheet date the Group revises its estimate of the number of equity instruments expected to vest as a result of the effect of non market based vesting conditions.
The impact of the revision of the original estimates if any is recognised in the prot or loss such that the cumulative expense reects the revised estimate with a corresponding adjustment to equity reserves.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS Computer software and the directly related development costs that are not an integral part of the related hardware are classied as an intangible asset and stated at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is charged on a straightline basis over three to ve years.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 69 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Depreciation is calculated so as to write down on a straightline basis the cost of noncurrent assets over their estimated useful lives to their estimated residual values.
The rates used are as follows Fixtures and ttings 5  10 years Computer hardware 5 years Computer software 3  5 years
6 years Hire inventory 4 7 years At each balance sheet date the Group reviews the carrying value of its property plant and equipment and intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that these assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
The Group considers all the assets of a particular store to be one cash generating unit for the purposes of impairment estimate and the related assets of a particular store are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and the value in use.
In assessing value in use of a store cash generating unit the estimated future cash ows are discounted to their present value.
If the recoverable amount of a cash generating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the cash generating unit is reduced to the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised as an expense immediately.
LEASEHOLD IMPROVEMENTS Leasehold improvements are written off over the shorter of the period of the lease or the useful economic life of the assets on a straightline basis.
Location premiums are paid to enter a property which is in a desirable location stated at cost net of depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is calculated on location premiums over the useful economic life on a straightline basis.
INVESTMENTS
Investments are stated at cost less amounts written off for any impairment in value.
INVENTORIES
Retail inventory is valued at the lower of cost weighted average by season and estimated net realisable value estimated selling price less estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in selling and distribution.
Net realisable value is estimated as discussed in note 16.
Volume discounts received and receivable are deducted from the cost of inventories.
PROVISIONS
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
The amount recognised as a provision is the best estimate of the consideration required to settle the present obligation at the balance sheet date taking into account the risks and uncertainties surrounding the obligation.
Where a provision is measured using the cash ows estimated to settle the present obligation its carrying amount is the present value of those cash ows.
Provisions for onerous property lease contracts are recognised when the Group believes that the unavoidable costs of meeting the lease obligations exceed the economic benets to be received under the lease.
Where material these provisions are discounted to their present value.
Provisions are recognised on a lease by lease basis.
Provisions for dilapidations for leases terminating are recognised when the Group believes that the costs of rectifying the store is probable and a reliable estimate can be made for the obligation.
We will assess all leases that are due to be exited within 18 months from the year end date.
We do not discount these provisions to present value as the value of discount is immaterial.
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT The Boards policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor creditor and market condence and to sustain future development of the business.
To achieve this the Board of Directors monitors the balance sheet working capital the cash ows and the level of dividends paid to shareholders.
The Board seeks to maintain a balance between the higher returns that might be possible with higher levels of borrowings and the advantages and security afforded by a sound capital position.
70 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED The Companys approach to capital management and policy is to spread cash deposits across three UK based banks to minimise the risks associated with default by any one bank.
The banks selected carry the highest available credit ratings.
Neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries are subject to externally imposed capital requirements.
KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY In applying the above accounting policies management has made appropriate estimates in many areas and the actual outcome may differ from those calculated.
The key sources of estimation uncertainty at the balance sheet date that have a signicant risk of causing material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next nancial period are IMPAIRMENT CALCULATIONS The carrying amount of noncurrent assets on the balance sheet is dependent on the estimates of future prots and cash ows arising from the Companys operations.
The key assumptions for the value used in calculating any impairment loss referred to in the property plant and equipment accounting policy note are regarding expected growth rates to individual stores during the year and discount rates applied to the forecast cash ows.
Management estimates discount rates using a pretax discount rate based on the weighted average cost of capital for the Group.
Sales and cost growth rates are based on the managements best expectations of future business performance over a maximum period of ve years.
There has been no impairment charge recognised during 201617 201516 nil in relation to loss making stores.
ONEROUS PROPERTY LEASE CONTRACTS The Company provides for onerous property lease contracts where the Group believes that the unavoidable costs of meeting the lease obligations exceed the economic benet until the end of the lease.
The provision is calculated as the lower of contracted rental costs estimated net exit costs and the forecast operating losses through to the end of the lease.
These provisions are based on the best estimate of the liability at the balance sheet date the actual liability being dependent on future events such as economic conditions and marketplace demand.
Expectations will be revised at each period until the actual liability arises with any difference accounted for in the period in which the revision is made.
The provision for onerous property lease contracts is discounted to reect the time value of money.
A credit of 207000 was recognised within the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in relation to onerous property lease contracts for continuing operations for the period ended 28 January 2017 201516 180000 credit.
SHAREBASED PAYMENT TRANSACTIONS The fair values of the options granted and shares granted under the LTIP and SAYE that are referred to in the accounting policies note are measured using the BlackScholes model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options and shares were granted.
Details of the assumptions used are set out in note 9.
The Group has applied the requirements of IFRS2 Sharebased Payments.
The Company has applied the requirements of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments.
The amount recorded in the statement of comprehensive income and statement of changes in equity in respect of sharebased payment transactions is an IFRS 2 charge of 392000 and employers National Insurance charge of 52000 201516 IFRS 2 charge of 347000 and employers National Insurance charge 104000 and relates to the LTIP and SAYE.
INVENTORY PROVISIONS Net realisable value is the selling price of inventory in the ordinary course of business less estimated selling costs.
Provision is made for the estimated obsolescence of old seasons lines based on historical margin trends and for the estimated loss of inventory from shop theft based on historical data.
The provision at 28 January 2017 was 460000 201516 467000.
DILAPIDATIONS
In 201516 an exceptional charge of 748000 was incurred in respect of property dilapidations.
In line with our policy the provision has been increased by 347000 in 201617.
See note 22.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 71 REVENUE AND BUSINESS SEGMENTS OPERATING SEGMENTS The majority of the Companys turnover arose in the United Kingdom with the exception of two stores in Ireland.
IFRS 8 Operating Segments requires operating segments to be identied on the basis of internal reports about components of the Group that are regularly reviewed by the Chief Executive Ofcer to allocate resources to the segments and to assess their performance.
Information reported to the Groups Chief Executive Ofcer for the purposes of resource allocation and assessment of segment performance is focused on the split between Mainstream Retail and Hire.
Information regarding the Groups continuing operating segments is reported below.
The following is an analysis of the Groups revenue and gross prot in the current and prior periods KEY FINANCIALS 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 January 30 January 2017 2016 CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Retail 110812 103883 Hire 17118 17189 Total revenue 127930 121072 Gross prot Retail 64920 58570 Hire 13482 13833 Total gross prot 78402 72403 Gross Margin % Retail 58.6% 56.4% Hire 78.8% 80.5% Total gross margin 61.3% 59.8% Administrative expenses 6620 6146 Shops selling and marketing costs 64705 60333 Operating prot before exceptional items 7077 5924 Other gains and losses 26 3 Investment revenues 48 66 Financial costs 5 51 Prot before taxation and exceptional items 7146 5942 Exceptional items  98 Prot before taxation and after exceptional items 7146 5844 The accounting policies for the reportable segments are the same as the Groups accounting policies described in note 1.
Only revenue and gross prot have been reported for the Groups business segments Retail and Hire as the main operating costs being property related overheads and staff cannot be separately identied as they both use the same stores and hence operating prot is not reported to the Chief Executive Ofcer split by Retail and Hire.
Revenue and gross prot are the measures reported to the Chief Executive Ofcer for the purpose of resource allocation and assessment of segmental performance.
On the same basis assets cannot be allocated between Retail and Hire and are not reported to the Chief Executive Ofcer separately.
72 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
INVESTMENT INCOME AND FINANCIAL COSTS 201617 201516 CONTINUING OPERATIONS 000 000 Interest receivable on bank deposits 48 66 Interest payable on corporation tax 2 47 Interest payable on bank accounts 3 4 PROFIT ON ORDINARY ACTIVITIES BEFORE EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS AND TAXATION Prot on ordinary activities before taxation is stated after chargingcrediting the following 201617 201516 CONTINUING OPERATIONS 000 000 Staff costs note 8 25922 25100 Depreciation of property plant and equipment net of the amortisation of the LDA credit amounting to 203K 201516 204k 5505 5233 Depreciation of leasehold improvements 197 217 Amortisation of intangibles 801 1149 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment 636 642 Operating lease charges  land and buildings 19308 18177 other 1 17 Other operating income from sublets 612 650 Rent paid contingent on turnover 667 707 Onerous lease and dilapidations provision release and utilisation 101000 201516 101000 of this credit relates to compulsory purchase compensation of 1440000 was received during 201213 from the London Development Agency LDA resulting from the nalisation of a compulsory purchase compensation claim made in 2007 on the Groups former distribution centre following the successful London Olympics bid.
423000 of this amount related to revenue and 1017000 related to xed assets.
Of the 1017000 which related to xed assets 610000 was recognised in 201213 as an exceptional item representing six years accumulated depreciation and 407000 was deferred into future years to be released over the useful economic lives of the relevant replacement assets.
This ongoing annual release has not been treated as an exceptional item in subsequent years but netted off the annual depreciation charge for the replacement assets.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS 201617 201516 Shop selling and marketing costs Provision for dilapidations Other gains and losses Receipt of compensation from termination of lease contract  650 TOTAL EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS  98 In 201516 an exceptional credit had been received following the negotiated exit from a retail location where the landlord paid compensation for the release of certain lease obligations of 650000.
An exceptional charge of 748000 was incurred in respect of property dilapidations.
As a result of the portfolio of stores increasingly moving away from the high street and towards shopping centres and retail parks we rened our estimation technique for calculating the dilapidation provision in 201516.
Given this change in estimate and the unusually high number of dilapidation claims received in 201516 there was a large dilapidations charge to the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
While dilapidation claims are generally part of the underlying operations of the business the size of the charge to the Statement of Comprehensive Income in the prior year means that this meets our denition of an exceptional item.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 73 AUDITORS REMUNERATION The analysis of auditors remuneration is as follows 201617 201516 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 94 94 Audit related assurance services Nonaudit fees 7 7 Total auditors remuneration 101 101 STAFF NUMBERS AND COSTS Including Executive Directors the average monthly number of fulltime equivalent staff employed by the Group during the period was as follows 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Number Number Distribution 95 94 Selling and marketing 789 787 Administration 54 53 Total 938 934 The aggregate staff costs recognised in the statement of comprehensive income were as follows 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY 000 000 Wages and salaries 23151 22427 Social security costs 1929 1892 Contributions to dened contribution plans 450 434 Sharebased payments note 9 392 347 25922 25100 Directors emoluments are disclosed within the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 41 to 52.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The Group operates a number of sharebased payments schemes the Sharesave scheme and an equitysettled LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP.
The Group and Company has applied the requirements of IFRS2 Sharebased Payments.
SAVE AS YOU EARN SHARE OPTION SCHEME A save as you earn scheme was approved and adopted in 201213.
Under the terms of the scheme the Board may offer options to purchase ordinary shares in the Company once in each nancial year to those employees who enter into an HM Revenue and Customs HMRC approved Save As You Earn SAYE savings contract.
For the 201617 plan in line with HMRC regulations the Board limited the maximum amount saved to 500 per month per employee 201516 plan 500 per month.
The price at which options were offered is the average closing price for three consecutive dealing days preceding the offer date.
For 2016 the exercise price offered was discounted by 20%.
The options may normally be exercised during the six month period after the completion of the SAYE contract three years after entering the scheme.
3year plan 3year plan 3year plan Options outstanding at the beginning of the period 118881 143880 Granted 581827 Forfeited 25637 29249 41129 Options outstanding at the end of the period 556190 89632 102751 Exercise price pence 82.70 104.60 117.70 74 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED The fair values of the options granted during the year have been calculated using the BlackScholes model assuming the inputs shown belowtel 3year plan 3year plan 3year plan Grant date May 2016 May 2015 May 2014 Fair value at grant date pence per share 20.78 12.30 23.20 Share price at grant date pence per share 100.50 104.75 115.88 Exercise price pence per share 82.70 104.60 117.70 Expected volatility expressed as weighted average volatility used in the modelling under the Black  Scholes model 32.4% 20.5% 31.8% Option life years 3.0 3.0 3.0 Expected dividend yield 5.3% 3.0% 3.0% Riskfree interest rate 0.62% 1.94% 1.2% The resulting fair value is expensed over the service period of three years on the assumption that 15% of options will lapse over the service period as employees leave the Group.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLAN On 14 April 2014 a new equity settled LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP was approved by shareholders and 807341 shares were awarded to directors and senior employees.
In accordance with this plan the shares are exercisable at nil cost subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions and the requirement for continued employment during the vesting period.
The fair value is measured at grant date and recognised over the vesting period.
These grants are accounted for in accordance with IFRS 2.
On 1 April 2015 and 5 May 2015 a new equity settled LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP was approved by shareholders and 763302 shares and 73800 shares respectively were awarded to directors and senior employees.
In accordance with this plan the shares are exercisable at nil cost subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions and the requirement for continued employment during the vesting period.
The fair value is measured at grant date and recognised over the vesting period.
These grants are accounted for in accordance with IFRS 2.
On 12 April 2016 and 31 October 2016 a new equity settled LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP was approved by shareholders and 879447 shares and 61228 shares respectively were awarded to directors and senior employees.
In accordance with this plan the shares are exercisable at nil cost subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions and the requirement for continued employment during the vesting period.
The fair value is measured at grant date and recognised over the vesting period.
These grants are accounted for in accordance with IFRS 2.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 75 RECONCILIATION OF SHARE AWARDS October 2016 April 2016 May 2015 April 2015 April 2014 Fair value of share options and assumption Grant Grant Grant Grant Grant Options originally granted net of lapsed 61228 879447 73800 541236 576506 Unvested options at 30 January 2016   73800 541236 576506 Granted 61228 879447 Lapsed  91026  37611 297091 Vested     279415 Unvested options at 28 January 2017 61228 788421 73800 503625 Options unexercised at 28 January 2017 61228 788421 73800 503625 279415 Fair value at grant date pence per share 83.65 87.00 83.89 98.25 104.19 Share price pence per share 99.25 102.00 91.79 107.50 114.00 Exercise price pence per share Expected volatility expressed as weighted average volatility used in the modelling under the Black  Scholes model 34.3% 31.9% 21.2% 20.0% 4.7% Option life years 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 Contractual life of shares years Expected dividend yield 5.7% 5.3% 3.0% 3.0% 3.0% Riskfree interest rate 0.62% 0.62% 1.94% 1.94% 0.5% Based on the year ended 28 January 2017 in respect of the 2014 scheme 50% of the original grant of these options will vest based on satisfying the performance conditions.
These options were unexercised at 28 January 2017.
The options unexercised for April 2014 represents 50% of the original grant as 50% will lapse when exercised.
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the period of three years.
The expected life used in the model has been based on managements best estimate of the Group meeting the performance conditions.
Vesting conditions  see the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 41 to 52.
76 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED DEFERRED BONUS SHARES In accordance with the Directors Remuneration Policy a 50% of any bonus awarded to directors and senior employees is invested in shares and deferred for a three year period.
In accordance with the terms of this plan the shares are exercisable at nil cost subject to continued employment during the vesting period and awarded based on annual performance.
Fair value of share options and assumption April 2014 April 2013
Award
Unvested options at 30 January 2016 131920 419179
131920 419179 Unvested options at 28 January 2017 Options unexercised at 28 January 2017 131920 Fair value at measurement date pence per share 65.93 31.37 Share price pence per share 72.50 34.5 Exercise price pence per share Expected volatility expressed as weighted average volatility used in the modelling under the Black  Scholes model 16.0% 34.8% Option life years 3.00 3.00 Expected dividend yield 3.0% 3.0% Riskfree interest rate 0.5% 0.5% April 2014 grant was awarded in 201415 and is based on annual performance for the 201314 nancial year.
April 2013 grant was awarded in 201314 and was based on annual performance for the 201213 nancial year.
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the period of three years.
The expected life used in the model has been based on managements best estimate of the Group meeting the performance conditions.
Vesting conditions  see the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 41 to 52.
SHAREBASED PAYMENT CHARGE The amount recorded in the statement of comprehensive income in respect of sharebased payment transactions is IFRS 2 charge of 392000 and employers National Insurance charge of 52000 201516 IFRS 2 charge of 347000 and employers National Insurance charge 104000 and relates to the LTIP Deferred Bonus Shares and SAYE scheme.
Deferred
SAYE LTIP bonus RECONCILIATION OF SHARE AWARDS Number Number Number Share awards outstanding at 30 January 2016 1765177 551099 Granted in the period Exercised in the period 142477 573636 Lapsed in the period Share awards outstanding at the end of the period 748573 1706487 131920 Fully exercisable at the end of the period 1 This represents the exercise of awards granted in April 2013 and September 2013 which vested during 201516.
All shares apart from SAYE options are exercised at nil cost.
Option price for SAYE options stated on page 73.
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the period of three years.
The expected life used in the model has been based on managements best estimate of the Group meeting the performance conditions.
Vesting conditions  see the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 41 to 52.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 77
A TAXATION RECOGNISED IN THE STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME IS AS FOLLOWS 201617 201516 GROUP  CONTINUING OPERATIONS 000 000 Current tax charge Current period 2104 1563 Adjustment for prior periods 80 105 2024 1458 Deferred tax creditcharge Current period 406 169 Adjustment for prior periods Effect of change in tax rate on opening deferred tax balances 82 73 Total taxation charge in the Statement of Comprehensive Income 1623 1239 B FACTORS AFFECTING THE TAX CHARGE FOR THE PERIOD 201617 201516 GROUP  CONTINUING OPERATIONS 000 000 Prot on ordinary activities before tax 7146 5844 Prot before tax multiplied by rate of corporation tax in the UK of 20% 201516 20.16% 1429 1178 Income taxed at different rates in foreign jurisdictions Depreciation on assets not qualifying for capital allowances 303 159 Adjustment in respect of prior period 157 81 Impact on share based payments 9 12 Other permanent differences 5 80 Effect in the change of tax rate 82 72 Taxation charge for the period 1623 1239 C ANALYSIS OF DEFERRED TAX LIABILITY 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY 000 000 The deferred tax liability comprises Deferred capital gains 1395 1848 Deferred tax liability 1395 1848 D ANALYSIS OF DEFERRED TAX ASSET 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY 000 000 The deferred tax asset comprises Accelerated capital allowances 1068 959 Sharebased payments 125 192 Other shortterm timing differences 7 38 Deferred tax asset 1200 1189 78 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
TAXATION CONTINUED E MOVEMENT IN DEFERRED TAX ASSET AND LIABILITY GROUP AND COMPANY 000 Liability at 26 January 2014 281 Charge to income due to continuing operations 149 Debit to equity due to continuing operations 272 Liability at 31 January 2015 702 Credit to income due to continuing operations 220 Debit to equity due to continuing operations 177 Liability at 30 January 2016 659 Credit to income due to continuing operations 401 Credit to equity due to continuing operations 63 Liability at 28 January 2017 195 At 28 January 2017 the deferred tax asset in respect of capital allowances sharebased payments and other short term temporary differences was recognised on the basis that the Company is protable in 201617 and forecasts to be protable in future years.
At the balance sheet date the Finance No 2 Act 2015 had been substantively enacted conrming that the main UK corporation tax rate will reduce from 20% to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and then to 18% from 1 April 2020.
Therefore at 28 January 2017 deferred tax assets and liabilities have been calculated at the rate at which the temporary difference is expected to reverse after 1 April 2017.
These reductions may also reduce the Groups future current tax charges accordingly.
EARNINGS PER SHARE Underlying basic earnings per ordinary share is based on the weighted average of 100211983 201516 99084852 ordinary shares in issue during the period after deducting for shares held by the Employee Benet Trust and are calculated by reference to the prot attributable to shareholders of 5523000 201516 4669000.
Underlying diluted earnings per ordinary share is based upon the weighted average of 102559814 201516 102324496 ordinary shares after deducting shares held by the Employee Benet Trust which include the effects of shares under SAYE LTIP and Deferred Bonus Shares of 2347831 that were nondilutive for the period presented and could dilute earnings per share in the future and are calculated by reference to the prot attributable to shareholders as stated above.
201617 201516 Basic earnings per share pence pence Underlying basic earnings per share 5.51 4.71 Impact of exceptional items  0.06 Basic earnings per share on continuing operations 5.51 4.65 201617 201516 Diluted earnings per share pence pence Underlying basic earnings per share 5.39 4.56 Impact of exceptional items  0.06 Diluted earnings per share on continuing operations 5.39 4.50 Underlying represents results before exceptional items as dened in note 1 of the Financial Statements.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 79
Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the period 201617 201516 Final dividend for the year ended 30 January 2016 3.75 pence per share 31 January 2015 3.55 pence per share 3766 3512 Interim dividend for the year ended 28 January 2017 of 1.91 pence per share 30 January 2016 1.80 pence per share 1921 1788 5687 5300 Given the progress made in 201617 and the prospects for further growth the Board feels it is appropriate to propose the payment of a nal dividend.
A dividend of 3.98 pence per share is proposed to be paid on 23 June 2017 to all shareholders on the register as at 2 June 2017 ex dividend date 1 June 2017 and in line with the Boards policy will be monitored to ensure we achieve robust dividend cover over time.
INTANGIBLE NONCURRENT ASSETS IT software GROUP AND COMPANY 000
At 31 January 2015 6856 Additions 966 At 30 January 2016 7822
At 31 January 2015 4877 Charge for the period 1149 At 30 January 2016 6026 NET BOOK VALUE At 30 January 2016 1796 At 31 January 2015 1979
At 30 January 2016 7822 Additions 650 Disposals 357 At 28 January 2017 8115
At 30 January 2016 6026 Charge for the period 801 Disposals 155 At 28 January 2017 6672 NET BOOK VALUE At 28 January 2017 1443 At 30 January 2016 1796 Amortisation charges are recorded within shops selling and marketing costs.
The Group has capitalised 228000 of IT personnel costs during the year 201516 254000 which are included within Intangible NonCurrent Asset Additions.
These costs relate specically to IT time incurred on developing the Groups IT infrastructure.
At 28 January 2017 the total cost of IT personnel costs included within Intangible NonCurrent Assets was 967000 201516 1219000 with associated net book value of 276000 201516 546000.
80 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Fixtures plant and vehicles and Hire equipment Leasehold equipment inventory total improvements Total GROUP AND COMPANY 000 000 000 000 000
At 31 January 2015 60113 9771 69884 3798 73682 Additions 5852 2443 8295 350 8645 Disposals 4695 2138 6833 647 7480 At 30 January 2016 61270 10076 71346 3501 74847
At 31 January 2015 48425 6718 55143 2889 58032 Charged in period 3733 1500 5233 217 5450 Disposals 4435 1782 6217 621 6838 At 30 January 2016 47723 6436 54159 2485 56644 NET BOOK VALUE At 30 January 2016 13547 3640 17187 1016 18203 At 31 January 2015 11688 3053 14741 909 15650 GROUP AND COMPANY
At 30 January 2016 61270 10076 71346 3501 74847 Additions 5772 1907 7679 436 8115 Disposals 1171 1718 2889 103 2992 At 28 January 2017 65871 10265 76136 3834 79970
At 30 January 2016 47723 6436 54159 2485 56644 Charged in period 3952 1553 5505 197 5702 Disposals 980 1340 2320 100 2420 At 28 January 2017 50695 6649 57344 2582 59926 NET BOOK VALUE At 28 January 2017 15176 3616 18792 1252 20044 At 30 January 2016 13547 3640 17187 1016 18203 Leasehold improvements relate to leasehold buildings as the element of land contained in these leases is minimal.
Included within leasehold improvements at 28 January 2017 are 110000 of location premiums 30 January 2016 114000.
Location premiums relate to premiums paid to enter a property which is in a desirable location.
During 201617 the Group progressed with the store development programme which commenced during 201213.
A charge of 0.5m was taken in 201213 to reect accelerated depreciation on existing xtures and ttings in those stores so that the value of xtures and ttings replaced on ret will be written off by the date of ret.
Management have reassessed the useful economic lives of these assets and a 71000 charge 201516 51000 charge to the Statement of Comprehensive Income has been made during the year ended 28 January 2017.
This has been treated as a prospective revision to the Groups estimate for depreciation in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 81 B COMMITMENTS Capital commitments for which no provision has been made in the nancial statements were as follows 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY
1235 1020 C OPERATING LEASES Total commitments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 201617 201516 Land and Land and buildings Other buildings Other GROUP AND COMPANY Payments falling due within one year 17147  15868 1 in the second to fth year 52364  50554 over ve years 18349  20568 87860  86990 1 The majority of these leases are subject to rent review and a small number have contingent rentals payable based on revenue exceeding a minimum amount in the relevant store.
Total commitments receivable from sublets under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 201617 201516 Land and Land and buildings buildings GROUP AND COMPANY Income falling due within one year in the second to fth year 647 1139 over ve years 903 1572 82 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FIXED ASSET INVESTMENTS 201617 201516 COMPANY 000 000 Subsidiary undertakings cost at the beginning of the period 15351 15351 Provision at the beginning of the period 5849 5849 Carrying value at the end of the period 9502 9502 Subsidiary undertakings at the end of the period are as follows Subsidiary undertakings Principal Activities Country of Incorporation Fairdale Textiles Limited Dormant United Kingdom Blazer Limited Dormant United Kingdom Shirt Co Limited Dormant United Kingdom LandA Froomberg Limited Dormant United Kingdom Moss Bros Group Qualifying Employee Share Ownership Trustee Limited Employee Benet Trust United Kingdom Gee 2 Limited Dormant United Kingdom Our Big Day Limited Dormant United Kingdom Tannetje Limited Dormant United Kingdom Cecil Gee Menswear Limited Dormant United Kingdom Delanco Meyer Textiles Limited Dormant United Kingdom Suit Co Limited Dormant United Kingdom Broadpark Limited Dormant United Kingdom City Menswear Limited Dormant United Kingdom Savoy Taylors Guild Limited Dormant United Kingdom Cecil Gee Limited Dormant United Kingdom Hagee London Limited Dormant United Kingdom Beale and Inman Limited Dormant United Kingdom Vavasseur and Company Limited Dormant United Kingdom Dehavilland Limited Dormant United Kingdom Brand Centre Holdings Limited Dormant United Kingdom Brand Centre Lifestyle Limited Dormant United Kingdom All holdings are 100% except for Delanco Meyer Textiles Limited and Gee 2 Limited Moss Bros Group plc has a 50% holding in Delanco Meyer Textiles Limited and Gee 2 Limited.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 83
201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Retail inventory 17169 14895 Retail inventory provisions 16709 14428 TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 201617 201516
Trade receivables Other receivables Prepayments and accrued income 3031 2411 3688 3013 201617 201516
Trade receivables Amounts owed by Group undertakings 2151 2151 Other receivables Prepayments and accrued income 3031 2411 5839 5164 The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade and other receivables approximates to their fair value.
SHARE CAPITAL 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY
Ordinary shares of 5 pence each 6000 6000 ALLOTTED CALLED UP AND FULLY PAID Ordinary shares of 5 pence each 5040 5040 84 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
RESERVES
Share Employee Share Share based benet Hedging Retained capital premium payments trust reserve earnings Total At 31 January 2015 5040 8673 1224 1521 691 23347 37454 Prot after taxation      4605 4605 Cash ow hedging movement     61  61 Dividends paid      5300 5300 Credit to equity for equity settled sharebased payments   347    347 Exercise of shares held under option   619   619 Movement on deferred tax on equity settled sharebased payments   177    177 Movement on current tax on exercise of equity settled sharebased payments      249 249 Sale of shares by employee benet trust    839  839 SAYE exercise employee contributions      220 220 At 30 January 2016 5040 8673 775 682 630 22901 37337 Prot after taxation      5523 5523 Cash ow hedging movement     212  212 Dividends paid      5687 5687 Credit to equity for equity settled sharebased payments   392    392 Exercise of shares held under option   480 Movement on deferred tax on equity settled sharebased payments   50    50 Movement on current tax on exercise of equity settled sharebased payments      113 113 Sale of shares by employee benet trust    544  544 SAYE exercise employee contributions      83 83 At 28 January 2017 5040 8673 637 138 418 22869 37499 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 85 Share Employee Share Share based benet Hedging Retained Acquisition capital premium payments trust reserve earnings reserve Total At 31 January 2015 5040 8673 1224 1521 691 18447 4370 36924 Prot after taxation      4605  4605 Cash ow hedging movement     61   61 Dividends paid      5300  5300 Credit to equity for equity settled sharebased payments   347     347 Exercise of shares held under option   619   619 Movement on deferred tax on equity settled sharebased payments   177     177 Movement on current tax on exercise of equity settled sharebased payments      249  249 Sale of shares by employee benet trust    839 SAYE exercise employee contributions      220  220 At 30 January 2016 5040 8673 775 682 630 18001 4370 36807 Prot after taxation      5523  5523 Cash ow hedging movement     212   212 Dividends paid      5687  5687 Credit to equity for equity settled sharebased payments   392     392 Exercise of shares held under option   480   480 Movement on deferred tax on equity settled sharebased payments   50     50 Movement on current tax on exercise of equity settled sharebased payments      113  113 Sale of shares by employee benet trust    544  544 SAYE exercise employee contributions      83  83 At 28 January 2017 5040 8673 637 138 418 17969 4370 36969 The Group has an employee benet trust which holds 265363 shares 201516 1400652 in the Company for the benet of the Groups employees.
None of its shares has been allocated to a specic scheme.
At 28 January 2017 the shares had a carrying value of 139000 and a market value of 136000 201516 carrying value of 682000 and market value of 1383000.
86 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES DUE WITHIN ONE YEAR 201617 201516 GROUP 000 000 Trade payables 4059 2430 Other payables including taxation and social security 6228 4336 Accruals and deferred income 6870 4837 17157 11603 Other payables including taxation and social security comprise Other taxes 1821 1812 Social security 534 469 2355 2281 Other payables 3873 2055 6228 4336
201617 201516 Amounts falling due within one year Trade payables 4059 2430 Amounts owed to group undertakings 12182 12182 Other payables including taxation and social security 6228 4336 Accruals and deferred income 6870 4837 29339 23785 Other payables including taxation and social security comprise 201617 201516 Other taxes 1821 1812 Social security 2355 2281 Other payables 3873 2055 6228 4336 The fair value of payables is not materially different to the values disclosed above.
The Groups exposure to currency and liquidity risk related to trade and other payables is disclosed in note 24.
The fair value of the trade and other payables is not materially different to the values disclosed above.
OTHER PAYABLES DUE AFTER ONE YEAR 201617 201516
Accruals and deferred income 3208 2990 201617 201516
Amounts falling due after one year Accruals and deferred income 3209 2991 MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 87
Onerous
Dilapidations lease provision provisions Total GROUP AND COMPANY At 31 January 2015 370 1865 2235 Additional provision during the period 748 158 906 Release during the period  84 84 Utilisation during the period 325 254 579 At 30 January 2016 793 1685 2478 Additional provision during the period 415  415 Utilisation during the period 113 207 320 At 28 January 2017 1095 1478 2573
Dilapidations lease provision provisions Total 201516 Current Balance sheet 1010 242 1252 1076 Noncurrent Balance Sheet 85 1236 1321 1402 1095 1478 2573 2478 The additional provision of 415000 on dilapidations during the period reects the Groups estimate of obligations arising under operating leases in line with the company policy.
The utilisation of 113000 of Dilapidations provision and 207000 of onerous property lease provision was in respect of continuing and closed stores.
The onerous property lease provision at 28 January 2017 of 1478000 201516 1685000 is the estimated future cost of the Groups onerous property lease contracts and will be released over the lease terms up until 2024.
The net release to the Statement of Comprehensive Income on stores which closed during the year and on continuing stores was 267000 201516 release of 214000.
This has been discounted to reect the time value of money.
The effect of the unwinding of the discount rate on the release for the year was a debit of 59000 201516 debit of 34000.
The dilapidations provision at 28 January 2017 of 1095000 201516 793000 is the estimated future cost of the Groups dilapidations costs and is expected to be released within two years.
PENSIONS
The Group currently operates a dened contribution scheme.
As at 28 January 2017 there were 42000 outstanding contributions relating to the dened contribution scheme 201516 41000.
88 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES A MANAGEMENT OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES The Companys nancial instruments comprise cash and various items such as derivative forward foreign currency transactions trade receivables and payables that arise directly from its operations.
The main purpose of these nancial instruments is to manage the Companys liquidity.
The main risks arising from the Companys nancial instruments are credit risk liquidity risk foreign currency risk and interest rate risk.
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks.
CREDIT RISK Management has a credit policy in place and the exposure to credit risk is maintained on an ongoing basis.
At the Balance Sheet date there were no signicant concentrations of credit risk.
The carrying amount of each nancial asset represents the maximum credit exposure.
LIQUIDITY RISK Cash balances are managed and monitored on a daily basis and the peaks and troughs in the cash cycle are well known through experience.
The Company continues to operate the business from a debt free position and current trading levels generate a healthy cash ow.
FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK The Companys policy is to mitigate all currency exposures on purchases either by buying the amount of currency required at the time the obligation is known and holding it in a designated bank account until it is needed or by taking out forward foreign currency contracts and applying hedge accounting.
Details of forward foreign currency contracts outstanding as at 28 January 2017 are detailed in note E below.
INTEREST RATE RISK Interest rate risk arises from investment of cash balances on short term deposits.
The Company is not exposed to any other interest rate risk.
B FINANCIAL ASSETS i Trade receivables Carrying value 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Trade receivables Allowance for doubtful debts The Company recognised an allowance for doubtful debts where the trade receivable was considered irrecoverable on the basis of ageing and historical experience.
In the current period nil was provided for 201516 nil.
If the Company believes that a specic balance is irrecoverable it will be written off.
The Company does not require collateral in respect of these nancial assets.
Floating rate nancial assets 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY
Sterling
18800 16530
Total
19518 17259 Cash and cash equivalents generate interest income on short term deposits.
The Company has no xed rate nancial instruments.
Based on the average cash balance the effective interest rate on nancial assets is 0.25% 201516 0.43%.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 89 C FINANCIAL LIABILITIES There were no nancial liabilities after excluding derivative nancial instruments as detailed below and current trade payables as at 28 January 2017 201516 nil.
D FAIR VALUES OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES As at 28 January 2017 and 30 January 2016 there was no material difference between the fair values and book values of the Companys nancial assets or liabilities.
E DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Current Current 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Financial assets designated as cash ow hedges Forward foreign currency contracts 41telCurrent Current 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Financial liabilities carried at fair value through prot and loss FVTPL Forward foreign currency contracts In the current year the Group entered into several forward foreign currency contracts to protect the cost to the Group of 201617 inventory purchases and hedge against the risk of exchange rate uctuations.
During 201617 the Group had entered into 12934382 201516 7645000 US dollar forward contracts which were outstanding at 28 January 2017.
In the current year these have been designated as cash ow hedges.
The associated fair value gains and losses will be transferred to inventories when the purchases occur during the next 12 months at which time the amount deferred in equity will be reclassied to the Statement of Comprehensive
At 28 January 2017 418000 has been deferred in equity 201516 630000.
The ineffective portion of cash ow hedges recognised in Other gains and losses within the Statement of Comprehensive Income is a credit of 26000 201516 credit of 3000.
CAPITAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Group manages its capital to ensure that the Group will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimism of the debt and equity balance.
The Groups overall strategy remains unchanged from 201112.
The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the parent comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in note 19.
The Group is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.
The Groups risk management committee reviews the capital structure on a semiannual basis.
As part of this review the committee considers the cost of capital and risks associated with each class of capital.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Details of the signicant accounting policies and methods adopted including criteria for recognition the basis of measurement and the bases for recognition of income and expenses for each class of nancial asset nancial liability and equity instrument are disclosed in note 1.
90 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES CONTINUED CATEGORIES OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The net fair value of derivatives by hedge designation at the balance sheet date is 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Financial assets Cash ow hedges 411 597tel17 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Financial liabilities Cash ow hedges 201617 201516 GROUP AND COMPANY Effect of 10% appreciation in foreign exchange rates on derivative cash ow hedges Sterling against US Dollar Deferred in equity  Hedge Reserve Prot or loss ineffectiveness The impact of changes in foreign exchange rates on cash ow hedges results from retranslation of forward purchases of US Dollars used to hedge 201617 inventory purchases.
A negative number indicates a credit to equity where Sterling strengthens 10% against the US Dollar.
The associated fair value gains and losses are deferred in equity until the purchases occur.
The sensitivity analysis excludes the impact of movements in market variables on the carrying amount of trade and other payables and receivables due to the low associated sensitivity and are reported before the effect of tax.
It has been prepared on the basis that the Groups hedging activities hedge accounting designations and derivate contracts remain constant reecting the position at 28 January 2017.
Consequently the analysis relates to the position at that date and is not necessarily representative of 201617 then ended.
In preparing the sensitivity analysis it is assumed that all hedges are fully effective.
The effect shown above would be reversed in the event of an equal and opposite change in foreign exchange rate.
All derivatives are categories as level 2 under the requirements of IFRS 7 and they are valued using techniques based signicantly on observed market data.
EARNINGS BEFORE INTEREST TAX DEPRECIATION AND AMORTISATION EBITDA EBITDA as reported in the Headlines on page 2 is calculated as follows 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 January 30 January 2017 2016 Prot on ordinary activities before tax and exceptional items 7146 5942
Investment revenues 48 66 Financial costs 5 51
Depreciation of property plant and equipment 5905 5654 Amortisation of intangible assets 801 1149 Amortisation of compulsory purchase compensation EBITDA 13606 12526 EBITDA is earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and exceptional items MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 91 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS The Group had no material related party transactions which might reasonably be expected to inuence decisions made by users of these Financial Statements.
Directors remuneration is disclosed in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 41 to 52.
Other
The key management personnel compensation is as follows 201617 201516 Shortterm employee benets 1389 1139 Termination payments 66 46 Contributions to dened contribution plans 79 65 Proceeds from sharebased payments 240 535 1774 1785 Total remuneration is included in administrative expenses and relates to 11 employees in the period ended 28 January 2017 201516 10.
TRADING TRANSACTIONS The Group entered into the following transactions with related parties who are not members of the Group Berkeley Burke Trustee Company Limited is considered a related party of the Group because Brian Brick Chief Executive Ofcer of Moss Bros Group plc is a beneciary of the pension fund.
On 8 December 2011 Moss Bros Group plc agreed a longterm lease with Berkeley Burke Trustee Company Limited a pension fund and the superior landlord for a store in Hounslow on an arms length basis.
AAK Limited is considered a related party of the Group because Maurice Helfgott Senior Independent Non Executive Director of Moss Bros Group plc has a close relative holding a key management position with signicant inuence and who is a signicant shareholder at AAK Limited.
All transactions with AAK Limited have been on an arms length basis.
At 28 January 2017 total purchase from AAK Limited was 4.3m including VAT 30 January 2016 4.1m including VAT of which 177000 was outstanding at year end.
Moss Bros agreed a sublet of a store lease to White Stuff Ltd.
Debbie Hewitt Chairman of Moss Bros Group plc is also Chairman and director of White Stuff.
The transaction was on arms length commercial terms and Debbie Hewitt took no part in determining the commercial terms offered by Moss Bros or in the decision to accept them taken by White Stuff.
The sublet is from June 2014 until December 2021 at a rent of 50000 per year.
A capital contribution of 50000 was paid to White Stuff on completion of the agreement.
At 28 January 2017 the balance due from White Stuff was 212 in respect of service charges payable in arrears.
92 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING THIS DOCUMENT IS IMPORTANT AND REQUIRES YOUR IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.
If you are in any doubt as to what action to take you should consult your stockbroker solicitor accountant or other appropriate independent professional adviser authorised under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
If you have sold or otherwise transferred all your shares in Moss Bros Group PLC please forward this document and the accompanying form of proxy to the person through whom the sale or transfer was effected for transmission to the purchaser or transferee.
A form of proxy for the Annual General Meeting is enclosed.
Whether or not you intend to be present at the meeting please complete the form of proxy and return it in accordance with the instructions printed on it so as to reach Moss Bros Group PLCs registrar Capita Asset Services by no later than 12 noon on 17 May 2017 or in the event of any adjournment at 12 noon on the date which is two days before the day of the adjourned meeting.
Alternatively you can register your proxy vote electronically either by means of a website provided by the Moss Bros Group PLCs registrar or if you are a CREST member by using the service provided by Euroclear.
Further details are given in the notes to this notice.
Completion and return of the form of proxy will not prevent you from attending and voting at the meeting in person should you so wish.
Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting of Moss Bros Group PLC the Company will be held at 8 St.
Johns Hill London SW11 1SA on 19 May 2017 at 12 noon for the transaction of the following business To consider and if thought t to pass the following resolutions.
It is intended to propose 14 to 16 inclusive as special resolutions.
All other resolutions will be proposed as ordinary resolutions.
Voting on all resolutions will be by way of poll.
ORDINARY RESOLUTIONS To receive the annual Directors and Auditors reports and the accounts for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017.
To approve the Directors remuneration report excluding the Directors remuneration policy for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017 as set out on pages 41 to 52 of the Companys Annual Report and Accounts 20162017.
To approve the Directors remuneration policy which is contained in the Directors remuneration report for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017 as set out on pages 34 to 40 of the Companys Annual Report and Accounts 20162017.
To elect Tony Bennett as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Brian Brick as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Bryan Portman as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Zoe Morgan as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Maurice Helfgott as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Debbie Hewitt as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Deloitte LLP as the auditor of the Company until the conclusion of the Companys next Annual General Meeting.
To authorise the Directors to set the remuneration of the auditor as they shall in their discretion see t.
To declare a nal dividend for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017 of 3.98 pence per ordinary share payable on 23 June 2017 to ordinary shareholders on the register at the close of business on 2 June 2017.
That the Directors be generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot shares as dened in section 540 of the Act and grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares up to an aggregate nominal amount within the meaning of section  and 6 of the Act of 1679997.88 representing 33599957 shares this authorisation to expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or if earlier on 28 July 2018 save that the Company may before such expiry make any offer or agreement which would or might require shares to be allotted or rights to be granted after such expiry and the Directors may allot shares or grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in pursuance of any such offer or agreement as if the authorisations conferred hereby had not expired.
SPECIAL RESOLUTIONS That subject to the passing of resolution 13 set out in the notice of the 2017 Annual General Meeting of the Company the Directors be generally empowered pursuant to section 570 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to allot equity securities as dened in section 560 of the Act of the Company for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by that resolution as if section 561 of the Act did not apply to any such allotment provided that this power shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities for cash in connection with or pursuant to an offer of or invitation to acquire equity securities in favour of the holders of ordinary shares of the Company in proportion as nearly as practicable to the respective number of ordinary shares held by them on the record date for such allotment subject only to such exclusions or other arrangements as the Directors may consider necessary or appropriate to deal with fractional entitlements record dates or MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 93 legal regulatory or practical difculties which may arise under the laws of or the requirements of any regulatory body or stock exchange in any territory or any other matter whatsoever and the allotment otherwise than pursuant to subparagraph a of this resolution of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 251999.68 and the power hereby granted shall expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or if earlier on 28 July 2018 save that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry in which case the Directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of such offer or agreement as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.
That the Company be generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of section 701 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to make one or more market purchases within the meaning of section  of the Act of any of its ordinary shares of 5p each in the capital of the Company on such terms and in such manner as the Directors may from time to time determine provided that the maximum number of ordinary shares which may be purchased is 10079987 ordinary shares of 5p each representing 10 per cent.
105 per cent.
Daily Ofcial List of the London Stock Exchange plc for the ve business days immediately preceding the day on which such is contracted to be purchased and ii the higher of the price of the last independent trade of an ordinary share and the highest current independent bid for an ordinary share on the trading venues where the purchase is carried out unless previously renewed revoked or varied the authority conferred by this resolution shall expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or if earlier on 28 July 2018 and the Company may before the expiry of the authority granted by this resolution enter into a contract to purchase ordinary shares which would or might be executed wholly or partly after the expiry of this authority and may make purchases of ordinary shares pursuant to it as if this authority had not expired.
That a general meeting of the Company other than an annual general meeting may be called on not less than 14 clear days notice.
By Order of the Board Tony Bennett Registered Ofce Company Secretary 8 St.
Johns Hill 11 April 2017 London SW11 1SA Registered in England and Wales No.
94 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
NOTES
Copies of the Executive Directors service contracts with the Company and copies of the NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment with the Company will be available for inspection at the registered ofce of the Company during normal business hours on any weekday Saturdays Sundays and public bank holidays excepted from the date of this notice until the close of the Companys 2017 Annual General Meeting on 19 May 2017 and will also be available for inspection at the place of the meeting for at least 15 minutes prior to and throughout the meeting.
A copy of this notice and other information required by section 311A of the Companies Act 2006 the Act can be found at httpcorp.
Pursuant to regulation 41 of the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 2001 and section 360B2 of the Act the Company species that in order to have the right to attend and vote at the Annual General Meeting and also for the purpose of determining how many votes a person entitled to attend and vote may cast a person must be entered on the register of members of the Company at close of business on 17 May 2017 or in the event of any adjournment at close of business on the date which is two days before the day of the adjourned meeting.
Changes to entries on the register of members after this time shall be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend or vote at the meeting.
A member of the Company entitled to attend speak and vote at the Annual General Meeting may appoint a proxy to attend speak and vote in their place.
A member may appoint more than one proxy in relation to the Annual General Meeting provided that each proxy is appointed to exercise the rights attached to a different share or shares held by that member.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
A form of proxy for the 2017 Annual General Meeting is enclosed.
To be valid the completed and signed form of proxy together with the power of attorney or authority if any under which it is signed or a duly certied copy of any such power or authority or other instrument appointing a proxy must be received by post or by hand during normal business hours with the Companys registrars Capita Asset Services at PXS1 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham BR3 4ZF as soon as possible but not less than 48 hours before the time of the meeting.
If you are a CREST member see note 5 below.
Alternatively a member may appoint a proxy electronically or may wish to vote electronically online at site Please see the form of proxy for further details.
Return of a completed form of proxy or other instrument appointing a proxy or any CREST Proxy Instruction will not preclude a member from attending and voting personally at the meeting if heshe wishes to do so.
Alternatively if you are a member of CREST you may register the appointment of a proxy by using the CREST electronic proxy appointment service.
Further details are contained below.
CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies through the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so for the Annual General Meeting and any adjournments thereof by using the procedures and to the address described in the CREST Manual available via siteCREST subject to the provisions of the Companys articles of association.
CREST personal members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service providers should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service providers who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
In order for a proxy appointment or instruction made using the CREST service to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST Proxy Instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with Euroclear UK and Ireland Limiteds Euroclear specications and must contain the information required for such instructions as described in the CREST Manual.
The message regardless of whether it constitutes the appointment of a proxy or an amendment to the instruction given to a previously appointed proxy must in order to be valid be transmitted so as to be received by the issuers agent ID RA10 by the latest times for receipt of proxy appointments specied in the notice of the Annual General Meeting being 12 noon on 17 May 2017.
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the time stamp applied to the message by the CREST Applications Host from which the issuers agent is able to retrieve the message by enquiry to CREST in the manner prescribed by
After this time any change of instructions to proxies appointed through CREST should be communicated to the appointee through other means.
CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers should note that Euroclear does not make available special procedures in CREST for any particular messages.
Normal system timings and limitations will therefore apply in relation to the input of CREST Proxy Instructions.
It is the responsibility of the CREST member concerned to take or if the CREST member is a CREST personal member or sponsored member or has appointed a voting service providers to procure that his CREST sponsor or voting service providers takes such action as shall be necessary to ensure that a message is transmitted by means of the CREST system by any particular time.
In this connection CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers are referred in particular to those sections of the CREST Manual concerning practical limitations of the CREST system and timings.
The Company may treat as invalid a CREST Proxy Instruction in the circumstances set out in Regulation a of the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 2001.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 95 Any person to whom this notice is sent who is a person currently nominated by a member of the Company to enjoy information rights under section 146 of the Act a nominated person may have a right under an agreement between himher and such member by whom heshe was nominated to be appointed or to have someone else appointed as a proxy for the Annual General
If a nominated person has no such proxy appointment right or does not wish to exercise it heshe may have a right under such an agreement to give instructions to the member concerned as to the exercise of voting rights.
The statement of the above rights of the members in relation to the appointment of proxies does not apply to a nominated person.
Such rights can only be exercised by a member of the Company.
Any corporation which is a member can appoint one or more corporate representatives who may exercise on its behalf all of its powers as a member provided that they do not do so in relation to the same shares.
Any member attending the Annual General Meeting has the right to ask questions.
The Company must cause to be answered any such question relating to the business being dealt with at the meeting but no such answer need be given if a to do so would interfere unduly with the preparation for the meeting or involve the disclosure of condential information b the answer has already been given on a website in the form of an answer to a question or c it is undesirable in the interests of the Company or the good order of the meeting that the question be answered.
Under section 527 of the Act members meeting the threshold requirements set out in that section have the right to require the Company to publish on a website a statement setting out any matter relating to i the audit of the Companys accounts including the auditors report and the conduct of the audit that are to be laid before the Annual General Meeting or ii any circumstance connected with an auditor of the Company ceasing to hold ofce since the previous meeting at which annual accounts and reports were laid in accordance with section 437 of the Act in each case that the members propose to raise at the Annual General
The Company may not require the members requesting any such website publication to pay its expenses in complying with sections 527 or 528 of the Act.
Where the Company is required to place a statement on a website under section 527 of the Act it must forward the statement to the Companys auditor not later than the time when it makes the statement available on the website.
The business which may be dealt with at the meeting includes any statement that the Company has been required under section 527 of the Act to publish on a website.
As at 11 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to the date of this document the Companys issued share capital consists of 100799873 ordinary shares carrying one vote each.
Therefore the total voting rights in the Company as at that date are 100799873.
You may not use any electronic address within the meaning of section  of the Act provided in this notice or in any related documents including the proxy form to communicate with the Company for any purposes other than those expressly stated.
Under section 338 and section 338A of the Act members meeting the threshold requirements in those sections have the right to require the Company i to give to members of the Company entitled to receive notice of the Annual General Meeting notice of a resolution which may properly be moved and is intended to be moved at the meeting andor ii to include in the business to be dealt with at the meeting any matter other than a proposed resolution which may be properly included in the business.
A resolution may properly be moved or a matter may properly be included in the business unless a in the case of a resolution only it would if passed be ineffective whether by reason of inconsistency with any enactment or the Companys constitution or otherwise b it is defamatory of any person or c it is frivolous or vexatious.
Such a request may be in hard copy form or in electronic form must identify the resolution of which notice is to be given or the matter to be included in the business must be authorised by the person or persons making it must be received by the Company not later than the date 6 clear weeks before the meeting and in the case of a matter to be included in the business only must be accompanied by a statement setting out the grounds for the request.
Voting on all resolutions at the Annual General Meeting will be by way of a poll.
This means that you will be asked to complete a poll card if you attend in person.
The Company believes that this is the best way of representing the views of as many shareholders as possible in the voting process.
EXPLANATORY NOTES Resolution 2.
This resolution is to approve the Directors remuneration report other than the part containing the Directors remuneration policy for the nancial year ended on 28 January 2017.
You can nd the report on pages 41 to 52 of the Companys Annual Report and Accounts 20162017 which is available on the Companys website httpcorp. itereports.
As this vote is an advisory vote no entitlement of a Director to remuneration is conditional on it.
This resolution is put annually as required by the Act.
Resolution 3.
This resolution is to approve the Directors remuneration policy contained in the Directors remuneration report.
You can nd the policy on pages 34 to 40 of the Companys Annual Report and Accounts 20162017.
This vote is a binding vote and subject to limited exceptions no remuneration payment or loss of ofce payment may be made to a prospective current or former Director unless consistent with the approved remuneration policy or otherwise specically approved by shareholders of the Company.
If approved by shareholders the Directors remuneration policy will take effect immediately after the end of the Annual General Meeting.
This resolution should be put at least every three years as required by the Act.
96 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
Resolutions 4 to 9.
As required by the UK Corporate Governance Code biographical details of each of the Directors standing for election and reelection appear on page 19 of the Companys Annual Report and Accounts 20162017.
Under the Companys articles of association onethird of the Directors are required to retire by rotation each year.
However in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all the Directors will submit themselves for annual reelection by shareholders.
The Chairman is satised that following individual formal performance evaluations the performance of the Directors standing for election and reelection continues to be effective and to demonstrate commitment to the role.
Resolution 13.
Your Directors may allot shares and grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares only if authorised to do so by shareholders.
The authority granted at the last Annual General Meeting is due to expire at this years Annual General Meeting.
Accordingly resolution 13 will be proposed as an ordinary resolution to grant new authorities to allot shares and grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares.
If given these authorities will expire at the Annual General Meeting in 2018 or on 28 July 2018 whichever is earlier.
Resolution 13 will allow the Directors to allot ordinary shares up to a maximum nominal amount of 1678317 representing approximately onethird 33.33 per cent. issued share capital and calculated as at 11 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the date of this document.
As at 11 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to the date of this document the Company holds no treasury shares.
Resolution 14.
Your Directors also require a power from shareholders to allot equity securities for cash and otherwise than to existing shareholders pro rata to their holdings.
The power granted at the last Annual General Meeting is due to expire at this years Annual General Meeting.
Accordingly resolution 14 will be proposed as a special resolution to grant such a power.
Apart from offers or invitations in proportion to the respective number of shares held the power will be limited to the allotment of equity securities for cash up to an aggregate nominal value of 251999.68 being ve per cent. share capital at 11 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the date of this document.
If given this power will expire on 28 July 2018 or at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting in 2018 whichever is the earlier.
Your Directors will have due regard to institutional guidelines in relation to any exercise of this power in particular the requirement for advance consultation with shareholders before making any non preemptive cash issue pursuant to this resolution which exceeds 7.5 per cent of the Companys issued ordinary share capital in any rolling three year period.
Resolution 15.
This resolution will give the Company authority to purchase its own shares in the markets up to a limit of 10 per cent of its issued ordinary share capital.
The maximum and minimum prices are stated in the resolution.
Your Directors believe that it is advantageous for the Company to have this exibility to make market purchases of its own shares.
Your Directors will exercise this authority only if they are satised that a purchase would result in an increase in expected earnings per share and would be in the interests of shareholders generally.
In the event that shares are purchased they may either be cancelled and the number of shares in issue would be reduced accordingly or in accordance with the Act be retained as treasury shares.
The Company will consider holding repurchased shares pursuant to the authority conferred by this resolution as treasury shares.
This would give the Company the ability to re issue treasury shares quickly and cost effectively and would provide the Company with additional exibility in the management of its capital base.
As at 11 April 2017 being the last practicable date prior to the date of this document the total number of options over ordinary shares in the capital of the Company that were outstanding under all of the Companys share option plans was 2873075 which if exercised would represent 2.85 per cent. of the Companys issued share capital at that date.
If the Company were to purchase its own shares to the fullest possible extent of its authority from shareholders existing and being sought this number of outstanding options could potentially represent 3.2 per cent of the issued share capital of the Company.
Resolution 16.
Changes made to the Act by the Companies Shareholders Rights Regulations 2009 increase the notice period required for general meetings of the Company to at least 21 clear days unless shareholders approve a shorter notice period which cannot however be less than 14 clear days.
Annual General Meetings will continue to be held on at least 21 clear days notice.
Until the coming into force of the Companies Shareholders Rights Regulations 2009 on 3 August 2009 the Company was able to call general meetings other than an annual general meeting on at least 14 clear days notice without obtaining such shareholder approval.
In order to preserve this ability resolution 14 seeks the necessary shareholder approval.
The approval will be effective until the Companys next Annual General Meeting when it is intended that a similar resolution will be proposed.
The exibility offered by this resolution will be used where taking into account the circumstances the directors consider this appropriate in relation to the business to be considered at the meeting.
Note that the changes to the Act mean that in order to be able to call a general meeting on less than 21 clear days notice the Company must make a means of electronic voting available to all shareholders for that meeting.
MOSS BROS GROUP PLC Annual Report and Accounts 201617 I 97
Your Directors believe that all the proposed resolutions to be considered at the 2017 Annual General Meeting as set out in this document are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders as a whole.
Accordingly your Directors unanimously recommend that you vote in favour of them as they intend to do in respect of their own benecial holdings.
Note from the Chairman I can conrm as required by the UK Corporate Governance Code that having fully evaluated their performances the Board is of the view that each of the Directors offering themselves for reappointment at the Annual General Meeting continue to be effective and to demonstrate commitment to their role.
Debbie Hewitt Chairman 98 I MOSS BROS GROUP PLC shop online at site THIS PAGE HAS BEEN DELIBERATELY LEFT BLANK MOSS BROS GROUP PLC FORM OF PROXY FOR USE BY SHAREHOLDERS AT THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF MOSS BROS GROUP PLC THE COMPANY TO BE HELD AT 12 NOON ON 19 MAY 2017 AT 8 ST.
JOHNS HILL LONDON SW11 1SA.
Please read the notice of meeting and the explanatory notes before completing this proxy form.
IWe names in full IN BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE of addresses being the holders of ordinary shares of 5p each in the capital of the Company hereby appoint the Chairman or failing her the Senior NonExecutive Director or to act as myour proxy to exercise all or any of myour rights to attend speak and to vote in respect of myour voting entitlement on myour behalf at the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held at 12 noon on 19 May 2017 and at any adjournment thereof.
If you want your proxy to vote in a certain way on the resolutions specied please place a mark in the relevant boxes.
If you fail to select any of the given options your proxy can vote as he or she chooses or can decide not to vote at all.
The proxy can do this on any resolution put to the meeting.
Please tick here if this proxy appointment is one of multiple appointments being made.
For the appointment of more than one proxy please refer to note 1 overleaf.
For Against Vote Withheld Discretion Resolution 1 To receive the annual accounts and reports of the Directors and auditors for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017 Resolution 2 To approve the Directors remuneration report excluding the Directors remuneration policy for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017 Resolution 3 To approve the Directors remuneration policy Resolution 4 To elect Tony Bennett as a Director of the Company Resolution 5 To reelect Brian Brick as a Director of the Company Resolution 6 To reelect Bryan Portman as a Director of the Company Resolution 7 To reelect Zoe Morgan as a Director of the Company Resolution 8 To reelect Maurice Helfgott as a Director of the Company Resolution 9 To reelect Debbie Hewitt as a Director of the Company Resolution 10 To reelect Deloitte LLP as auditor of the Company Resolution 11 To authorise the Directors to set the remuneration of the auditor Resolution 12 To declare a nal dividend for the nancial year ended 28 January 2017 of 3.98 pence per ordinary share Resolution 13 To authorise the Directors to allot shares pursuant to section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 Resolution 14 To authorise the Directors to disapply preemption rights pursuant to sections 570 of the Companies Act 2006 Resolution 15 To authorise the Company to make market purchases of its ordinary shares pursuant to section 701 of the Companies Act 2006 Resolution 16 To approve general meetings of the Company other than annual general meetings to be held on not less than 14 clear days notice
Dated this day of To facilitate arrangements for the meeting please tick here without commitment on your part if you propose to attend the meeting.
NOTES
To appoint as a proxy a person other than the Chairman of the meeting insert the full name in the space provided.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
You can also appoint more than one proxy provided each proxy is appointed to exercise the rights attached to a different share or shares held by you.
The following options are available a To appoint the Chairman as your sole proxy in respect of all your shares simply ll in any voting instructions in the appropriate box and sign and date the form of proxy.
To appoint a person other than the Chairman as your sole proxy in respect of all your shares delete the words the Chairman or failing him the Senior NonExecutive Director or and insert the name of your proxy in the spaces provided.
Then ll in any voting instructions in the appropriate box and sign and date the form of proxy.
To appoint more than one proxy you may photocopy this form of proxy.
Please indicate the proxy holders name and the number of shares in relation to which they are authorised to act as your proxy which in aggregate should not exceed the number of shares held by you.
Please also indicate if the proxy instruction is one of multiple instructions being given.
If you wish to appoint the Chairman as one of your multiple proxies simply write the Chairman of the Annual General Meeting.
All forms must be signed and should be returned together in the same envelope.
Unless otherwise indicated the proxy will vote as he thinks t or at his discretion abstain from voting.
The form of proxy must arrive at Capita Asset Services PXS1 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham BR3 4ZF during usual business hours accompanied by any power of attorney or other authority under which it is executed if applicable or a duly certied copy of such power of attorney or authority no later than 12 noon on 17 May 2017.
A corporation must execute the form of proxy under either its common seal or the hand of a duly authorised ofcer or attorney.
In the case of joint holders the signature of any one holder will be sufcient but the names of the joint holders should be stated.
The vote of the senior joint holder according to the order in which the names stand in the register in respect of the holding who tenders a vote in person or by proxy shall be accepted to the exclusion of the vote of the other joint holders.
The Vote Withheld option is to enable you to abstain on any particular resolution.
Such a vote is not a vote in law and will not be counted in the votes For and Against a resolution.
Shares held in uncertied form i. in CREST may be voted through the CREST Proxy Voting Service in accordance with the procedures set out in the CREST manual.
Completion and return of the Form of Proxy will not preclude you from attending and voting in person at the meeting should you subsequently decide to do so.
You may also vote your shares electronically at site If you prefer you may return the proxy form to Capita Asset Services in an envelope addressed to FREEPOST CAPITA PXS.
Please note that delivery using this service can take up to 5 business days.
Please trim along dotted line fold and insert into the supplied reply paid envelope.
