Unquenchable thirst for improvement
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts January 2017
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts January 2017 improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement improvement Strategic Report Performance at a glance 01 Our business and brands 02
Chairmans Introduction 04
Business Model 06
Chief Executives Review 08
Strategy 12 Key Performance Indicators 13 Strategy in Action 14
Financial Review 26
Risk management 31 Corporate Governance Board of Directors 36 Directors Report 38 Corporate Governance Report 43 Audit Committee Report 48
Directors Remuneration Report 51
Directors Statement 77
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of A.
BARR p.
Consolidated Income Statement 81 Statement of Comprehensive Income 82 Statement of Changes in Equity 83 Statements of Financial Position 85 Cash Flow Statements 86 Notes to the Accounts 87 Review of Trading Results 129 Glossary 130 Notice of Annual General Meeting 133 Auditors Statement of Circumstances 142 We are a growth driven branded consumer goods business delivering longterm sustainable value.
We build great tasting brands that people love oering them choice and enjoyment.
Unquenchable thirst for value value
Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable Unquenchable
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance We have made considerable progress across the business over the last 12 months and delivered a solid financial performance in volatile and uncertain market conditions.
Revenue
0.6% Prot before tax 4.4% EBITDA margin 20.1% 0.6% See page 14 for our Strategy in Action Strategic Report I am pleased to present A.
BARR p. ended 28 January 2017.
The report provides an overview of our business model and a comprehensive review of our strategy its execution our nancial performance and information on how we govern our business.
We have made considerable progress across the business over the last 12 months and delivered a solid nancial performance in volatile and uncertain market conditions.
We will continue to seek opportunities to grow our business and I believe we are well placed to continue to deliver consistent longterm shareholder value.
Roger White Chief Executive Net cash Earnings per share 3.9% Full year dividend per share 8.0% Items marked with an asterisk are nonGAAP measures.
Denitions and relevant reconciliations are provided in the Glossary on pages 130 to 132.
The term underlying has been used to improve comparability between the 52 week reporting period ended 28 January 2017 and the 53 weeks ended 30 January 2016.
In the 53 week reporting period ended 30 January 2016 the Group received nonrecurring income associated to the termination of the Orangina franchise and incurred oneo transaction fees associated to corporate development activities including Funkin Limited.
The underlying gures for the 53 week reporting period ended 30 January 2016 have been adjusted for the revenue and prot associated to week 53 and the nonrecurring Orangina franchise and oneo corporate development transaction fees.
The underlying gures for the period ended 28 January 2017 are the reported gures before exceptional items as disclosed in the consolidated income statement.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Established over 140 years ago in Scotland we are a FTSE 250 business operating across the UK and with a growing international presence.
Excellence in taste Our business and brands
Spring launched Bottles sold 7.6 million IRNBRU
Equivalent number of cans sold 20 million
Light and Fruity launched Sugar content reduced by 50% 03
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance At our core we are a successful branded soft drinks business building a diverse and dierentiated portfolio of great tasting brands that people love.
We make it our business to understand what our consumers want.
Whether its our iconic IRNBRU launched in 1901 and still going strong today our market leading RUBICON exotic fruit juice drinks or our pure clear Scottish spring water STRATHMORE our brands oer people a choice of great tasting products and bring exciting innovation to the market.
Enhancing our portfolio we also operate longterm successful partnerships complementing our own range of products with global brands ROCKSTAR and SNAPPLE in the UK and beyond.
But were not just about soft drinks with the addition of FUNKIN we have moved into the cocktail mixer segment broadening and strengthening our portfolio with a unique and exciting market leading brand in a growing market.
Employing around 900 people across 10 UK locations we are proud to be a sustainable business that listens to our consumers builds lasting customer relationships takes care of our employees gives something back to our communities and works to minimise our environmental impact.
MJ launched Sales exceeded 1 million
Sales up 27%
Sales up 20% 04
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report A strong platform for the future The announcement of a soft drinks sugar tax in the Chancellors budget in March 2016 and the devaluation of sterling following the UKs referendum vote to leave the European Union in June added additional external headwinds in a soft drinks market already impacted by price deation.
Despite these macro external inuences the business has retained a clear focus on the execution of its strategy and in particular on internal improvement actions.
Financially the business has delivered another solid performance with prot before tax and exceptional items of 42.4m an increase of 2.7% on the prior year 41.3m and exits the year with a strong balance sheet.
We maintained our market share across the period and continued to invest in our brands with the key brands IRNBRU and Rubicon delivering good growth.
Innovation has been a key strategic focus across the year and the launches of IRNBRU XTRA and Rubicon Spring in particular both no added sugar products have proven successful.
As consumer tastes and preferences continue to change and the demand for great tasting reduced sugar products increases the recent announcement that 90% of our Company owned brands will contain less than 5g of total Over the past 12 months we have seen some extremely signicant events unfold across the UK and beyond.
Chairmans Introduction
Items marked with an asterisk are nonGAAP measures.
Denitions and relevant reconciliations are provided in the Glossary on pages 130 to 132. both pace and commitment.
Our key partnerships with Rockstar and Dr Pepper Snapple Group continued to progress complementing our own portfolio both in the UK and increasingly on an international basis where we have delivered further growth extending our international footprint and our franchise territory agreements.
The Funkin business acquired in 2015 continues to exceed our acquisition expectations and we remain highly encouraged by the continued growth momentum of the Funkin brand and business.
Our drive for improvement across the business has not abated.
We have continued to invest in our asset base including the installation of a new glass lling line at Cumbernauld and are in the process of adding new PET capability in our Milton Keynes facility.
In addition we have successfully completed a Companywide business reorganisation that has both enhanced our organisational capability and reduced our overhead base.
We exit the year with a strong balance sheet and are well placed to exploit growth opportunities as and when they arise.
Dividend
The Board is pleased to be in a position to maintain its commitment to a progressive dividend policy and recommend a nal dividend of 10.87p per share to give a total dividend for the full year of 14.40p per share a full year increase of 8% on the prior year.
The nal dividend is payable on 9 June 2017 to shareholders on the Register of Members at the close of business on 12 May 2017.
The exdividend date is 11 May 2017.
Share repurchase programme Given the strength of the balance sheet and the cash generative nature of the business the Board has decided to return up to 30m to shareholders via an onmarket share repurchase programme.
This programme is anticipated to commence in the spring of 2017 and complete within 24 months.
The AGM in May 2017 will be requested to approve the renewal of the authority granted in June 2016 for the Board to repurchase up to 10% of the Companys own shares.
We do not believe that the repurchase programme will have any material impact on our ability to secure acquisition opportunities should these be identied.
People
The continued success of the business is testament to the commitment and skills of the whole team and I would like to take this opportunity to extend a thank you to each and every team member for their eorts across this year of change and reorganisation.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The Board continues to operate eectively with a complementary mix of skills and experience providing solid and eective governance controls.
We will continue to review how to enhance both the governance model and the advisory aspect of the Board.
Prospects
The business has achieved a great deal in the past year building a strong platform for the future while sustaining current nancial performance.
With great brands an eective business model a clear strategy and a strong team in place to deliver it the business remains well placed to develop further and realise its longterm potential.
John Nicolson
The business has achieved a great deal in the past year building a strong platform for the future while sustaining current financial performance.
John Nicolson Chairman 06
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Simple effective profitable Business Model We make We pride ourselves on our eective manufacturing capabilities producing high quality products across our wellinvested and ecient production sites in Cumbernauld Forfar and our new state of the art facility at Milton Keynes.
From sourcing our raw materials across the globe to designing our packaging materials we strive for continuous improvements keep safety at the forefront of all we do and invest accordingly to ensure we produce the best tasting products as eciently as possible.
We move With a eet of more than 100 vehicles and long standing relationships with our key distribution partners we strive to deliver a great service to all our customers from the biggest food service customer to the smallest local shop.
Operating
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We are a growth driven branded consumer goods business delivering longterm sustainable value.
We build great tasting brands that people love oering them choice and enjoyment.
Our business model is simple eective and protable.
This simple but eective approach is supported by strong partnerships talented people and responsible actions.
Our business model has proven successful for more than 140 years and continues to create and deliver value in all that we do.
We market Listening carefully to our consumers is paramount and by doing so we have developed a diverse and dierentiated brand portfolio of great tasting products to satisfy their needs and oer choice.
And when it comes to marketing and building our brands we like to have some fun appealing to our broad range of consumers whether thats through national TV campaigns digital media sponsorship or supporting local community events.
We sell Building long lasting relationships with our customers across all our key markets is fundamental to our business.
Whether its a multiple grocer a wholesaler a regional restaurant group or a local independent retailer we work collaboratively with all our customers to understand their businesses and nd winning consumer propositions in a practical fun and protable way.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Chief Executives Review
We have delivered signicant business improvement across our brands assets infrastructure organisation and our teams to support the successful longterm development of the Company.
The unexpected and unwelcome announcement of a new punitive tax regime associated with the manufacture of soft drinks with added sugar had the potential to be a major business distraction.
However I am pleased to report that we have continued to place consumers at the heart of our business not regulators and have responded positively to changing consumer tastes and preferences across our portfolio.
We will of course continue to work with the various government bodies involved in the new regime to ensure that this new regulatory environment is deployed appropriately and with as much common sense as possible.
In this reporting period We maintained overall market share in UK soft drinks with total Group revenue of 257.1m an underlying increase of 1.5% on the previous year.
Prot before tax increased 4.4% on the prior year to 43.1m.
Statutory prot before tax and exceptional items increased 2.7% on the prior year to 42.4m.
Operating margin before exceptional items improved 50bps to 16.8% following our continued tight cost control.
Our dened benet pension scheme was closed to future accrual further reducing our corporate risk prole.
Benets from our Fit for the Future enabling programme began to lter through as planned including signicantly better customer service tighter inventory management and the implementation of a Company wide reorganisation.
Strong cash ow resulted in a net cash position of 9.7m.
Soft drinks market performance The UK soft drinks market has performed robustly across the last 12 months with growth of 1.2% in value and 1.6% in volume.
This total market position masks a higher degree of volatility than in prior years both in terms of monthly market movements and individual subcategory performance.
As we previously forecast deation has eased across the latter part of the year.
However the more structural element of this deation related to the continued growth of the lower value water category has continued to impact the total market.
Stills experienced volume growth of just over 3% and value growth of 1% with water growth continuing to be the driving force.
In contrast the carbonates sector experienced modest ination growing value by just over 1% versus a at volume position.
Clarity of purpose During the past 12 months our thirst for improvement has continued despite the numerous external challenges that we have had to overcome.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance We have made considerable progress across the business over the last 12 months and delivered a solid financial performance in volatile and uncertain market conditions.
Roger White Chief Executive 10
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report The past year has seen a number of material changes to the macro environment in which we operate the soft drinks sugar tax the UKs decision to leave the EU the devaluation of sterling and increased geopolitical volatility.
However perhaps most important to our business are the continuing development of UK consumer preferences in soft drinks the further consolidation and development of our customer environment and nally the advances across the digital communication landscape we operate in.
We have continued to respond positively and with pace to these changes focusing on the opportunities that arise.
Our longstanding reformulation and product development programme has seen our portfolio develop signicantly across the past year.
In March 2017 we announced our intention to meet consumers changing tastes and preferences with a number of further signicant portfolio developments.
The successful development and launch of Rubicon Spring and IRNBRU XTRA have contributed to our forward development plans giving us the insight and condence to announce our intention that over 90% of Company owned brands will contain less than 5g of total sugars per 100ml by the autumn of 2017.
This is a signicant and positive move which supports our consumer focused strategy at the same time as reducing our overall exposure to regulatory changes.
During the course of the last nancial year our key brands have beneted from continued investment and innovation.
IRNBRU and Rubicon in particular exit the full year with strong momentum based on positive brand fundamentals.
Strategy
In times of elevated uncertainty clarity of purpose and consistency of approach yield the best outcome in our experience.
We have remained consistent to our approach and principles across the past year focusing on strongly dierentiated brands eective and exible operations innovation based on consumer understanding growth driven partnerships and leveraging the strength and commitment of our teams.
In each of these areas we have invested eort and resources to drive improvement and thus increase competitiveness.
Our innovation has been instrumental in building our portfolio into the lower and no sugar consumer space and our technical developments in this area are critical to our future success.
Our investment in our assets and infrastructure has continued with the introduction of new glass lling capability at Cumbernauld and the announcement of our intention to extend PET capability to our Milton Keynes site.
This gives us a exible platform to improve our service control our costs and ensure we are capable of adapting our operations to meet the portfolio needs of the future.
Our core partnerships with Rockstar and the Dr Pepper Snapple Group have continued to develop across the period with notable extensions to the territories covered under our Rockstar agreement.
In September 2016 we signed a further exclusive extension with Rockstar for a further seven territories including the Russian Federation.
The Snapple brand has enjoyed growth of over 20% across 201617 with signicant product innovation packaging advancements
Chief Executives Review continued 11
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 and further distribution growth in the UK and internationally.
The expansion of these selective partnerships remains an important part of our longterm growth strategy.
We have enjoyed an excellent performance from our Funkin cocktail business building on the strong progress made last year our rst year of ownership.
The Funkin team has continued to deliver excellent opportunities to customers to access cocktail market growth with simplicity authenticity and excitement.
We anticipate continued growth for the Funkin business in the traditional ontrade environment and also from our planned launch into retail with a new ready to mix cocktail product format which has exciting brand development and growth potential for the future.
It has been a very busy and at times unsettling year for many of our colleagues as we have implemented signicant levels of change culminating in a Companywide reorganisation programme in the nal quarter.
Following our prior year investment in assets and systems the reorganisation has allowed us to streamline and improve our organisational structure reducing employee numbers by around 10% whilst improving operating eectiveness and exibility.
I would like to thank all our teams across the business who have responded positively to the challenges we face and have now helped to create a stronger business more capable of delivering against our longterm potential.
Summary
We have made considerable progress across the business over the last 12 months and delivered a solid nancial performance in volatile and uncertain market conditions.
The growth drivers of our core brands innovation partnerships Funkin and International remain at the heart of our future plans.
We are operating from a wellinvested and sustainable asset base with our new organisational structures established to support growth.
We will continue to seek opportunities to grow shareholder value by utilising our full suite of options our organic growth potential our strong balance sheet our core competencies and our strong culture and I believe we are well placed to continue to deliver consistent longterm shareholder value.
Roger White Chief Executive Items marked with an asterisk are non GAAP measures.
Denitions and relevant reconciliations are provided in the Glossary on pages 130 to 132.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Delivering longterm sustainable value
Consumer insight drives our business.
Our consumers are growing in number location and diversity and we ensure that we take the time to listen to understand their needs and to oer them a choice of great tasting high quality products.
Building brands We are brand owners and builders oering a diverse and dierentiated portfolio of products that people love.
With our own powerful brands complementary franchise partner brands and a strong track record of bringing successful innovation to the market we seek to build brand awareness grow our brand equity and outperform the market.
Understanding our customers Building and maintaining longlasting and successful customer relationships across multiple routes to market is central to our business.
We work closely with our customers to develop joint plans which allow us to share in success.
We pride ourselves on our ability to turn these shared plans into eective actions supporting our customers with excellent instore activation of our brand led activities and delivering the highest possible levels of service.
Developing partnerships With strong ambitions both within the UK and internationally we recognise the advantages that working in partnership can deliver.
By working closely with others whether that be brand franchise partners international distributors or 3rd party logistics providers we develop complementary relationships that deliver shared benets and support our growing business.
Driving efficiency We continually strive for eciency across our business ensuring strong nancial controls are in place while also investing for growth.
As our business develops we are committed to driving continuous improvement across our processes and technology.
As an asset backed business we drive operational improvements exibility and eciency through our expansionary capital investment programme equipping us with some of the industrys most advanced operational capability.
Acting responsibly We believe that how we act reects who we are.
We take our responsibilities seriously and aim to be a sustainable and responsible business that listens to our consumers takes care of our people works to minimise our environmental impact and gives something back to the communities we serve.
Our overarching business strategy is to deliver longterm sustainable value in all that we do.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance 2016 2017 20.1% 19.5% 2016 2017 46.9% 46.8% 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 20.2% 18.8% 2016 2017 2016 2017 16.8% 16.3% 2016 2017 Key performance indicators The increase in value of revenue recorded in the period relative to the prior period.
EBITDA dened as prot on ordinary activities before tax less exceptional items adding back interest depreciation amortisation and impairment divided by revenue.
Gross prot divided by revenue.
Net cash ow excluding the movements in borrowings expansionary capex shares dividend payments and noncash exceptional items.
Prot before tax and after exceptional items.
Operating prot before exceptional items as a percentage of invested capital.
Invested capital is dened as period end noncurrent plus current assets less current liabilities excluding all balances relating to any provisions nancial instruments interest bearing liabilities and cash or cash equivalents.
Dividend payable in respect of the nancial year.
Operating prot before exceptional items and before the deduction of interest and taxation divided by revenue.
Revenue
0.6% EBITDA margin 20.1% Gross margin 46.9% 10bps Free cash ow Prot before tax 4.4% Return on Capital Employed
20.2% Dividend per share Operating margin before exceptional items 16.8% 50bps A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Connecting with consumers Consumers tastes and behaviours have continued to evolve and change over the past 12 months and we have responded positively and with pace.
Innovation
As consumer tastes and preferences continue to change and the demand for great tasting reduced sugar products increases the recent announcement that 90% of our Company owned brands will contain less than 5g of total sugars per 100ml by the autumn of 2017 is an extremely positive demonstration of how the business is responding to consumers.
90% of our Company owned brands will contain less than 5g of total sugars per 100ml by the autumn of 2017.
Equivalent number of IRNBRU XTRA cans sold in its rst six months.
Rubicon Spring bottles sold since launch.
Strategy in Action consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers Connecting with Connecting with Connecting with Consumers tastes and behaviours have continued consumers consumers consumers consumers Consumers tastes and behaviours have continued consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers consumers 15
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance NEW IRNBRU XTRA Launched in August 2016 IRNBRU XTRA is the rst permanent new product from IRNBRU in 35 years.
In the making for over a year IRNBRU XTRA includes even more of the IRNBRU taste that consumers love but leaves out the sugar for a new avour experience.
Supported by an impactful outdoor marketing campaign the equivalent of 20 million cans of IRNBRU XTRA were sold in its rst 6 months.
NEW Rubicon Spring Launched in the summer of 2016 Rubicon Spring is an exciting development for our Rubicon brand extending the brand reach.
Oering
Supported by a national TV advertising campaign Rubicon Spring has sold more than 7.6 million bottles since its launch.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Strategy in Action continued
We have maintained our market share across the period and have continued to invest in the longterm health of our brands.
IRNBRU Rubicon and Funkin in particular exit the full year with strong momentum based on positive brand fundamentals.
Funkin grew revenue by an impressive 27% across the year while on an underlying basis IRNBRU delivered growth of 3.2% and Rubicon grew by 4.9%.
Funkin grew revenue by 27% IRNBRU delivered growth of 3.2% Rubicon sales grew by 4.9% Items marked with an asterisk are nonGAAP measures.
Denitions and relevant reconciliations are provided in the Glossary on pages 130 to 132.
Building Building Building Building Building Building Building Building 17 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance NEW IRNBRU brand identity April 2016 saw the new IRNBRU identity revealed with a 3 month outdoor advertising campaign reaching over 8 million adults rmly establishing the new iconic design.
NEW Rubicon Light and Fruity Our core Rubicon brand was a key area of focus across 2016 with exciting innovation at the core of our plans.
Rubicon Light and Fruity brings 3 reduced sugar variants to the market packed with exotic fruit avour but with 50% less sugar.
Funkin brand development Our Funkin brand delivered a very successful innovation programme across the year responding with speed and agility to meet fastevolving consumer tastes in the cocktail market.
A total of 10 new products were launched in 2016 a new digital platform went live and Funkin products were included in excess of 85 million individual cocktails across the year.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Strategy in Action continued
We have taken a number of actions across the year to facilitate and enhance our customer relationships working with our customers to develop winning strategies and to ensure the highest possible levels of service.
These actions combined with our pride in our inmarket execution and a genuine desire to work in partnership with our customers are essential components in our objective to deliver shared success and to be a key partner and supplier.
Business Process Redesign project now delivering improved customer service. customer dynamics.
Understanding our our our our our our our
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Improved customer service Following the delivery of our 12m Business Process Redesign project in 2015 and the associated implementation of a new ERP system we have made signicant progress in realising some of the benets the improved platform and processes provide.
Customer service in particular has been optimised with signicant improvements delivered across the year.
Sales team reorganisation As the UK retail landscape has continued to undergo a considerable amount of change we made some signicant changes to our sales team structures across the year as part of our Fit for the Future Companywide reorganisation.
Our c.250 strong sales team is now more closely aligned to changing customer dynamics across our channels providing greater exibility and agility and allowing us to better deliver shared success with our customers.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Strategy in Action continued
We have further developed and enhanced our partnerships across 2016 working collaboratively to deliver shared success.
Our key partnerships with Rockstar and Dr Pepper Snapple Group continued to progress complementing our own portfolio both in the UK and increasingly on an international basis where we have delivered further growth extending our international footprint and our franchise territory agreements.
Rockstar agreement to include a further seven territories Snapple sales grew by over 20% partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships partnerships
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Snapple success Snapple sales grew by over 20% across the year with a number of key brand developments delivered.
The brand artwork was updated for the rst time in 10 years Iced Tea was reformulated to contain no sugar and we launched a new on the go resealable carton.
The sugar content of the Snapple juice range is now being reduced and production has been brought inhouse following the installation of new glass lling capability at our Cumbernauld factory.
Rockstar innovation and territory expansion Innovation continues to play an important role in the energy drink category with consumers energsed and engaged by new and exciting product development.
Rockstar continues to more than meet this demand with its strong innovation programme launching great new products including Rockstar Pure Zero Guava that oers all the great Rockstar Punched Guava taste but with zero sugar and zero carbs.
In September 2016 we signed an extension to our Rockstar agreement to include a further seven territories including the Russian Federation which will see Rockstar entering new international territories for the rst time.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Strategy in Action continued
Our drive for operational eciency and continuous improvement continued across 2016 delivered through a series of business improvement projects.
Our capital investment programme continued across the year with the installation of a 5m new glass lling line at Cumbernauld and the announcement that we are investing a further 10m in new PET capability at Milton Keynes.
Across our Fit for the Future enabling programme we began to see many of the eciency benets ltering through as planned including signicantly better customer service and tighter inventory control and as the programme entered its nal phase we successfully implemented a Companywide reorganisation that has both enhanced our organisational capability and reduced our overhead base.
Reorganisation and eciencies are reducing overhead base by around 3m Investment in new high speed glass lling line 5m efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency efficiency
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance NEW Glass filling capability We have invested over 5m in new glass lling capability at our Cumbernauld facility.
Faster and more exible the fully installed and commissioned new glass line produces our iconic 750ml glass range provides us with additional hot ll technology for fruit based products and has facilitated the inhouse production of our partnership brand
This signicant investment also oers exciting opportunities to support our innovation programme and oer new glass formats.
Business reorganisation Our Fit for the Future business improvement programme entered its nal phase in the second half of 2016 culminating in the successful implementation of a Companywide business reorganisation that has both enhanced our organisational capability and is reducing our overhead base by around 3m.
Our Commercial teams are now more closely aligned to the changing retail landscape our Supply Chain resources have been rebalanced across all of our factories and our Central teams are now better structured to further realise the benets of our Business Process Redesign investment.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Strategy in Action continued
Our responsibility agenda is not a standalone area of focus it is integral to how we do business.
We have always been driven to do the right thing whether for our consumers our people our environment or our communities a value rmly embedded in all our activities.
Some highlights across our 2016 responsibility agenda include 90% of our Company owned brands will contain less than 5g of total sugars per 100ml by the autumn of 2017.
3year partnership with Macmillan Cancer Support.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Living Wage accreditation conrmed.
New occupational health provision for employees
90% of our Company owned brands will contain less than 5g of total sugars per 100ml by the autumn of 2017  an extremely positive demonstration of how the business is responding with both pace and commitment to consumers changing tastes and preference.
Environment
The installation of a brand new glass lling production line at our Cumbernauld site allowed us to decommission the returnable glass line bottle washing equipment which accounted for more than 80% of the previous glass lines carbon footprint.
Community
New employee chosen charity 3year partnership agreed with Macmillan Cancer Support already generating high levels of employee fundraising activity and engagement.
Gender split Board and
Secretary
Senior
Managers
All
Employees
Male 9 68 668 Female 2 24 259 Total 11 92 927
BARR GHC Emissions in tonnes CO Note 2 201617 Scope 1 5419 5420 Scope 2 10676 8947 Intensity ratio Note 1 Intensity ratio is kg of CO e per 1000 litres of product produced.
Note 2 The 201516 gures have been corrected and restated.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Financial Review
Overview
Revenue down 0.6% to 257.1m Revenue underlying basis up 1.5% to 257.1m Gross margin up 10 bps to 46.9% Operating margin before exceptional items up 50 bps to 16.8% Prot before tax before exceptional items up 2.7% to 42.4m Prot before tax before exceptional items underlying basis up 7.1% to 42.4m Free cash ow up 15.0m to 43.2m Net cash up 21.0m to 9.7m Basic earnings per share EPS up 3.9% to 30.78p Proposed nal dividend of 10.87p per share 2016 9.97p to give a proposed total dividend for the year of 14.40p per share an increase of 8% over the prior year.
Reconciliation of underlying measures 52 weeks to 28 January 2017
Gross prot
Prot before tax 201617 as reported 52 week period ended 28 January 2017 257.1 120.7 43.8 43.1 Exceptional items   0.7 0.7 Underlying 257.1 120.7 43.1 42.4 53 weeks to 30 January 2016
Gross prot
Prot before tax 201516 as reported 53 week period ended 30 January 2016 258.6 121.1 42.1 41.3 Orangina franchise 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 Corporate development   0.8 0.8 Underlying 253.2 118.6 40.4 39.6
The following is based on results for the 52 weeks ended 28 January 2017.
Comparatives unless otherwise stated are for the 53 weeks ended 30 January 2016.
This is a positive set of results in a challenging environment and reects the combined benets of strong brands successful innovation and much improved customer service.
It is particularly pleasing to recognise that we have put behind us the supply chain and system implementation challenges that constrained performance in 201516.
The strong second half which recorded both top and bottom line growth followed a period of soft drinks market volatility in the rst half and provides condence that we enter 201718 with positive momentum.
Reported revenue declined 0.6% the result of a 53 week prior year comparator.
Our underlying revenue from the business improved 1.5% driven by growth from innovation across two of our key brands IRNBRU and Rubicon and an operating margin improvement benet from the impact of the organisational review that we announced in September 2016.
The year was not without its challenges.
The commercial environment while always competitive was particularly testing this year with customer range rationalisations and deationary pricing pressures impacting the business most evidently across Rockstar and our regional brands.
These customer challenges were compounded by the reappearance of inationary headwinds from the commodity and currency markets during the second half of 201617.
While the increased levels Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 This is a positive set of results in a challenging environment.
Stuart Lorimer Finance Director 28
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report of volatility and uncertainty were unhelpful we took decisive management action which beneted us in the second half and we expect will continue to underpin our performance going forward.
On an underlying basis our business delivered revenue growth 1.5% gross and operating margin expansion 10bps and 80bps respectively increased prot before tax and exceptional items 7.1% and improved overall free cash ow 15.0m.
We continue to drive for improved eciency in all aspects of the business whether it is through zerobased budgeting promotional evaluation or our programme of supply chain excellence.
We believe this committed approach to growth productivity and cash generation will drive further sustainable value creation for shareholders.
We have accomplished much in the year The investment in our Business Process Redesign programme is now entering its second year of operation and tangible progress in eciency and exibility is being made across the network.
This is already delivering improved customer service and will provide a solid platform for future protability.
A Companywide reorganisation was announced in September 2016.
Our employee base reduces by around 100 at a oneo cost of 3.3m and will generate ongoing savings in the region of c.
3m per annum.
The majority of the employee changes have taken place and an element of the savings has been delivered in 201617.
Our Dened Benet DB pension scheme was closed to future accrual during the year.
We continue to oer our employees marketleading pension arrangements however the DB closure to future accrual has provided us with signicant pension derisking.
Our banking arrangements were successfully renegotiated in February 2017 to provide longer term more cost eective revolving credit facilities 40m over 3 years and 20m over 5 years.
We undertook a competitive tender process for our external audit mandate.
As a result we will be recommending to shareholders at the AGM in May 2017 that we appoint Deloitte LLP as our Group external auditors for the year 201718.
Segment performance We have successfully maintained market share in a challenging market environment.
Our core carbonates business has performed well with both our IRNBRU and Rubicon brands growing through a combination of innovation and distribution gains.
Our portfolio carbonates including Barr Flavours Tizer and KA have been impacted by retailer range reduction activity.
The Rockstar brand delivered lower revenues as we maintained our focus on margin and value in the face of competitor deep discounting and distribution reductions in several of the supermarkets.
The second year of our Snapple partnership has seen considerable success both in the UK and internationally with our new branding and reduced sugar oerings being well received by consumers.
Our stills and water business performed well led by our new lower sugar Rubicon Light and Fruity range.
Our continued focus on value over volume improved margins however there were continued marketwide challenges in fruit juices and fruit drinks with water remaining a very price competitive subcategory.
The international business has delivered double digit revenue growth through brand development in our established core markets new distributor arrangements in existing markets and the opening up of new markets.
Our Funkin business has performed very strongly with sales growth of 27% reported within our Other segment.
The key ontrade business has grown in each of its product segments syrups mixers and purees and the Funkin team is on track to launch the rst Funkin branded consumer retail product in spring 2017.
On the basis of the audited results and the achievement of agreed nancial performance targets there will be an associated cash earnout payment in 201718 which has been fully provided for at the year end.
Margins
Modest price deation impacted carbonates gross margins slightly down 30bps however a combination of tight cost control and favourable mix limited the impact.
Stills and water delivered gross margin improvement as growth was driven from the higher margin core brands and innovation.
Operating expenses beneted from a net 0.7m exceptional credit and a continued focus on cost control supply chain eciencies and some early benets from the organisational review which has been successfully implemented slightly ahead of plan.
Financial performance beneted from the stabilisation of our infrastructure and systems the continued growth in both our international business and Funkin partially oset by negative movements on foreign exchange and the return to a 52 week year 201516 53 weeks.
Operating margin before exceptional items increased from 16.3% to 16.8%.
Interest
Net nance charges totalling 0.7m largely comprise the notional interest on the pension decit.
Debt interest charges continued to reduce reecting our improved debt prole as we successfully paid down our debt and transitioned to a net cash position.
The constituent elements of the interest charge comprised Finance income  0.1 Finance costs 0.2 0.2 Interest related to Group borrowings 0.2 0.1 Finance costs related to pension 0.5 0.7 Net nance costs 0.7 0.8 Financial Review continued 29
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
The tax charge of 7.5m is 0.5m higher than the prior year and represents an eective tax rate of 17.4%.
This is an increase of 0.3% from the prior year and primarily reects the impact of the reduction in the deferred tax rate from 18% to 17% this year compared to the reduction from 20% to 18% included in the charge last year.
Balance sheet and cash ow The Groups balance sheet continues to strengthen with net asset growth of 1.7m to 181.8m over the 52 weeks ended 28 January 2017 despite a 14.5m increase in the pension decit under IAS19.
The key balance sheet highlights can be summarised as Noncurrent assets increased slightly to 195.4m up 2.6m after several years of sustained investment in assets and infrastructure.
We are now in the favourable position of having a modern wellinvested asset base capable of accommodating growth.
Inventories have increased by 1.7m driven by the deliberate decision to secure favourable mango pricing following a good 2016 harvest by purchasing much of our 201718 requirements in advance.
Finished goods inventories are down in volume value and days.
Trade payables have as expected increased substantially due to the timing of the year end and the phasing of monthly payment runs.
Trade payables at 15.8m were up 7.4m on the prior year.
Trade and other receivables were broadly at at 51.4m 201516 We continue to benet from good customer relationships and strong credit controls and as a result have modest aged debt and experienced no bad debts during the nancial year.
ROCE improved from 18.8% in 201516 to 20.2% in 201617 largely driven by working capital phasing.
The movement from a net debt position as at January 2016 11.3m to a net cash position as at January 2017 9.7m reects the strong cash generative nature of our business working capital Free cash ow statement Operating prot before exceptional items 43.1 42.1 Depreciation and amortisation 8.6 8.4 EBITDA 51.7 50.5 IncreaseDecrease in inventories 1.7 1.8 Decrease in receivables 1.3 0.6 IncreaseDecrease in payables 10.2 15.8 Movement in pension liability 2.2 0.7 Sharebased payment costs 0.9 0.5 Exceptional cash items 4.2 1.0 Loss on sale of property plant and equipment  0.2 Net operating cash ow 56.0 36.1 Net interest 0.2 0.2 Taxation 7.2 6.8 Cash ow from operations 48.6 29.1 Maintenance capex 5.5 1.8 Capex proceeds 0.1 0.9 Free cash ow 43.2 28.2 Expansionary capex 6.9 12.9 Dividends 15.6 14.3 Acquisition of subsidiary net of cash acquired  15.7 Acquisition of intangible assets  4.8 Net salepurchases of shares by employee benet trusts 0.3 2.0 Loans repaidreceived incl arrangement fees 17.5 2.4 Cash ow from nancing 39.7 47.3 Net increasedecrease in cash 3.5 19.1 Opening cash and cash equivalents 6.2 25.3 Closing cash and cash equivalents 9.7 6.2 Borrowings  17.5 Closing net cashdebt 9.7 11.3 phasing and lower capital expenditure requirements as we come out of a period of sustained capital investment.
In the year ahead we will continue to invest in the fabric of the business and to support our growth agenda.
Capital expenditure in 201718 is anticipated to be at a slightly higher level than in 201617 primarily driven by the phasing of our new 10m PET bottling line at Milton Keynes.
This expansionary capital will deliver logistics cost savings and provide production exibility to support our innovation pipeline.
A strong balance sheet and accessibility to cost eective and exible debt facilities provide optionality and ensure we have the ability and the agility to take advantage of any opportunities that may be identied.
Our recently renegotiated banking facilities ensure that we have sucient headroom at our disposal to meet expected future requirements.
The business remains highly cash generative.
Operating cash ow before movements in working capital has increased 2.1m to 53.3m.
We believe that EBITDA and Free Cash Flow permit a more meaningful analysis of the underlying performance of the
EBITDA increased to 51.7m up 2.4% representing an EBITDA margin of 20.1% and a strong cash generating performance with EBITDA to free cash ow conversion of 83.6%.
The Group utilises its cash appropriately and with care.
More than 12m was invested in longterm assets and almost 16m was distributed in dividends to our shareholders.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Shares with a net value of 0.3m were disposed of on behalf of various employee benet trusts to satisfy the ongoing requirements of the Groups employee share schemes.
Given the current net cash position the relatively benign outlook for shortterm interest rates and the expectation of continued strong free cash generation no interest rate hedging activity has taken place during the year.
Exceptional items We have undergone signicant reorganisation during 201617 the scale and nature of which made it appropriate that the related costs be recognised as exceptional items for reporting purposes.
We believe that this permits a more meaningful analysis of the underlying performance of the Group.
A net credit of 0.7m pretax 0.6m post tax for exceptional items included Net gain arising on closure of DB pension scheme to future accrual 5.5m Reorganisation and capability refresh programme  3.3m Redundancy costs relating to direct sales reorganisation  0.6m Costs in relation to a strategic review of ecommerce capabilities  0.5m Professional fees relating to corporate development  0.4m Net exceptional credit 0.7m UK referendum and exit from the European Union The level of uncertainty and volatility in the external environment is unprecedented.
Given the largely UK focus of our commercial activities our current assessment is that the specic issue of the UKs future exit from the European Union will not have a signicant impact on our business other than through its eects on foreign exchange.
The current value of sterling has created an inationary pressure on our commodity cost base primarily Euro or US dollar denominated.
We have a well developed risk management framework in place at both functional and corporate levels of the business and we will continue to closely monitor political and commercial developments and react accordingly to these.
Post balance sheet events Certain events and decisions have taken place between the nancial year end and the approval of these accounts that merit highlighting.
Debt nance During the nancial year we entered into discussions on our longer term debt cover.
These discussions concluded in February 2017 with the Board approving three revolving credit facilities over periods of 3 to 5 years with Royal Bank of Scotland plc Bank of Scotland plc and HSBC Bank plc.
These facilities provide 60m of sterling debt facilities to 2020 reducing to 20m for the period to 2022.
Our longterm nancial modelling indicates signicant nancial headroom with these facilities in place.
Share repurchase programme The Board has approved a share repurchase programme of up to 30m as part of the Groups approach to capital allocation and under the authority to repurchase up to 10% of its own shares granted at the AGM in June 2016.
This programme is anticipated to commence in the spring of 2017 and complete within 24 months.
The AGM in May 2017 will be requested to approve the renewal of the authority for the Board to repurchase up to 10% of the Companys own shares.
We do not believe that the repurchase programme will have any material impact on our ability to secure acquisition opportunities should these be identied.
Asset sale The disposal of our Walthamstow site sale proceeds 3.8m gain on sale 2.5m was concluded in February 2017.
We have entered into a short term lease of the premises as we nalise our longterm plans for direct customer deliveries in the area.
Pensions
The Group continues to operate two pension plans the A.
BARR p.
Dened Contribution Pension Scheme and the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme.
The latter is a dened benet scheme based on nal salary which also includes a dened contribution section for pension provision to senior managers.
The dened benet scheme the scheme has been closed to new entrants since 5 April 2002 and to new executive entrants since 14 August 2003.
During the year after employee consultation and with the support of the Pension Trustee the scheme was closed to future accrual.
Despite these actions the scheme decit continued to grow during the year as gilt yields and interest discount rates remained low.
The decit on an IAS19 valuation basis increased from 12.9m at the end of 201516 to 27.4m at the balance sheet date.
The increase in the decit in the current nancial year is primarily as a result of a lower net discount rate being used to value the schemes liabilities in the year.
The Company continues to work proactively with the Pension Trustee to derisk the pension liabilities and secure the commitments to employee benets as part of the Groups ongoing strategic risk management.
The Group is comfortable that the overall pension decit is supportable.
Share price and market capitalisation At 28 January 2017 the closing share price for A.
BARR p.
January 2016 position.
The Group is a member of the FTSE 250 with a market capitalisation of 586m at the year end.
Stuart Lorimer Finance Director Items marked with an asterisk are non GAAP measures.
Denitions and relevant reconciliations are provided in the Glossary on pages 130 to 132.
Financial Review continued 31
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Risk management
Identifying
Risk management approach The Board is responsible for the Groups risk management and internal control systems and for reviewing their eectiveness supported by the Audit Committee and the Risk Committee.
A risk management framework is in place which sets out the ongoing processes for the identication assessment and management of risks and for their ongoing monitoring and review.
The Board has dened its risk appetite in a number of key areas for the business  this sets out the relative level of risk that the Group is prepared to seek or accept in the pursuit of its strategic objectives.
The aim is to ensure that the risks taken by the Group fall within its dened risk appetite.
Eective risk management is essential to enable us to achieve our operational and strategic objectives and deliver longterm value creation.
During the reporting period we have continued to focus on embedding a culture of risk management throughout the organisation which will contribute towards successful strategy execution.
Robust risk assessment The risk management framework sets out a systematic approach to risk management which is designed to identify risks to the business regardless of source.
Once identied risks are assessed according to the likelihood and impact of the risk occurring and an appropriate risk response is determined in line with the Groups risk appetite.
Risks are reassessed based on the strength of the mitigating controls implemented.
The implementation of risk mitigation plans is subject to ongoing monitoring and review.
A risk scoring matrix is used to ensure that a consistent approach is taken across the business at both a corporate and functional level.
This risk assessment and review process is documented in the appropriate risk register.
Risks are constantly reviewed on an ongoing basis the Groups risk register is formally reviewed by the Risk Committee quarterly and by the Board and the Audit Committee twice each year.
Risk control assurance Internal audit work is undertaken by an independent organisation which develops an annual internal audit plan having reviewed the Groups risk register and following discussions with the external auditors management and members of the Audit Committee.
During the year the Audit Committee has reviewed reports covering the internal audit work.
This has included assessment of the general control environment identication of any control weaknesses and quantication of any associated risk together with a review of the status of mitigating actions.
The Audit Committee has also received reports from management in relation to specic risk items together with reports from external auditors who consider controls to the extent necessary to form an opinion as to the truth and fairness of the nancial statements.
The Groups internal control and risk management systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can provide only reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The report of the Audit Committee can be found on page 48.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Principal risks and uncertainties The Board has carried out a robust systematic assessment of the principal risks facing the Group during the period including those which would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The principal risks as determined by the Board are listed in the table below together with corresponding mitigating actions.
This is not intended to be an exhaustive list of all risks and uncertainties that may arise.
The UKs decision to leave the European Union has created a volatile and uncertain economic environment.
Like many other businesses we are closely following developments in this area.
We believe that it is still too early to quantify or determine with any certainty the impact on the Group of the UK leaving the European Union.
However given that the Group is a UK based group whose sales are predominantly made in the UK our current assessment is that Brexit will not have a signicant impact on the Group other than through its eect on foreign exchange rates to which it is exposed through the purchase of certain commodities.
We will continue to monitor developments and adapt our strategy as the impact of the UK exit from the European Union becomes clear.
Principal risks and uncertainties Risks relating to the Group Risk Impact Mitigating actions Changes in consumer preferences perception or purchasing behaviour Consumers may decide to purchase and consume alternative brands or spend less on soft drinks.
The Group oers a broad range of branded products across a range of avours subcategories and markets which oer choice to the end consumer.
Changing consumer attitudes and behaviours are monitored on an ongoing basis and inform our brand plans and new product development.
Changing consumer attitudes towards sugar further government intervention on sugar Consumers may decide to purchase and consume alternative brands or spend less on sugared soft drinks.
The Group oers a broad range of branded products many of which are low sugar or sugar free.
We announced on 1 March 2017 that we will accelerate our longstanding sugar reduction programme so that over 90% of our Company owned soft drinks portfolio by volume will contain less than 5g of total sugars per 100ml by the autumn of 2017.
Our new product development activity is focused on development of lower calorie products and our marketing programmes incorporate our lower calorie choices.
We are working constructively with the government in relation to the proposed sugar tax with the aim of ensuring the optimal outcome for the Group.
Risk management continued 33
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Risk Impact Mitigating actions Adverse publicity in relation to the soft drinks industry the Group or its brands Adverse publicity in relation to the soft drinks industry the Group or its brands could have an adverse impact on the Groups reputation consumer consumption patterns sales and operating prots.
Our risk management process is designed to identify and monitor events that may impact the Group as a result of adverse publicity and to ensure that controls are in place to manage these risks.
We liaise with relevant industry bodies who work with government and policy makers.
Nutritional information is shown on all of our products and we have signed up to the UK Governments voluntary frontofpack nutritional labelling scheme.
Processes are in place to ensure compliance with health and safety legislation and ethical working standards and these are regularly reviewed by the Board and management committee.
Quality standards are well dened implemented and monitored.
A Corporate Social Responsibility Committee is in place with a clearly dened and communicated Corporate Social Responsibility
The Group maintains and develops ISO 9001 and 14001 systems and BRC standards which are subject to annual external audits with any nonconformances addressed in a timely manner.
Failure to maintain customer relationships or take account of changing market dynamics Failure to maintain appropriate customer relationships or a reduction in the customer base could have an adverse impact on the Groups sales and operating prots.
The Group oers a broad range of brands that it manufactures and distributes through a variety of trade channels and customers.
Performance is monitored closely by the Board and management committee by trade channel and customer as appropriate.
This includes monitoring of metrics which review brand equity strength nancial and operational performance.
The Group focuses on delivering high quality products and invests heavily in building brand equity.
We work closely in partnership with our customers on an ongoing basis.
Members of the senior management team meet with key customers throughout the year.
Inability to protect the Groups intellectual property rights Failure to protect the Groups intellectual property rights could result in a loss of brand value.
The Group invests considerable eort in proactively protecting its intellectual property rights for example through trademark and design registrations and vigorous legal enforcement as and when required.
Failure of the Groups operational infrastructure A catastrophic failure of the Groups major production or distribution facilities could lead to a sustained loss in capacity or capability.
Assets within the Group are proactively managed and maintained.
Risk assessments are carried out on a regular basis and appropriate actions taken.
Robust business continuity plans are in place and are regularly tested.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Risk Impact Mitigating actions Loss of continuity of supply of major raw materials The loss of continuity of supply of major raw material ingredients andor packaging materials could impact our ability to manufacture with an adverse impact on the Groups sales and operating prots.
There is a robust supplier selection process in place.
Supplier performance is monitored on an ongoing basis and audits are undertaken for major suppliers.
Multiple sources of supply are sourced wherever possible.
Commodity risks are managed by the procurement team and reviewed by the Treasury and Commodity Committee.
Contingency measures are in place and are tested regularly.
Loss of product integrity A loss of product integrity in the manufacturing supply chain could lead to a product withdrawal or recall.
Appropriate risk assessments are carried out on a regular basis and robust quality controls and processes are in place to maintain the high quality of our products.
Product recall procedures are tested regularly.
Failure of critical IT systems A failure of critical IT systems could result in a loss of key systems business interruption lost sales or lost production.
IT assets within the Group are proactively managed and procedures exist that support rapid and clean recovery.
Robust business continuity plans and contingency measures are in place and are regularly tested.
Financial risks The Groups activities expose it to a variety of nancial risks which include market risk including medium term movements in exchange rates interest rate risk and commodity price risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
Our underlying objective is to secure budgeted exchange rates and thereby reduce the volatility through our cost of goods.
Financial risks are reviewed and managed by the Treasury and Commodity Committee which seeks to minimise adverse eects on the Groups nancial performance through hedging known currency exposures throughout the year.
The Groups nance team reviews cash ow forecasts throughout the year with headroom against banking covenants assessed regularly.
The nance team uses external tools to assess credit limits oered to customers manages trade receivable balances vigilantly and takes prompt action on overdue accounts.
The Groups nancial control environment is subject to review by both internal and external audit.
Internal audits focus is to work with and challenge management to ensure an appropriate control environment is maintained.
Principal risks and uncertainties continued Risks relating to the Group continued Risk management continued 35
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2014 the directors have assessed the viability of the Company over a three year period to January 2020 taking account of the Groups current position and the Groups principal risks as detailed in the Strategic Report.
Based on this assessment the directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the three year period to January 2020.
In making this statement the directors have considered the resilience of the Group in severe but plausible scenarios taking account of its current position and prospects the principal risks facing the business and how these are managed.
This assessment has considered the potential impact of these risks on the Companys business model future performance solvency and liquidity over the three year period.
The following four principal risks were selected for enhanced stress testing changing consumer preferences loss of product integrity major raw material supply disruption and the sugar tax.
These are the principal risks assessed to have the highest probability of occurrence or the most severe impact they were stress tested both individually and in combination taking account of the Groups current position the Groups experience of managing adverse conditions in the past and the mitigating actions available to the business.
A reverse stress test was also performed allowing the Board to assess scenarios and circumstances that would render its business model unviable and enabling the identication of potential business vulnerabilities and the development of appropriate mitigating actions.
The Board selected the period of three years as an appropriate period for the Companys viability statement for the following reasons the Company operates on a three year business cycle and management currently use three year forecasts as part of the business planning process and capital investment cycle.
By order of the Board
Barr
Company Secretary 28 March 2017 36 Corporate Governance
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 John R.
Nicolson
B.
Hons
Chairman
Johns career was spent with ICI Unilever Fosters Brewing Group Scottish and Newcastle PLC and latterly as President Americas for Heineken NV and Deputy Chairman of CCU SA Chile.
He held various positions in Marketing and Sales before moving into Corporate Development and then General Management.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in 2013 as a NonExecutive Director.
Appointed Chairman January 2015.
External Appointments NonExecutive Director of Stocks Spirits Group PLC NonExecutive Director of North American Breweries Inc and NonExecutive Director of PZ Cussons PLC.
Committee Membership Nomination Committee Chair Remuneration Committee.
Roger A.
White
M.
Hons
Chief Executive Roger is a member of the Board of Management and Executive Council and is a past President of the British Soft Drinks Association.
Previously held numerous senior positions in food group Rank Hovis McDougall.
Scottish PLC Chief Executive of the year in 2010.
Honorary Doctorate University of Edinburgh 2014.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in 2002 as Managing Director.
Appointed
Chief Executive in 2004.
External Appointments NonExecutive Director of Troy Income and Growth Trust.
Stuart Lorimer
Hons C.
M.
Finance Director Stuart was with Diageo for 22 years in a range of roles and countries ultimately as the FD for Diageos Global Supply Operation.
Term of Oce Joined the Company as Finance Director in January 2015.
External Appointments Trustee Community Integrated
Jonathan D.
Kemp
B.
Hons
Commercial Director Jonathan has had a successful career in various commercial roles within Procter and Gamble.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in 2003 as Commercial Director.
External Appointments NonExecutive Director Cricket Scotland.
Board of Directors 37 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Andrew L.
Memmott
BSc MSc.
Supply Chain Director Andrew joined the Company following three years with Cooperative Wholesale Society.
Term of Oce Joined the Companys Project Engineering Team in June 1990.
Appointed
Operations Director in 2008.
External Appointments
Martin A.
Griths
L.
Hons C.
Senior Independent NonExecutive Director A Chartered Accountant Martin is a former Chairman of the Scottish Finance Directors Group and a former Director of Troy Income and Growth Trust plc Trainline Holdings Limited RoadKing Infrastructure HK Limited and Citybus HK Limited.
He is also a former Senior Independent Non Executive Director of Robert Walters plc and past Chairman of Rail Delivery Group Limited and was young Scottish Finance Director of the year in 2004.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in 2010 as a NonExecutive
External Appointments CEO of Stagecoach Group CoChairman of Virgin Rail Group Holdings Limited and Virgin Trains East Coast.
Committee Membership Audit Committee Chair Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee.
W.
Robin G.
Barr
C.
NonExecutive
Director
Robin is a past President of the British Soft Drinks Association.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in 1960.
Appointed Director in 1964 and Chairman in 1978.
Retired as Chairman and appointed Non Executive Director in 2009.
External Appointments
Committee Membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee.
Pamela Powell
M.
NonExecutive
Director
Pam was formerly Group Director of Strategy and Innovation at SABMiller plc SVP Global Personal Care at Coty Beauty Inc and VP Skincare and Global Brand Director Dove at Unilever plc.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in 2013 as a NonExecutive
External Appointments NonExecutive Director of Premier Foods plc.
Committee Membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee.
David J.
Ritchie
B.
Hons A.
NonExecutive
Director
David is a qualied Chartered Accountant and former Chief Executive of Bovis Homes Group PLC
He joined Bovis in 1998 from KPMG as Group Financial Controller becoming Group Finance Director in 2002 and Chief Executive in 2008.
Term of Oce Joined the Company in April 2015 as Non Executive Director.
External Appointments
Committee Membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee
Committee Chair.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Directors Report The directors present their report and the audited consolidated financial statements of the Group for the 52 weeks 2016 53 weeks ended 28 January 2017.
Strategic Report The Companies Act 2006 requires the directors to present a review of the business during the year to 28 January 2017 and of the position of the Group at the end of the financial year together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties faced.
The Strategic Report can be found on pages 01 to 35 and is incorporated by reference into this Directors Report.
Corporate Governance Statement
The Disclosure and Transparency Rules require certain information to be included in a corporate governance statement in the Directors Report.
Information that fulfils the requirements of the corporate governance statement can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 43 to 47 and is incorporated by reference into this Directors Report.
Results and dividends The Groups profit after tax for the financial year ended 28 January 2017 attributable to equity shareholders amounted to 35.6m 2016 34.3m.
An interim dividend for the current year of 3.53p 2016 3.36p per ordinary share was paid on 21 October 2016.
The final proposed dividend of 10.87p 2016 final dividend 9.97p per ordinary share will be paid on 9 June 2017 if approved at the Companys annual general meeting on 31 May 2017 AGM.
The directors have taken advantage of the exemption available under s408 of the Companies Act 2006 and have not presented an income statement for the Company.
The Companys profit for the year was 25.7m 2016 22.8m.
Directors
The following were directors of the Company during the financial year ended 28 January 2017
Nicolson
R.
White
S.
Lorimer
J.
Kemp
A.
Memmott
W.
Barr
M.
Griffiths
P.
Powell
D.
Ritchie
Subject to the Companys Articles of Association the Articles and any relevant legislation the directors may exercise all of the powers of the Company and may delegate their power and discretion to committees.
The Articles give the directors power to appoint and remove directors.
Under the terms of reference of the Nomination Committee any appointment must be recommended by the Nomination Committee for approval by the Board.
The Articles require directors to retire and submit themselves for election at the first annual general meeting following appointment and to retire no later than the third annual general meeting after the annual general meeting at which they were last elected or reelected.
However in order to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code all directors will submit themselves for reelection at the AGM.
Biographical details of the Board are set out on pages 36 and 37 of this report.
Directors interests Information regarding the directors interests in ordinary shares of the Company is provided in the Directors Remuneration Report on page 51.
No director has any other interest in any shares or loan stock of any Group company.
Other than service contracts no director had a material interest in any contract to which any Group company was a party during the year.
There have been the following changes notified in the directors shareholdings between 28 January 2017 and 28 March 2017
Lorimer an increase in beneficial holding of 74 shares and a decrease in nonbeneficial holding of 8699 shares R.
White an increase in beneficial holding of 76 shares A.
Memmott an increase in beneficial holding of 75 shares J.
Kemp an increase in beneficial holding of 75 shares and W.
Barr an increase in beneficial holding of 75 shares.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Directors indemnity provisions As at the date of this report indemnities are in force between the Company and each of its directors under which the Company has agreed to indemnify each director to the extent permitted by law in respect of certain liabilities incurred as a result of carrying out their role as a director of the Company.
The directors are also indemnied against the costs of defending any criminal or civil proceedings or any claim in relation to the Company or brought by a regulator as they are incurred provided that where the defence is unsuccessful the director must repay those defence costs to the Company.
The Companys total liability under each indemnity is limited to 5.0m for each event giving rise to a claim under that indemnity.
The indemnities are qualifying third party indemnity provisions for the purposes of the Companies Act 2006.
In addition the Company maintained a Directors and Ocers liability insurance policy throughout the nancial year and has renewed that policy.
As at the date of this report indemnities are in force between the Company and each of the directors of the corporate trustee of the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme under which the Company has agreed to indemnify each director to the extent permitted by law in respect of certain liabilities incurred in connection with the corporate trustees activities as a trustee of such scheme.
Research and development The Group undertakes research and development activities in order to develop its range of new and existing products.
Expenditure during the year on research and development amounted to 1.1m 2016 1.1m.
Political donations and political expenditure No Group company made any political donations or incurred any political expenditure in the year 2016 nil.
Post balance sheet events Relevant post balance sheet events requiring disclosure are included in note 33 to the accounts.
Employee involvement The Group is committed to engaging employees at all levels regarding matters which aect them and the performance of the Group.
This is achieved in a number of ways including the use of regular brieng procedures which twice yearly include a report on trading results.
Regular communication meetings are held to keep employees up to date with Group performance.
Consultation meetings also take place when the Company is making decisions that are likely to aect employees interests at which employee representatives views are taken into account.
In addition to this the Groups intranet site provides uptodate information regarding the Groups activities.
All qualifying employees are entitled to join the Savings Related Share Option Scheme SAYE and the AllEmployee Share Ownership Plan AESOP.
Details of these share schemes are provided below.
AESOP
The AESOP is HMRC approved and the executive directors participate in both sections of the scheme which is open to all qualifying employees.
The partnership share element provides that for every three shares a participant purchases in the Company up to a current maximum contribution of 150 per month the Company will purchase one matching share.
The matching shares purchased are held in trust in the name of the individual.
There are various rules as to the period of time that the shares must be held in trust but after ve years the shares can be released tax free to the participant.
The free share element allows participants to receive shares to the value of a common percentage of their earnings related to the performance of the Group.
The maximum value of the annual award is currently 3600 and the shares awarded are held in trust for ve years.
Under the terms of the AESOP rules any award of free shares to employees is made by the Trustee of the AESOP subject to the Companys consent.
Under the terms of this scheme unless they are a good leaver the matching shares will be forfeited if the participant leaves the employment of the Company within three years of the award.
All partnership matching and free shares must be removed from the trust if employment with the Company ceases.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
The SAYE is HMRC approved and is available to all qualifying employees including executive directors.
It is based on a five year savings contract which provides the participant with an option to purchase shares after five years at a discounted price fixed at the time the contract is taken out or earlier as provided by the scheme rules.
No performance conditions require to be met by any participant in order to exercise their option under the SAYE.
Employment of disabled persons Applications for employment by disabled persons are always fully considered bearing in mind the qualifications and abilities of the applicants concerned.
In the event of employees becoming disabled every effort is made to ensure that their employment will continue.
The Groups policy is that the training career development and promotion of disabled persons are as far as possible identical to those of other employees.
Substantial shareholdings As at 28 January 2017 the Company had been notified under Rule 5 of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the following interests in the Companys ordinary share capital Number of shares % of voting rights Type of holding Lindsell Train Limited discretionary clients 15115319 12.94 Indirect Caledonia Investments plc 8157500 6.99 Direct Troy Asset Management 6553311 5.61 Direct The position remains the same as at 28 March 2017 as it did at 28 January 2017.
Relations with shareholders The Company has regular discussions with and briefings for analysts investors and institutional shareholders.
The Chief Executive and Finance Director normally meet with major shareholders twice annually in order to develop an understanding of their views and brief the next Board meeting on their discussions.
All directors have the opportunity to attend these meetings.
At the AGM all shareholders including private investors have an opportunity to participate in questions and answers with the Board on matters relating to the Companys operation and performance.
Share capital As at 28 January 2017 the Companys issued share capital comprised a single class of ordinary shares of 4 16 pence each.
All of the Companys issued ordinary shares are fully paid up and rank equally in all respects.
The rights attaching to the shares are set out in the Articles.
Note 28 to the financial statements contains details of the ordinary share capital.
On a show of hands at a general meeting of the Company every holder of ordinary shares present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote and on a poll every member present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote for every ordinary share held.
The Notice of AGM gives full details of deadlines for exercising voting rights in relation to resolutions to be passed at the AGM.
All proxy votes are counted and the numbers for against or withheld in relation to each resolution are announced at the AGM and published on the Companys website after the meeting.
Subject to the relevant statutory provisions and the Articles shareholders are entitled to a dividend where declared and paid out of profits available for such purposes.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company other than those which may from time to time be applicable under existing laws and regulations for example insider trading laws and pursuant to the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority whereby certain directors and employees of the Company require the approval of the Company to deal in the Companys ordinary shares and are prohibited from dealing during closed periods.
At 28 January 2017 the Company had authority pursuant to the shareholders resolution of 1 June 2016 to purchase up to 10% of its issued ordinary share capital.
This authority will expire at the conclusion of the 2017 AGM.
It is proposed that this authority be renewed at the 2017 AGM as detailed in the Notice of AGM.
Directors Report continued 41
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance At 28 January 2017 Robert Barr Limited as trustee of the General Employee Benet Trust the Savings Related Benet Trust and the AllEmployee Share Ownership Plan Trust the RBL Trustee held 0.88% of the issued share capital of the Company in trust for the benet of the executive directors and employees of the Group.
As at 28 January 2017 Equiniti Share Plan Trustees Limited the AESOP Trustee held 1.23% of the issued share capital of the Company in trust for participants in the AESOP.
A dividend waiver is in place in respect of the RBL Trustees holdings under the Savings Related Benet Trust.
A dividend waiver is in place in respect of shares held by the AESOP Trustee and the RBL Trustee under the AESOP which have not been appropriated to participants.
The voting rights in relation to the RBL Trustees shareholdings are exercised by the RBL Trustee who may vote or abstain from voting the shares as it sees t in respect of shares which are unvested or have not been appropriated to employees.
Under the rules of the AESOP eligible employees are entitled to acquire shares in the Company.
Details of the AESOP are set out above.
AESOP shares which have been appropriated to participants are held in trust for those participants by the AESOP
Voting rights in respect of shares which have been appropriated to participants are exercised by the AESOP Trustee on receipt of participants instructions.
If a participant does not submit an instruction to the AESOP Trustee no vote is registered in respect of those shares.
In addition the AESOP Trustee does not vote any unappropriated shares held under the AESOP as surplus assets.
The Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS was approved by shareholders at the 2010 AGM.
Approved Long Term Incentive Plan ALTIP awards comprising both a taxapproved option granted under the ESOS and a Long Term Incentive Plan award have been granted to executive directors.
ALTIP awards enable the participant and the Company to benet from HMRC taxapproved option tax treatment in respect of part of the award without increasing the pretax value delivered to participants.
Other than to enable the grant of ALTIP awards the Company has not granted awards to executive directors under the ESOS.
Details of the ALTIP awards granted to executive directors are set out on page 75.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
Change of control As disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report under certain conditions the notice period for R.
White J.
Kemp and
Memmott may increase from one year to two years in the event of a takeover of or by the Company or a Company reconstruction.
All of the Companys share incentive plans contain provisions relating to a change of control of the Company.
The Companys banking facilities may at the discretion of the lender be repayable upon a change of control.
Articles of association The Companys Articles may only be amended by a special resolution at a general meeting of shareholders.
No amendments are proposed to be made to the existing Articles at the 2017 AGM.
Greenhouse gas emissions Disclosures regarding greenhouse gas emissions required by The Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 are included in the Strategic Report on page 25.
This information is incorporated by reference into this Directors Report.
Financial risk management Information on the exposure of the Group to certain nancial risks and on the Groups objectives and policies for managing each of the Groups main nancial risk areas is detailed in the nancial risk management disclosure in note 26.
Contracts of signicance There were no contracts of signicance as dened by Listing Rule 9.8 in existence during the nancial year.
Disclosure of information under Listing Rule 9.4.3R The information required under Listing Rule 9.4.3R is provided in the Directors Remuneration Report on page 68 and 69.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 01 to 35.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the financial review on pages 26 to 30.
After making the appropriate enquiries the directors have concluded that the Group will be able to meet its financial obligations for the foreseeable future and therefore have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group overall have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future being at least one year following the date of approval of this annual report and accordingly consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
The Companys viability statement is set out on page 35 of the Strategic Report.
Directors statement as to disclosure of information to auditor So far as each director is aware there is no relevant audit information as defined by the Companies Act 2006 of which the Companys auditor is unaware.
Each director has taken all steps that ought to be taken by a director to make themselves aware of and to establish that the auditor is aware of any relevant audit information.
Auditor
The Audit Committee has responsibility delegated from the Board for making recommendations on the appointment reappointment removal and remuneration of the external auditor.
Following a competitive tender for the external audit KPMG LLP has indicated its intention to resign as auditor and Deloitte LLP will be appointed to fill the casual vacancy arising.
A resolution to appoint Deloitte LLP as auditor of the Company and its subsidiaries and to authorise the Audit Committee to fix their remuneration will be proposed at the 2017 AGM.
Annual General Meeting The Companys AGM will be held at 11.00am on 31 May 2017 at the offices of Deloitte LLP 110 Queen Street Glasgow G1 3BX.
The Notice of the AGM is set out on pages 133 to 135 of this report.
A description and explanation of the resolutions to be considered at the 2017 AGM is set out on pages 136 to 141 of this report.
Recommendation to shareholders The Board considers that all the resolutions to be considered at the AGM are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders as a whole and unanimously recommends that you vote in favour of them.
By order of the Board
Barr
Company Secretary 28 March 2017 Directors Report continued 43
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report The Board The Company is led by a strong and experienced board of directors the Board which brings a depth and diversity of expertise to the leadership of the Company.
The Board has an appropriate balance of skills experience and knowledge of the Group to enable it to discharge its responsibilities eectively.
The Board currently has nine members comprising four executive directors the nonexecutive Chairman three independent nonexecutive directors and one nonindependent nonexecutive director.
Biographical details of the directors are set out on pages 36 and 37.
The roles of Chairman and Chief Executive are separate and there is a clear division of responsibilities between those roles.
The
Chairman leads the Board and ensures the eective engagement and contribution of all nonexecutive and executive directors.
The Chairman also ensures that Board meetings are underpinned by a culture of openness and challenge with sucient time made available to debate issues arising.
The Chief Executive has responsibility for all Group businesses and acts in accordance with the authority delegated from the Board.
The senior independent nonexecutive director M.
Griths is available to shareholders if they have concerns which have not been resolved via the normal channels of Chairman Chief Executive or the other executive directors or where communication through such channels would be inappropriate.
The Board considers that M.
Griths P.
Powell and D.
Ritchie are independent for the purposes of provision B.1.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council in September 2014 the Code and that the relationships and circumstances set out in that provision which may appear relevant to the determination of independence do not apply.
The Board considers that on appointment the Chairman was independent for the purposes of provision A.3.1 of the
M.
Griths fullled the role of senior independent director during the year to 28 January 2017.
In addition to his role as Chairman of the Company J.
Nicolson is a director of Stocks Spirits Group plc director of North American Breweries Inc and director of PZ Cussons plc.
The Board does not consider that J.
Nicolsons other commitments have any impact on his ability to discharge his duties as Chairman of the Company eectively.
The Articles require directors to retire and submit themselves for election at the rst annual general meeting following appointment and to retire no later than the third annual general meeting after the annual general meeting at which they were last elected or reelected.
However in order to comply with the Code all directors will submit themselves for reelection at the AGM.
Chairmans Introduction
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present our Corporate Governance Report which describes how the main principles of the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code have been applied during the year.
Information about the Board its members and committees and an overview of the Companys system of internal controls are also included.
There were no changes to the Board during the year.
Details of the Boards composition are given on pages 36 and 37.
John R.
Nicolson
Chairman
28 March 2017 44
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report continued Details of directors remuneration and interests in shares of the Company are given in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 51 to 76.
Role of the Board The Board is responsible for the long term success of the Group determines the strategic direction of the Group and reviews operating nancial and risk performance.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Board including approval of the Groups annual business plan the Groups strategy acquisitions disposals and capital expenditure projects above certain thresholds the nancial statements the Companys dividend policy transactions involving the issue or purchase of Company shares borrowing powers appointments to the Board alterations to the memorandum and articles of association legal actions brought by or against the Group above certain thresholds and the scope of delegations to Board committees subsidiary boards and the management committee.
Responsibility for the development of policy and strategy and operational management is delegated to the executive directors and a management committee which as at the date of this report includes the executive directors and nine senior managers.
Board performance evaluation Every year the performance and eectiveness of the Board its committees and individual directors is evaluated.
In line with the Code during the year Independent Audit Limited Independent Audit conducted a formal externallyfacilitated review of the eectiveness of the Board and its committees.
Independent Audit is an independent adviser with no other connection to the
The evaluation was conducted by the completion by all Board members of detailed and comprehensive written survey questionnaires.
Independent Audit agreed the questionnaires with the Company Secretary and the Chairman.
The Board questionnaire covered such themes as strategy and risk taking leadership and accountability how the Board works Board culture line of sight and risk management with a similar degree of coverage for each of the committees.
Independent Audit provided a full written report based on the responses to the survey which they discussed with the Chairman.
The full report was shared with and discussed by the Board and each of the committees.
Overall the review found that the Board and its committees were functioning in an eective manner and performing satisfactorily with no major issues identied.
The nonexecutive directors led by the senior independent director carried out a performance evaluation of the Chairman taking into account the views of the executive directors.
The Chairman is pleased to conrm that following performance evaluation of the directors all of the directors performances continue to be eective and all of the directors continue to demonstrate commitment to the role of director including commitment of time for Board meetings and committee meetings and any other relevant duties.
Independent professional advice Directors can obtain independent professional advice at the Companys expense in the performance of their duties as directors.
None of the directors obtained independent professional advice in the period under review.
All directors have access to the advice and the services of the Company Secretary.
The nonexecutive directors have access to senior management of the business.
Training and development On appointment to the Board directors are provided with a full formal and tailored programme of induction to familiarise them with the Groups businesses the risks and strategic challenges the Group faces and the economic competitive legal and regulatory environment in which the Group operates.
A programme of strategic and other reviews together with the other training provided during the year ensures that directors continually update their skills their knowledge and familiarity with the Groups businesses and their awareness of sector risk regulatory legal nancial and other developments to enable them to full eectively their role on the Board and committees of the Board.
Meetings and attendance Board meetings are scheduled to be held seven times each year.
Between these meetings as required additional Board meetings andor Board committee meetings may be held to progress the Companys business.
A part of each Board meeting is dedicated to the discussion of specic strategy matters.
In advance of all Board meetings the directors are supplied with detailed and comprehensive papers covering the Groups operating functions.
Members of the management team attend and make presentations as appropriate at meetings of the
The Company Secretary is responsible to the Board for the timeliness and quality of information provided to it.
The
Chairman holds meetings with the nonexecutive directors during the year without the executive directors being present.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The attendance of directors at scheduled Board and committee meetings in the year to 28 January 2017 was as follows
Maximum 8
Committee
Maximum 4
Committee
Maximum 5
Committee
Maximum 4
R.
White 8  5 4
Lorimer 8 4
Kemp 8
Memmott 8
J.
Nicolson 8  5 4
Barr M.
Griths D.
Ritchie P.
Powell  R.
White attended Board committee meetings during the year by invitation.
S.
Lorimer attended Audit Committee meetings during the year by invitation.
Conicts of interest The Articles allow the Board to authorise potential conicts of interest that may arise from time to time subject to certain conditions.
The Company has established appropriate conicts authorisation procedures whereby actual or potential conicts are regularly reviewed and authorisations sought as appropriate.
During the year no such conicts arose and no such authorisations were sought.
Committees of the Board The terms of reference of the principal committees of the Board  Audit Remuneration and Nomination  have been approved by the Board and are available on the Companys website site Those terms of reference have been reviewed in the current year and are reviewed at least annually.
The work carried out by the Nomination Committee in discharging its responsibilities is summarised below.
The work carried out by the Audit Committee is described within the Audit Committees Report on pages 48 to 50.
The work carried out by the Remuneration Committee is described within the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 51 to 76.
The Board has established a Market Disclosure Committee which comprises R.
White S.
Lorimer and the Company Secretary.
The Market Disclosure Committee meets only when required and is responsible for overseeing the disclosure of information by the Company to meet its obligations under the Market Abuse Regulation and the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules and Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee comprises J.
Nicolson W.
Barr M.
Griths P.
Powell and D.
Ritchie.
The Nomination Committee is chaired by J.
Nicolson.
The Nomination Committee leads the process for making appointments to the Board and ensures that there is a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the appointment of new directors to the Board.
The remit of the Nomination Committee also includes reviewing the composition of the Board through a full evaluation of the skills knowledge and experience of directors and ensuring plans are in place for orderly succession for appointments to the Board.
The Nomination Committee also makes recommendations to the Board on the membership of its committees.
The Nomination Committee is required in accordance with its terms of reference to meet at least once per year.
The
Nomination Committee met four times during the year and amongst other matters considered the recruitment of an additional nonexecutive director.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report continued The Board recognises the importance of diversity to the success of the business and is rmly committed to giving due consideration to all aspects of diversity including gender diversity.
Appointments to the Board are made on merit against objective criteria and with due regard for the benets of diversity on the Board.
Whilst no formal measurable objectives have been set for female representation at Board level the Board remains committed to the principles of gender diversity.
The disclosure relating to gender diversity within the Company is included in the Strategic Report on page 25.
Treasury Committee The Treasury Committee consists of R.
White S.
Lorimer and senior members of the nance legal and procurement departments.
The Treasury Committee reviews purchase requirements in foreign currencies and implements strategies including the use of foreign exchange hedges in order to reduce the risk of foreign exchange exposure and provide certainty over the value of nondomestic purchases in the short to medium term.
The Treasury Committees remit also includes the ability to utilise certain nancial instruments in order to hedge the Groups exposure to interest rate uctuations.
Internal control The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups internal control systems and annually reviews their eectiveness including a review of nancial operational compliance and risk management controls.
The implementation and maintenance of the risk management and internal control systems are the responsibility of the executive directors and other senior management.
The systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board has reviewed the eectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems including nancial operational and compliance controls in accordance with the Code for the period from 31 January 2016 to the date of approval of this annual report.
No signicant failings or weaknesses were identied from this review during the year.
Had any failings or weaknesses been identied then the Board would have taken the action required to remedy them.
At the Audit Committee meeting on 18 January 2017 following a review and evaluation of the Groups risk management and internal control systems in place the Audit Committee concluded that the Group has a sound system of risk management and internal controls in place.
The Board conrms that there is an ongoing process embedded in the Groups integrated internal control systems allowing for the identication evaluation and management of signicant risks as well as a reporting process to the Board.
This risk management process has been in place throughout the year ended 28 January 2017 and up to the date of the approval of this annual report.
The Board has carried out a robust systematic assessment of the principal risks facing the Group during the period including those which would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
Information on the Groups risk management framework is set out in the Strategic Report on pages 31 to 35.
The three main elements of the Groups internal control system are as follows The Board The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups internal control systems and exercises this through an organisational structure with clearly dened levels of responsibility and authority as well as appropriate reporting procedures.
The Board has a schedule of matters that are brought to it or its duly authorised committees for decision aimed at maintaining eective control over strategic nancial operational and compliance issues.
This structure includes the Audit Committee which with the Finance Director reviews the eectiveness of the internal nancial and operating control environment.
Financial reporting There is a comprehensive strategic planning budgeting and forecasting system with an annual operating plan approved by the Board.
Monthly nancial information including trading results cash ow statement statement of nancial position and indebtedness is reported.
The Board and the management committee review their business and nancial performance against the prior year and against annual plans approved by the Board.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Audits and reviews The key internal risks identied in the Group are subject to regular audits or reviews by the internal auditors.
This role is fullled by an external professional services rm which is independent from the Board and the Company.
The review of the internal auditors work by the Audit Committee and monitoring procedures in place ensure that the ndings of the audits are acted upon and subsequent reviews conrm compliance with any agreed action plans.
The Board conrms that there has been an independent internal audit function in place for the year.
Share capital structure The share capital structure of the Company is set out in the Directors Report.
UK Corporate Governance Code compliance The Company is committed to the principles of corporate governance contained in the Code.
A copy of the Code is available on the Financial Reporting Councils website www. rc.
Each of the provisions of the Code has been reviewed and where necessary steps have been taken to ensure that the Company is in compliance with all of those provisions as at the date of this report.
The directors consider that the Company has complied throughout the year ended 28 January 2017 with the provisions of the Code except as set out below.
During the year the Board comprised four executive directors the nonexecutive Chairman and three independent non executive directors.
In addition W.
Barr was a nonexecutive director during the year although he is not considered by the Board to be independent.
Accordingly during the year to 28 January 2017 the composition of the Board did not at any time comply with provision B.1.2 of the Code.
The Board considers that despite this noncompliance the Board has an appropriate balance of skills knowledge and experience to enable it to discharge its duties and responsibilities eectively.
No concerns regarding the Boards nonindependent majority were raised as part of the Board performance evaluation carried out during the year and referred to above.
Provision D.1.5 of the Code recommends that executive directors contracts contain a maximum notice period of one year.
As disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report the service contracts with R.
White J.
Kemp and A.
Memmott provide for a notice period of 12 months except during the six months following either a takeover of or by the Company or a Company reconstruction.
Under these conditions and certain circumstances the directors are entitled to a liquidated damages payment equal to the directors basic salary at termination plus the value of all contractual benets for a two year period.
Given the size of the Company and the sector dynamics at the time these directors were recruited the Remuneration Committee considered this provision appropriate in order to attract and retain high calibre executive directors.
As disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report this provision will continue to be honoured as a contractual commitment made to these directors however this provision was not included in S.
Lorimers service contract and will not be included in service contracts with other new executive directors appointed in future.
A copy of the nancial statements has been placed on the Companys website site The maintenance and integrity of this website is the responsibility of the directors.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may dier from legislation in other jurisdictions.
By order of the Board
Barr
Company Secretary 28 March 2017 48
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Audit Committee Report
The Audit Committee comprises four nonexecutive directors M.
Griths W.
Barr P.
Powell and D.
Ritchie.
The Audit Committee is chaired by M.
Griths.
The Board is satised that M.
Griths has recent and relevant nancial experience as required by provision C.3.1 of the Code.
The Board has determined that the current composition of the Audit Committee as a whole has competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
Biographical details relating to each of the Committee members are shown on page 37.
Meetings
The Audit Committee met four times during the year.
The meetings are attended by the Committee members and by invitation the Finance Director the Central Financial Controller the Company Secretary and representatives from the external and internal auditors.
The Audit Committee regularly meets with executive directors and management as well as privately with the external and internal auditors.
Role and responsibilities The primary role of the Audit Committee is to assist the Board in fullling its oversight responsibilities.
This includes monitoring the integrity of the annual and interim nancial statements and formal announcements relating to the Groups nancial performance and reviewing any signicant nancial reporting judgements and disclosures which they contain if requested by the Board providing advice on whether the Annual Report and Accounts are fair balanced and understandable reporting to the Board on the appropriateness of the Groups accounting policies and practices reviewing and monitoring the eectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems reviewing and monitoring the eectiveness of the internal audit function and managements responsiveness to any ndings and recommendations approving the appointment and removal of the internal auditor reviewing and monitoring the appropriateness of the Groups whistleblowing and antibribery procedures making recommendations to the Board in relation to the appointment and removal of the external auditor and approving its remuneration and terms of engagement reviewing and monitoring the external auditors independence and objectivity and the eectiveness of the audit process reviewing the policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services and reporting to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities.
Activities of the Audit Committee During the year the Audit Committee has reviewed and discussed with the external auditor the key accounting considerations and judgements reected in the Groups results for the six month period ended 30 July 2016 reviewed and agreed the external auditors audit strategy memorandum in advance of its audit for the year ended 28 January 2017 discussed the report received from the external auditor regarding its audit in respect of the year ended 28 January 2017 which report included comments on its ndings on internal control and on the disclosure of risks and a statement on its independence and objectivity received and reviewed reports from management regarding their approach to key accounting considerations and judgements in the half year and full year nancial statements reviewed the half year and full year nancial statements received reports on the operation of the Groups Risk Committee reviewed the Groups risk register and the Groups principal risks together with the systems and processes for mitigating those risks discussed and agreed the nature and scope of the work to be performed by the external and internal auditors reviewed the results of this audit work and the response of management to matters raised reviewed the eectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems including nancial operational compliance and risk management controls reviewed the appropriateness of the Groups whistleblowing procedures reviewed the eectiveness of the Groups antibribery systems and controls received reports from internal audit covering various aspects of the Groups operations controls and processes reviewed the Groups delegated authority limits approved the reappointment of the internal auditor conducted a competitive tender process for the external audit for 201718 onwards made recommendations to the Board on the appointment and remuneration of the external auditor and monitored the performance of the incumbent auditor monitored and reviewed the performance of the internal auditor and the eectiveness of the Groups internal audit activities reviewed its policies on the supply of nonaudit services by the external auditor and on the employment of former employees of the Groups external auditor 49
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance reviewed the nonaudit services provided to the Group by the external auditor and monitored and assessed the independence of both the external and internal auditors and reviewed the performance of the Audit Committee and its terms of reference.
At the request of the Board the Audit Committee also considered whether the Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 28 January 2017 taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Following review of managements processes in this regard and consideration of the draft Annual Report and Accounts the Audit Committee recommended to the Board that it could make the required disclosure as set out in the Directors Responsibilities Statement on page 77.
Signicant areas The signicant matters and key accounting judgements considered by the Audit Committee during the year were The carrying value of brand support accruals judgement is required when ascertaining the level of accrual required in relation to promotions and brand support campaigns that span the year end or where settlement has not been fully and nally settled by the year end or which relate to prior years.
During the year the Audit Committee received a report from the management team on the commercial investment process.
It also received and considered reports from management on the level of accruals at the half year and at the year end.
The Audit Committee was content that there were no issues arising.
The valuation of inventory the valuation of inventory is judgemental due to the volatile nature of raw material commodity prices and as the Group uses standard costing changes in production levels can lead to purchase price variances which require to be accounted for correctly.
During the year the Audit Committee considered and was satised with reports from the internal auditor and management regarding the controls operating in relation to inventory management at the Milton Keynes site.
The Audit Committee discussed and challenged managements judgements in relation to inventory valuation and considered reports from the external auditor on this area and were satised that inventory valuations were reasonable.
Other areas Other matters considered by the Audit Committee during the year were Exceptional items the Audit Committee considered reports received from management in relation to the classication and presentation of certain items as exceptional and was satised with the treatment and presentation of various items which arose during the year as exceptional the majority of which related to the closure of the dened benet pension scheme to future accrual and the Companywide reorganisation.
Dened benet pension scheme during the year the Audit Committee considered and was satised with reports received from the Groups external auditor and management relating to the accounting for the closure of the dened benet pension scheme to future accrual.
The presentation of adjusted performance measures.
Accounting for the Funkin acquisition during the year the Audit Committee considered and was satised with the Companys approach to accounting for the Funkin acquisition.
The Audit Committee receives regular presentations from members of the senior management team.
During the year the Audit Committee has considered presentations from representatives of the management team on the Companys franchise arrangements the purchase to pay process and the Finance Service Centre.
External audit The Groups external auditor is KPMG LLP.
The Audit Committee reviews the external auditors performance independence and objectivity annually.
The Audit Committee ensures that procedures are in place to safeguard the external auditors independence and objectivity.
The external auditor reports regularly to the Audit Committee on the actions that it has taken to comply with professional and regulatory requirements and current best practice in order to maintain its independence and objectivity.
The Group has a policy in place which ensures that the provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor does not impair the auditors independence or objectivity.
Where fees for any nonaudit project are expected to exceed 50000 the prior approval of the Chairman of the Audit Committee and the Finance Director is required.
Where fees for nonaudit projects are in aggregate expected to exceed 150000 the prior approval of the Audit Committee is required.
This policy was complied with during the year.
The Audit Committee has reviewed and amended this policy in preparation for the new EU regulation on nonaudit services.
The revised policy states that the external auditor should not be engaged in respect of services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard 2016.
Any other nontrivial nonaudit services provided must be preapproved by the Audit Committee unless the engagement is urgent in which case the Finance Director can agree the work with the Chairman of the Audit Committee and report to the next Audit Committee meeting.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Details of the amounts paid to the external auditor during the year for audit and nonaudit services are set out in note 3 to the nancial statements.
The ratio of fees for nonaudit services to those for audit services for the year was 2.61.
The
Audit Committee considered the nature and level of nonaudit services provided and was satised that the objectivity and independence of the external auditor were not aected by the nonaudit work undertaken.
A signicant proportion of the nonaudit fees during the year were for pension advisory services and the remainder related to the provision of tax advisory tax compliance and corporate nance transaction services.
The level of fees for nonaudit services was considered by KPMG who concluded that they did not present a threat to KPMGs independence.
KPMG Audit Plc was appointed as the Groups external auditor in May 2009 following a competitive tender process. approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM.
There are no contractual obligations which restrict the Audit Committees choice of external auditor.
The senior statutory auditor rotates every ve years to ensure independence an audit partner rotation took place at the end of the 201314 nancial year and the Audit Committee took steps to ensure that a new appropriately qualied and independent senior statutory auditor became responsible for the audit of the Groups nancial statements with eect from 201415.
The Audit Committee acknowledges the requirement under the Code to tender the external audit contract at least every ten years.
Following the introduction of the new EU regulation on nonaudit services the Audit Committee has taken the opportunity to reassess the role of various providers of such services to ensure full compliance with the new regulation in relation to the provision of such services going forward.
As a consequence during the year the Audit Committee conducted a competitive tender process for the audit for 201718 onwards.
Three audit rms not including the incumbent auditor KPMG LLP were invited to tender by the Audit Committee.
Each rm prepared a formal written proposal which was considered by the Audit Committee.
The proposed audit partners and key members of the audit teams of each of the tendering rms attended a meeting with the Chairman of the Audit Committee the Finance Director and certain members of senior management where they presented their proposals and answered questions thereon.
The Audit Committee considered the proposals and recommended the appointment of Deloitte LLP.
The Board approved the Audit Committees preferred rm for recommendation to shareholders.
The Company will seek shareholder approval of the appointment of Deloitte LLP at the Companys 2017 AGM.
The Company conrms that it has complied with the provisions of the Competition and Markets Authoritys Statutory Audit Services Order in respect of the nancial year under review.
The Audit Committee carried out a review of the eectiveness of the external audit process during the year.
This review included an externally facilitated detailed and comprehensive evaluation of the Groups external auditor by means of a written survey questionnaire completed by Audit Committee members and certain members of senior management including the executive directors.
The results of the evaluation were shared with the Groups external auditor.
The Audit Committee reviewed comprehensive papers from both management and the Groups external auditor which set out the planning and execution of the conduct of the audit.
The Audit Committee held a meeting with the Groups external auditor in the absence of management to discuss further.
Following this review the Audit Committee was satised with KPMG LLPs performance during the year that it was objective and independent and that the external audit process was eective.
Internal audit At the beginning of each year an internal control plan is developed by the internal auditor following meetings with directors and senior managers within the business and with reference to the signicant risks contained within the Groups risk register and identied controls.
The Audit Committee receives updates on progress against the internal control plan throughout the year.
Martin A.
Griths
Chairman of the Audit Committee 28 March 2017 Audit Committee Report continued 51
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report
Remuneration Committee  Chairmans Statement
On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 28 January 2017 which sets out the future Directors Remuneration Policy intended to take eect from the close of the 2017 AGM and the
Annual Report on Remuneration.
Our previous Policy was approved by a binding vote at the 2014 AGM and became eective for three years from the close of that meeting.
The future Policy will be subject to a binding vote and the Annual Report on Remuneration will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2017 AGM.
I am delighted to report on the strong level of support received from shareholders as evidenced by the voting outcome at the 2016
The resolution seeking approval of the Annual Report on Remuneration was supported by over 99.8% of the votes cast.
Directors Remuneration Policy The Remuneration Committee considers that the Companys current remuneration framework continues to eectively support the delivery of our business strategy as set out in the Strategic Report on pages 01 to 35 and the creation of shareholder value.
Consequently the Remuneration Committee has decided to make minor changes only to the Policy to take account of developments in best practice and to ensure that the Policy continues to provide sucient exibility to support potential changes to business needs over the next three years.
A summary of the minor changes to the Policy are set out on page 52.
201617 key decisions and pay outcomes The Remuneration Committee remains committed to a responsible approach to executive pay and believes that variable pay should only be earned for achievement against stretching performance targets.
As described in the Strategic Report against challenging soft drinks market conditions the Group delivered revenue for the year ended 28 January 2017 of 257.1m a decrease of 0.6% on the prior year.
The UK soft drinks market grew by 1.2% in value over the same period of time.
Pretax prot increased by 4.4% on the prior year.
Against this background and taking into account executive directors performance against strategic objectives an annual bonus of 23% was earned by R.
White and S.
Lorimer and an annual bonus of 18% was earned by J.
Kemp and A.
Memmott.
Average EPS for the three years ended 28 January 2017 exceeded the average EPS for the three years preceding that period both being adjusted for Consumer Price Index by 15.6%.
As a result the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP awards granted in June 2014 vested at 40.02%.
Further details in relation to the annual bonus and LTIP vesting are included on pages 67 to 69.
Director remuneration for 201718 In line with the range of salary increases across the Group an increase of 1.8% will be made to the executive directors base salaries with eect from 1 April 2017.
An increase of 1.8% will also be made to the Chairmans fee and the other nonexecutive directors basic fee with eect from 1 April 2017.
No changes are proposed to the annual bonus for the year ending 27 January 2018 with awards continuing to be subject to a combination of prot before tax and strategic performance measures.
Details of bonus award levels and performance measure weightings are provided on page 67.
Performance targets for these bonus awards will be disclosed in the Annual Report on Remuneration for the year ending 27 January 2018.
No changes are proposed to the LTIP for the year ending 27 January 2018 with awards continuing to be subject to an EPS performance measure.
EPS is a key performance indicator for the Company and shareholders and remains a highly credible measure of long term performance.
The EPS targets for the next LTIP awards are still to be determined given ongoing assessment of the anticipated impact of the new Soft Drinks Industry Levy which will inuence EPS during the vesting period.
Details of the LTIP awards which will be subject to a maximum of 125% of salary and the EPS targets will be disclosed at the time the LTIP awards are granted and in next years Annual Report on Remuneration.
The Remuneration Committee keeps long term performance metrics under review.
The terms of reference of the Remuneration Committee are available on the Companys website site David J.
Ritchie
Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 28 March 2017 52
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Directors Remuneration Policy This part of the report sets out the Companys Directors Remuneration Policy which subject to shareholder approval at the 2017 AGM shall take binding eect from the date of that meeting.
The Policy for the executive directors has been determined by the Remuneration Committee.
The Directors Remuneration Policy was rst approved at the 2014 AGM.
No signicant changes have been made to the Remuneration Policy.
Minor amendments have been made to ensure that the Remuneration Policy is appropriate for the next three years.
In summary the changes made to the proposed Remuneration Policy as compared to the Remuneration Policy approved at the 2014 AGM are as follows Minimum shareholding guidelines In line with best practice the minimum shareholding guidelines are included in the Remuneration Policy.
Shareholding guidelines were previously included in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Clawback In line with best practice clawback provisions in respect of annual bonus and LTIP awards are included in the Remuneration Policy.
Clawback provisions were previously included in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Pension The Companys maximum contribution under the URBS for R.
White has been redened for clarity.
For the avoidance of doubt the Companys maximum contribution under the URBS for R.
White is consistent with the maximum contribution under the Remuneration Policy approved at the 2014 AGM.
Recruitment The ability for the Company to pay appropriate relocation travel and subsistence costs for newly appointed directors where necessary has been claried.
Executive directors The table below describes each of the elements of the remuneration package for the executive directors.
Element
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Base salary Core element of xed remuneration reecting the size and scope of the role.
Purpose is to recruit and retain directors of the calibre required for the Company.
Usually reviewed annually.
Salary levels are determined by the Remuneration Committee taking into account a range of factors including role experience and individual performance pay for other employees in the roles at comparable companies.
Although there is no overall maximum salary increases are normally reviewed in the context of the salary increases across the wider Group.
The Remuneration Committee may award salary increases above this level to take account of individual circumstances such as increase in scope and responsibility increase to reect the executive directors development and performance in the role or alignment to market level.
Not applicable.
Directors Remuneration Report continued 53
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Benets Ensures the overall package is competitive.
Purpose is to recruit and retain directors of the calibre required for the
Executive directors receive benets in line with market practice which may include for example a car allowance or provision of a company car a biennial health check private medical insurance life assurance and the ability to buy or sell holidays under the Companys exible benets plan.
Other benets may be provided based on individual circumstances.
These may include for example relocation and travel allowances.
Whilst the Remuneration Committee has not set an absolute maximum on the levels of benets executive directors receive the value of the benet is at a level which the Remuneration Committee considers appropriate against the market and provides sucient level of benet based on individual circumstances.
Not applicable.
Annual bonus the Group.
Awards based on annual performance against key nancial andor strategic targets andor the delivery of personal objectives.
Payout levels are determined by the Remuneration Committee after the year end based on performance against those targets.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to amend the bonus payout if in its judgement any formulaic output does not produce a fair result for either the executive director or the Company taking into account overall business performance.
For up to two years following the determination of a bonus payout the Remuneration Committee has the right to recover some or all of the bonus payout in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups nancial results or if the participant has been guilty of misconduct.
Maximum bonus opportunity is 100% of base salary.
Targets are set annually reecting the Companys strategy and aligned with key nancial strategic and or individual objectives.
Targets whilst stretching do not encourage inappropriate business risks to be taken.
At least 80% of the bonus is assessed against key nancial performance metrics of the business and the balance may be based on nonnancial strategic measures andor individual performance.
Financial metrics There is no minimum payment at threshold performance up to 50% of the maximum potential for this element of the bonus will be paid out for ontarget performance and all of the maximum potential will be paid out for maximum performance.
Nonnancial or individual metrics Payment of the nonnancial or individual metrics will apply on a scale between 0% and 100% based on the Remuneration Committees assessment of the extent to which a nonnancial or individual performance metric has been met.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Long Term
Plan 2014
Incentivises
Under the LTIP awards of conditional shares nil cost share options or other such form as has the same economic eect may be made with vesting dependent on the achievement of performance conditions set by the Remuneration Committee normally over a three year performance period.
Awards granted over shares may be settled in cash at the election of the Remuneration Committee.
As described on page 62 awards may also vest in good leaver circumstances or on the death of a participant or on a change of control.
The Remuneration Committee has the right to reduce unvested or unexercised awards andor delay their vesting in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups nancial results or if the participant has been guilty of misconduct.
For up to two years following the determination of the vesting outcome of an award the Remuneration Committee has the right to cancel the award if it has not been exercised or require repayment of some or all of the award in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups nancial results or if the participant has been guilty of misconduct.
The Remuneration Committee may make a dividend equivalent payment Dividend Equivalents to reect dividends that would have been paid over the period to vesting on shares that vest.
This payment may be in the form of additional shares or a cash payment equal to the value of those additional shares.
The normal maximum award is 125% of annual base salary in respect of a nancial year.
Under the share plan rules the overall maximum opportunity that may be granted in respect of a nancial year will be 200% of annual base salary.
The normal maximum award limit will only be exceeded in exceptional circumstances involving the recruitment or retention of a senior employee.
These limits do not include the value of shares subject to any taxadvantaged option granted as part of an ALTIP award.
The vesting of awards is subject to the satisfaction of performance targets set by the Remuneration
The performance measures are reviewed regularly to ensure they remain relevant but will be based on key nancial andor strategic andor total shareholder return related measures.
The relevant metrics and the respective weightings may vary each year based upon Company strategic priorities.
Performance measures and weightings will be set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration for the relevant nancial year.
For achievement of threshold performance 20% of the maximum opportunity will vest.
There will usually be straight line vesting between threshold and maximum performance.
Where a taxadvantaged option is granted as part of an ALTIP award the same performance conditions will apply to the taxadvantaged option as apply to the LTIP award.
Directors Remuneration Report continued Directors Remuneration Report continued 55
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Long Term
Plan 2014
The Remuneration Committee may at its discretion structure awards as Approved Long Term Incentive Plan ALTIP awards comprising both a HMRC taxadvantaged option granted under the Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS and an LTIP award.
ALTIP awards enable the participant and Company to benet from HMRC taxadvantaged option tax treatment in respect of part of the award without increasing the pretax value delivered to participants.
ALTIP awards would be structured as a taxadvantaged option and a LTIP award with the vesting of the LTIP award scaled back to take account of any gain made on exercise of the tax advantaged option.
Other than to enable the grant of ALTIP awards the Company will not grant awards to executive directors under the ESOS.
All employee share schemes To encourage all employees to make a long term investment in the ecient way.
Executive directors are entitled to participate in a HMRC tax advantaged allemployee Savings Related Share Option Scheme SAYE under which they make monthly savings over a period of three or ve years linked to the grant of an option over the Companys shares with an option price which can be at a discount to the market value of shares on grant.
Executive directors are also entitled to participate in a HMRC tax advantaged AllEmployee Share Ownership Plan AESOP.
The executive directors may participate in both sections of the AESOP being the partnership and matching section and the free share section.
Participation limits are those set by the UK tax authorities from time to time.
No performance conditions are attached to awards in line with HMRC practice.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures
Purpose is to recruit and retain directors of the calibre required for the
Provides market competitive postemployment benets or cash allowance equivalent.
Executive directors are eligible to participate in the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme the Scheme which comprises a dened contribution section and a dened benet section.
The dened benet section was closed to new entrants from 14 August 2003 and to future accrual from 1 May 2016.
Details of the entitlements accruing to the two executive directors who are deferred members of the dened benet section are detailed in the table on page 70.
The contributions paid to the dened contribution section in respect of three executive directors are disclosed on pages 69 and 70.
Details of accruals under the URBS are disclosed on page 71.
Executive directors may participate in the A.
BARR p.
Unfunded
Retirement Benet Scheme URBS with the agreement of the
The URBS was established to satisfy the Companys contractual obligations to provide retirement benets for the benet of the executive directors where either the annual or lifetime allowance has been exceeded whilst those individuals were members of the Scheme.
Benets will be receivable in certain circumstances including on retirement death change of control or cessation of employment in accordance with the rules of the URBS.
In appropriate circumstances executive directors may take a cash supplement instead of contributions into a pension plan.
R.
White ceased his accrual under the dened benet section on 5 April 2011.
For R.
White the Companys maximum contribution under the URBS is equal to 26% of salary plus any contractual entitlement in respect of a shortfall in R.
Whites deferred pension revaluation as a consequence of Fixed Protection 2012.
The maximum combined Company contribution under the dened contribution section and the URBS in respect of the remaining executive directors is 19% of salary as dened in the Scheme rules rising to 26% of salary following the executives 50th birthday.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to vary the delivery mechanism for retirement benets however the exercise of this discretion will not exceed the above limits for the provision of executive directors retirement benets.
The Company has closed the dened benet section of the Scheme to new members but the two executive directors who are deferred members will continue to receive benets in accordance with the terms of the Scheme subject to separately agreed contractual arrangements including those summarised below Not applicable.
Directors Remuneration Report continued 57
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures
R.
Whites deferred pension will be revalued in line with RPI until his normal retirement date.
In addition R.
White will continue to be entitled to receive life assurance benets as if he were in pensionable service under the Scheme until his normal retirement date notwithstanding the termination of his employment with the Company but only in circumstances where he is a good leaver as set out in his service contract.
A.
Memmotts accrued benets retain a link to his nal pensionable salary.
Chairman and nonexecutive directors The table below sets out an overview of the remuneration of nonexecutive directors Purpose and link to strategy Approach of the Company Sole element of nonexecutive director remuneration set at a level that reects market conditions and is sucient to attract individuals with appropriate knowledge and expertise.
Fees are normally reviewed annually.
The remuneration of the Chairman is determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Fees are set at a level which reects the skill knowledge and experience of the individual whilst taking into account appropriate market data.
The Board is responsible for setting the fees of the other nonexecutive directors.
Fees may include a basic fee and additional fees for further responsibilities for example chairmanship of board committees and senior independent directorship.
Fees are set taking into account several factors including the size and complexity of the business appropriate market data and the expected time commitment and contribution for the role.
Nonexecutive directors do not participate in any of the Companys share schemes or bonus schemes nor do they receive any pension contributions.
Nonexecutive directors may be eligible to receive benets such as the use of secretarial support travel costs or other benets that may be appropriate.
Actual fee levels are disclosed in the Directors annual remuneration report for the relevant nancial year.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Explanation of performance metrics chosen and the target setting process Performance measures are selected that are aligned to the Companys strategy.
Stretching performance targets are set each year for the annual bonus and LTIP awards.
When setting these performance targets the Remuneration Committee will take into account a number of dierent reference points which may include the Companys business plans and strategy and the market environment.
Full payment or vesting will only occur for what the Remuneration Committee considers to be stretching performance.
The annual bonus performance targets have been selected to provide an appropriate balance between incentivising directors to meet nancial targets for the year and achieving strategic andor personal objectives.
The LTIP performance targets reect the Companys strategic objectives and therefore the nancial and strategic decisions which ultimately determine the success of the Company.
The LTIP performance measures may be based on key nancial andor strategic andor total shareholder return related measures.
LTIP performance is currently based solely on Earnings Per Share which is a key measure of the Companys protability.
The Remuneration Committee retains the ability to adjust or set dierent performance measures if events occur such as a change in strategy a material acquisition andor a divestment of a Group business or a change in prevailing market conditions which cause the Remuneration Committee to determine that the measures are no longer appropriate and that amendment is required so that they achieve their original purpose.
Awards and options may be adjusted in the event of a variation of share capital in accordance with the scheme rules.
Policy for the remuneration of employees generally Remuneration arrangements are determined throughout the Group based on the same principle that reward should be achieved for delivery of the business strategy and should be sucient to attract and retain high calibre talent.
Under the rules of the ESOS and the LTIP certain managers are eligible to participate in the ESOS and the LTIP however there has been no such participation to date and there is no current intention to invite managers to do so.
The annual bonus arrangements for the senior management team are similar to those for the executive directors in that targets are set annually dependent on nancial andor nonnancial performance metrics.
The key principles of the remuneration philosophy are applied consistently across the Group below this level taking account of the seniority of employees.
Approach to recruitment remuneration The policy aims to facilitate the appointment of individuals of sucient calibre to lead the business and execute the strategy eectively for the benet of shareholders.
When appointing a new director the Remuneration Committee seeks to ensure that arrangements are in the best interests of the Company and in line with market practice.
The Remuneration Committee will take into consideration a number of relevant factors which may include the calibre of the individual the candidates existing remuneration package and the specic circumstances of the individual including the jurisdiction from which the candidate was recruited.
Directors Remuneration Report continued 59
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The Remuneration Committee will typically seek to align the remuneration package with the Companys Remuneration Policy as set out in the policy table.
The maximum level of variable remuneration which may be granted excluding buyout awards referred to below is 300% of salary in line with this policy.
Subject to this overall maximum variable remuneration incentive awards will only be granted above the normal maximum annual award opportunities where the Remuneration Committee considers there to be a commercial rationale which may include but is not limited to circumstances where an executive director is recruited at a time in the year when it would be inappropriate to provide a bonus andor LTIP award for that year as there would not be sucient time to assess performance.
The quantum in respect of the months employed during the year may be transferred to the subsequent year so that reward is provided on a fair and appropriate basis.
The Remuneration Committee will ensure that any such awards are linked to the achievement of appropriate and challenging performance targets and will be forfeited if performance or continued employment conditions are not achieved.
The Remuneration Committee may also alter the performance measures performance period and vesting period of the bonus andor LTIP award if the Remuneration Committee determines that the circumstances of the recruitment merit such alteration.
The rationale would be clearly explained in the Directors Remuneration Report following grant.
The individual will move over time onto a remuneration package that is consistent with the normal maximum annual bonus and LTIP award opportunities set out in the policy table.
The Remuneration Committee retains discretion to include other remuneration components or awards which are outside the specic terms of the policy but subject to the limit on variable remuneration to facilitate the hiring of candidates of an appropriate calibre where the Remuneration Committee believes there is a need to do so in the best interests of the Company.
The Remuneration Committee would ensure that awards within the 300% of salary variable remuneration limit are linked to the achievement of appropriate and challenging performance measures.
The Remuneration Committee will not use this discretion to make a nonperformance related incentive payment for example a golden hello.
In some circumstances the Remuneration Committee may make payments or awards to recognise or buyout remuneration arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
The Remuneration Committee will normally aim to do so broadly on a likeforlike basis taking into account a number of relevant factors regarding the forfeited arrangements which may include the form of award any performance conditions attached to the awards and the time at which they would have vested.
These payments or awards are excluded from the maximum level of variable remuneration referred to above however the Remuneration Committees intention is that the value awarded would be no higher than the expected value of the forfeited arrangements.
Where considered appropriate such payments or awards will be liable to malus andor clawback on early departure.
Any share awards referred to in this section will be granted as far as possible under the Companys existing share plans.
If
Where a position is fullled internally any ongoing remuneration obligations or outstanding variable pay elements shall be allowed to continue according to the original terms.
Where necessary the Company will pay appropriate relocation travel and subsistence costs.
The Remuneration Committee will seek to ensure that no more is paid than is necessary.
Fees payable to a newlyappointed Chairman or nonexecutive director will be in line with the fee policy in place at the time of appointment.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Performance in line with expectations
24% 64% 100% 1618.3 12% 28% 37% 35%
Performance in line with expectations
25% 63% 100% 12% 28% 37% 35%
Performance in line with expectations
25% 63% 100% 12% 28% 37% 35%
Performance in line with expectations
24% 64% 100% 12% 28% 37% 35%
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Illustrations of application of Remuneration Policy The charts below set out an illustration of the Remuneration Policy for 201718 in line with the Remuneration Policy above and include base salary pension benets and incentives.
The charts provide an illustration of the proportion of total remuneration made up of each component of the Remuneration Policy and the value of each component.
R.
White total remuneration 000
Kemp total remuneration 000
Lorimer total remuneration 000
Memmott total remuneration 000 Base salary benets and pension Annual bonus LTIP 61
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Three scenarios have been illustrated for each executive director Fixed pay Annual Bonus LTIP Minimum performance Fixed elements of remuneration  base salary benets and pension only.
Base salary is the latest known salary i. page 64.
No bonus.
No LTIP vesting.
Performance in line with expectations 50% of salary awarded for achieving target performance.
20% of maximum award vesting i.
25% of salary for achieving target performance.
Maximum performance 100% of salary awarded for achieving maximum performance.
100% of maximum award vesting i.
125% of salary for achieving maximum performance.
LTIP awards are included in the scenarios above at face value with no share price movement included.
Service contracts Executive directors contracts are on a rolling basis and may be terminated on 12 months notice by the Company or on 6 months notice by the executive.
Service contracts for new directors will generally be limited to 12 months notice by the Company.
In line with the Remuneration Policy approved at the 2014 AGM service contracts entered into prior to this date provide for a notice period of 12 months except during the six months following either a takeover of or by the Company or a Company reconstruction.
Under these conditions and certain circumstances the executive directors are entitled to a liquidated damages payment equal to the executive directors basic salary at termination plus the value of all contractual benets for a two year period.
In the event this liquidated damages payment is triggered the executive director will also be deemed to be a good leaver for the purposes of the Companys share schemes.
Given the size of the Company and the sector dynamics at the time the directors were recruited the Remuneration Committee considered this provision appropriate in order to attract and retain high calibre executive directors.
The Remuneration Committee is cognisant of the fact that these provisions do not reect best practice.
It has therefore previously considered the alternatives available to exit these contractual arrangements including contractual buyout.
However the Remuneration Committee concluded that it was not feasible to place a value on these rights in order to remove them from the contracts which would be acceptable to both parties.
It therefore determined that the most appropriate approach would be to maintain the legacy provisions however for all future appointments after the approval of the 2014 Remuneration Policy these provisions have not and will not apply.
S.
Lorimers service contract does not therefore include the legacy provisions.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed for an initial period of three years subject to annual reelection by shareholders in accordance with the Code.
Their appointments are terminable by either the Company or the directors themselves upon three months notice without compensation.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Payments for loss of oce The principles on which the determination of payments for loss of oce will be approached are set out below
Payment in lieu of notice Payments to executive directors upon termination of their service contracts will be equal to 12 months base salary or the highest annual rate earned by the executive during the preceding three years whichever is higher plus benets in kind and pension contributions at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
Annual Bonus This will be at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee on an individual basis and the decision as to whether or not to award a bonus in full or in part will be dependent upon a number of factors including the circumstances of the individuals departure and their contribution to the business during the bonus period in question.
Any bonus amounts paid will typically be prorated for time in service to termination and will subject to performance be paid at the usual time.
LTIP The extent to which any award under the LTIP will vest would be determined based on the leaver provisions contained within the LTIP rules.
The Remuneration Committee shall determine when awards vest in accordance with those provisions.
Awards will normally lapse if the participant leaves employment before vesting.
However awards may vest in good leaver circumstances including death disability illhealth injury sale of the participants employer or any other reason determined by the Remuneration
Any good leaver awards will vest at the date of cessation of employment unless the Remuneration Committee decides they should vest at the normal vesting date.
In either case the extent to which an award vests will be determined by the Remuneration Committee taking into account the extent to which the performance conditions have been satised and unless the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise the period of time that has elapsed from the date of grant to the date of cessation of employment.
The
Remuneration Committee may vest the award on any other basis if it believes there are exceptional circumstances which warrant that.
Options are exercisable for six months from leaving employment or six months from the normal vesting date as appropriate.
Change of control Awards under the LTIP will generally vest early on a takeover merger or other corporate reorganisation.
The Remuneration Committee will determine the level of vesting taking account of performance conditions and unless the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise prorating for time where applicable.
Alternatively participants may be allowed or required to exchange their awards for awards over shares in the acquiring company.
Awards under all employee share schemes will be expected to vest on a change of control and those which have to meet specic requirements to benet from permitted tax benets will vest in accordance with those requirements.
Mitigation The executive directors service contracts do not provide for any reduction in payments for mitigation or for early payment.
Other payments Payments may be made under the Companys all employee share plans which are governed by HMRC taxadvantaged plan rules and which cover certain leaver provisions.
There is no discretionary treatment of leavers under these plans.
In appropriate circumstances payments may also be made in respect of accrued holiday outplacement and legal fees.
Where a buyout award is made under the Listing Rules then the leaver provisions would be determined at the time of the award.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make additional exit payments where such payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement or compromise of any claim arising in connection with the termination of a directors oce or employment.
In doing so the Remuneration Committee will recognise and balance the interests of shareholders and the departing executive director as well as the interests of the remaining directors.
Where the Remuneration Committee retains discretion it will be used to provide exibility in certain situations taking into account the particular circumstances of the directors departure and performance.
Statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company The Remuneration Committee generally considers pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Company when considering the executive directors remuneration.
When considering base salary increases the Remuneration Committee reviews overall levels of base pay increases oered to other employees.
Employees are not actively consulted on directors remuneration.
The Company has regular contact with union bodies on matters of pay and remuneration for employees covered by collective bargaining or consultation arrangements.
Existing contractual arrangements The Remuneration Committee retains discretion to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of oce outside the policy in this report where the terms of the payment were agreed before the policy came into eect where the terms of the payment were agreed at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee the payment was not in consideration of the individual becoming a director of the Company or to satisfy contractual commitments under legacy remuneration arrangements.
For these purposes the term payments includes the satisfaction of awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
The Remuneration Committee may make minor changes to this policy which do not have a material advantage to directors to aid in its operation or implementation taking into account the interests of shareholders but without the need to seek shareholder approval.
Statement of consideration of shareholder views The Remuneration Committee is committed to an ongoing dialogue with shareholders and welcomes feedback on executive and nonexecutive directors remuneration.
Shareholder guidelines In order to further align the executive directors long term interests with those of shareholders the Remuneration Committee has updated its share ownership guidelines applicable from 201718.
The guidelines require that with eect from 201718 executive directors retain all shares acquired under Company sponsored share plans and retain half of any bonus payout after tax to purchase shares in the Company until the value of their shareholding is equal to 125% of gross basic salary.
Until this shareholding is acquired the executive directors may not without Remuneration Committee approval sell shares other than to nance any tax liabilities arising from the vesting of LTIP awards.
Payments in relation to existing remuneration arrangements The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments andor payments for loss of oce including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the Remuneration Policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i. ii. iii.
Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Remuneration Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Annual report on remuneration The following parts of the Remuneration Report are subject to audit other than the elements explaining the application of the Remuneration Policy for 201718.
Single gure table  audited information The aggregate remuneration provided to directors who have served as directors in the year ended 28 January 2017 is set out below along with the aggregate remuneration provided to such directors for the year ended 30 January 2016.
Year ended 28 January 2017
Salaryfees
Benets
Bonus
Long term incentives
Total remuneration
R.
White 443 3tel915
Lorimer J.
Kemp A.
Memmott Nonexecutive
Nicolson 136     136
Barr 46     46
Griths 56     56
Powell 46     46
Ritchie 54     54 Total 1482 9tel2569 Year ended 30 January 2016
Salaryfees
Benets
Bonus
Long term incentives
Total remuneration
R.
S.
J.
A.
Nonexecutive
J.
Nicolson 133     133
Barr 45     45
Griths 55     55
Powell 45     45
Ritchie 44     44 Total 1442 130  323 358 2253 The total long term incentives gure of 323000 for the year ended 30 January 2016 is the gain made by directors in the year ended 28 January 2017 on the LTIP awards that vested on 9 April 2016.
No other long term incentive schemes were in place for the year to 28 January 2017.
D.
Ritchie was appointed as a nonexecutive director on 1 April 2015.
The long term incentives gure for the year ended 30 January 2016 has been restated to reect the market value of the shares that vested on 9 April 2016 as at that date.
The long term incentives gure for the year ended 30 January 2016 set out in the Annual Report 201516 used the average closing share price for the three months ended 30 January 2016 as an estimate of the market value of those shares.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The gures in the single gure table above are derived from the following a Salary and fees The amount of salaryfees received in the year.
A salary sacrice arrangement is operated by the Company.
Employees who join this arrangement no longer pay contributions to the pension schemes but receive a lower taxable salary.
Directors salaries are shown gross of salary sacrice pension contributions. b Benets The value of benets received in the year.
These include car allowance fuel benet the value of SAYE options vesting in the year and AESOP free and matching shares awarded in the year.
SAYE option shares are valued at the market price of the option shares at the date of vesting less the option exercise price.
AESOP free and matching shares are valued at market value at the date of award.
Details of the executive directors interests in the SAYE are set out on page 76. bonus payout was determined is provided on page 67. d Long term incentives The value of LTIP awards that vest in respect of the year.
LTIP the shares which will vest in respect of the year have been valued based on the average market value of the shares over the three month period ended 28 January 2017.
The value of the shares which vested in respect of the prior year was the market value of the shares on the vesting date.
Details of the executive directors interests in the LTIP are set out on page 75. for individuals in the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme the Scheme dened contribution section the Companys contributions to the dened contribution section excluding any pension contributions made in respect of an individual under the Companys salary sacrice arrangement for individuals in the Schemes dened benet section the additional value achieved in the year calculated using the HMRC method using a multiplier of 20 and the value of the accrued liability for the year in respect of the Companys contribution for each director participating in the URBS.
Further details of pension benets are set out on pages 69 to 71.
Individual elements of remuneration Base salary and fees Base salaries for individual executive directors for the year ended 28 January 2017 and for the following year are set out in the table below Executive director Base salary for year ended 28 January 2017 Base salary for year ending 27 January 2018
R.
White 443 451 1.8%
Lorimer 262 267 1.8%
Kemp 232 237 1.8%
Memmott 207 211 1.8% 66
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Details of nonexecutive directors fees for the year ended 28 January 2017 and for the following year are set out in the table below Nonexecutive director fee Year ended 28 January 2017 Year ending 27 January 2018
Chairman of the Company 137 139 1.8% Basic fee 46 47 1.8% Additional fee for chairing Audit Committee 8 8 0% Additional fee for chairing Remuneration Committee 8 8 0% Additional fee for Senior Independent Director 2 2 0% Benets  audited information The benets gure for each of the executive directors is detailed as follows Year ended 28 January 2017 Executive Director Car and fuel benet
AESOP awards
R.
White 26  4 30
Lorimer 19  4 23
Kemp 19  4 23
Memmott 19  4 23 Total 83  16 99 Year ended 30 January 2016 Executive Director Car and fuel benet
AESOP awards
R.
White S.
Lorimer 19   19
Kemp A.
Memmott Total The value of the AESOP awards are the sum of the AESOP free and matching shares awarded to the directors in the year.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Annual bonus The maximum annual bonus award opportunity for each executive director in respect of the year ended 28 January 2017 was 100% of salary with 80% of the bonus assessed against the achievement of prot before tax excluding exceptional items compared against a set of prot targets including a threshold and maximum level and 20% based on nonnancial strategic measures.
The executive directors earned a total of 241000 as annual bonus for the year representing 23% of R.
Whites and S.
Lorimers salary and 18% of J.
Kemps and A.
Memmotts salary.
The target for the proportion of the annual bonus based on prot before tax and performance against that target is set out in the table below.
50% of this element of the bonus could be earned for ontarget performance with zero paid for threshold performance and a linear scale through to full payment of this element of the bonus for performance at or above the maximum target.
Threshold target On target
Actual performance
Actual percentage of bonus Prot before tax excluding exceptional items 42.0m 44.0m 46.0m 42.4m 80% 8% Nonnancial strategic measure targets were set around the Companys key areas of strategic focus.
For R.
White these targets focused on business reaction to the Soft Drinks Industry Levy brand innovation and distribution plus leading the signicant change programmes in the year.
Following strong progress across these targets the Remuneration Committee considered it appropriate to pay a bonus equal to 15% of salary to R.
White.
For the other executive directors their non nancial strategic measure targets focused on areas including optimisation of the new Business Process Redesign systems launched in the second half of 2015 brand innovation enhanced operational eectiveness improved supply chain eciency and further development of the Groups governance and reporting processes.
The Remuneration Committee assessed progress against the strategic targets for each of the other executive directors and considered it appropriate to pay a bonus of 15% of salary to S.
Lorimer and 10% of salary to J.
Kemp and A.
Memmott.
Annual bonus for 201718 For the 201718 nancial year an element of the annual bonus 20% of basic salary will continue to be assessed against strategic measures to align the reward structure with key strategic priorities and to encourage behaviours which facilitate protable growth and the future development of the business.
The remainder of the annual bonus will continue to be assessed against growth in Group prot before tax.
Performance targets will be set at challenging levels in a similar manner to those of previous years with 50% of this element of the annual bonus being earned for ontarget performance.
The actual performance targets are not disclosed as they are considered to be commercially sensitive at this time and should therefore remain condential to the Company.
The Remuneration Committee will continue to disclose how the bonus earned relates to performance against the targets on a retrospective basis.
No changes are proposed to the maximum annual bonus opportunity which will remain at 100% of salary.
Long term incentives  audited information Awards vesting in respect of the nancial period LTIP awards granted in June 2014 were subject to the achievement of an average EPS growth performance condition over a three year period ended 28 January 2017.
Threshold vesting at 20% of the maximum award
Three year average EPS growth in excess of CPI 100% 10% 32.5% There is straightline vesting between the points and no reward below threshold performance.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance
Directors Remuneration Report continued
Details of LTIP awards vesting in respect of the nancial period are set out below Year ended 28 January 2017 Executive Director Total shares
Award rate % Shares awarded
Share price LTIP value
White 84354 40.02% 36426 5.02 183
Lorimer 20325 40.02% 8727 5.02 44
Kemp 44234 40.02% 19101 5.02 96
Memmott 39399 40.02% 17013 5.02 85 Total 188312 81267 408 Shares vesting under the LTIP for the year ended 28 January 2017 include dividend equivalents from the award date for each Director.
The long term incentives gure for the year ended 28 January 2017 has been valued using the average closing share price for the three months ended 28 January 2017 as an estimate of the value of the incentive as the actual value of the award will not be nalised until the closing share price is known when the incentive vests in June 2017.
With the exception of S.
Lorimer executive directors were granted ESOS awards in the form of market value options under the HMRC taxecient section of the ESOS.
These ESOS awards were subject to the same performance measures as the LTIP awards and therefore 1914 of the 4784 ESOS awards granted will vest for each of the executive directors.
If the ESOS awards are exercised at a gain then the LTIP awards will be scaled back to the same value to ensure that the total pretax value delivered to participants remains unchanged.
Year ended 30 January 2016 Executive Director Total shares
Award rate % Shares awarded
Share price at vesting LTIP value
White 75645 37.89% 28662 5.29 152
Lorimer 10162 37.89% 3850 5.29 20
Kemp 39667 37.89% 15030 5.29 80
Memmott 35332 37.89% 13387 5.29 71 Total 160806 60929 323 The long term incentives gure for the year ended 30 January 2016 has been restated to reect the market value of the shares that vested on 9 April 2016 as at that date.
The long term incentives gure for the year ended 30 January 2016 set out in the Annual Report 201516 used the average closing share price for the three months ended 30 January 2016 as an estimate of the market value of those shares.
Awards granted during the nancial period During the year ended 28 January 2017 the following LTIP awards were granted equating to 125% of salary.
Executive Director Type of award Number of shares Market value at grant % of award vesting at threshold %
Years
R.
White LTIP award 105636 557 20.0 3
Lorimer
LTIP award 62416 329 20.0 3 ESOS award 5703 30 20.0 3
Kemp LTIP award 55394 292 20.0 3
Memmott LTIP award 49339 260 20.0 3 ESOS awards were granted in the form of market value options under the HMRC taxecient section of the ESOS and are subject to the same performance measures as apply to the LTIP awards.
If the ESOS awards are exercised at a gain then the LTIP awards will be scaled back to the same value to ensure that the total pretax value delivered to participants remains unchanged.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The LTIP awards are subject to the following EPS performance measure % linked to award
Maximum vesting at 100% of the maximum award Cumulative EPS for 201617 201718 and 201819 100% 90p 100.5p There is straightline vesting between the points and no reward below threshold performance.
The salary used in the calculation of the award is the individual directors salary at 1 April 2016.
Long term incentives for 201718 LTIP awards granted in 2017 will be subject to cumulative EPS performance for 201718 201819 and 201920.
20% of the maximum award will vest for achieving threshold performance and 100% of the maximum award will vest for achieving maximum performance.
There will be straightline vesting between the points and no vesting below threshold performance.
The EPS targets for these LTIP awards are still to be determined given ongoing assessment of the anticipated impact of the new Soft Drinks Industry Levy which will inuence EPS during the vesting period.
Details of the LTIP awards and the EPS targets will be disclosed at the time the LTIP awards are granted and in next years Annual Report on Remuneration.
Awards made to the executive directors in 2017 will be subject to a maximum of 125% of salary.
Total pension entitlements  audited information Executive directors are all members of the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme the Scheme.
The Scheme has a dened benet section and a dened contribution section.
The dened benet section was closed to new entrants from 14 August 2003 and to future accrual from 1 May 2016.
R.
White and A.
Memmott are members of the dened benet section.
Company contributions which exclude any pension contributions made in respect of an individual under the Companys salary sacrice arrangement are detailed in the following table Year ended 28 January 2017
Dened benet
URBS
Investment
Total
R.
S.
Lorimer  10 46  56
Kemp  10 40  50
Memmott 19 10 47  76
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Year ended 30 January 2016
Dened benet
URBS
Investment
Total
R.
S.
Lorimer  28 20  48
Kemp  A.
Memmott
Total
The URBS is the A.
BARR p.
Unfunded Retirement Benet Scheme for executive directors.
Please see below for further details.
Details of the entitlements accruing to the two directors who are deferred members of the dened benet section are detailed in the table below
28 January 2017
Retirement Age
White 68 63
Memmott 46 63 The normal retirement age specied in the Scheme rules for R.
White and A.
Memmott is age 63 however both are also entitled under the Scheme rules to retire at age 60 without an actuarial reduction to their pension benets and without any consent required.
Early retirement can be taken at age 55 subject to Company consent.
The accrued pension would be reduced relative to age 60 to take account of its early payment.
R.
White ceased his accrual under the dened benet plan on 5 April 2011.
Under the terms of his service contract R.
White is entitled to revaluation of his deferred benets in line with RPI until his normal retirement date.
The rules of the Scheme provide for revaluation increases in deferment in line with CPI.
R.
White elected for Fixed Protection 2012 to protect his benets accrued under the Scheme.
To enable R.
White to continue to benet from Fixed Protection 2012 his deferred benets are revalued in line with CPI and to the extent that RPI exceeds CPI in any year a corresponding additional contribution is made to his URBS.
In the year ended 28 January 2017 this has resulted in an additional accrual of 14680 being included in
Whites URBS for that year and forms part of the 130000 URBS gure included in the pension table above.
In addition
White will continue to be entitled to receive life assurance benets as if he were in pensionable service under the Scheme until his normal retirement date notwithstanding the termination of his employment with the Company but only in circumstances where he is a good leaver.
A.
Memmott ceased his accrual under the dened benet plan on 1 March 2008.
His accrued benets retain a link to his nal pensionable salary.
Dependants of the executive directors are eligible for dependants pensions and the payment of a lump sum in the event of death in service.
Where the Scheme provides a pension on a dened benet basis nal pensionable salary is used to determine the directors pension entitlement.
Where benets are provided on a dened contribution basis the benets depend on the directors accumulated fund.
Lump sum life assurance cover is provided at four or eight times pensionable salary dependent upon the date of joining the Scheme.
Directors Remuneration Report continued 71
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The Company paid contributions to the dened contribution section of the Scheme during the year in respect of J.
Kemp
A.
Memmott and S.
Lorimer.
These are shown in the Dened Contribution column in the total pension entitlements table above.
During the year ended 28 January 2017 R.
White J.
Kemp A.
Memmott and S.
Lorimer participated in the A.
BARR p.
Unfunded Retirement Benet Scheme URBS with the agreement of the Company.
The URBS was approved by the Remuneration Committee and is an unfunded employer nanced retirement benets scheme.
It was established to satisfy the Companys contractual obligations to provide retirement benets for the benet of the executive directors.
The maximum Company contribution under the URBS in respect of R.
White is 26% of his salary.
The maximum combined Company contribution under the dened contribution section of the Scheme and the URBS in respect of the remaining executive directors is 19% of salary or 26% of salary following the executives 50th birthday.
The URBS gure for the directors represents a Company contribution only.
An accrued liability of 1317323 201516 982272 is included in the closing balance sheet for the URBS.
The liability has been accrued in respect of the directors as follows Executive Director Accrual at 28 January 2017 Accrual at 30 January 2016
White 1068701 900972
Lorimer 79057 20312
Kemp 87135 35998
Memmott 82430 24990 Total URBS liability 1317323 982272 Payments to past directors There were no payments made to past directors during the year in respect of services provided to the Company as a director.
Payments for loss of oce No payments for loss of oce were made during the year.
Statement of directors shareholding and share interests  audited information The Remuneration Committee has updated its share ownership guidelines applicable from 201718 and these are disclosed in the Remuneration Policy on page 63.
Prior to 201718 executive directors were required to retain all shares acquired under Company sponsored share plans until the value of their shareholding is equal to 100% of gross basic salary.
At the year end
White J.
Kemp and A.
Memmott met the 100% of gross basic salary requirement applicable for the year ended 28 January 2017.
S.
Lorimer was appointed to the Board on 5 January 2015 and is to build up a shareholding equal to 100% of his gross basic salary.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance The interests of each executive director of the Company as at 28 January 2017 including those held by their connected persons were as set out below.
Unvested
Director Type
Exercised during the year Vested but unexercised during the year Subject to performance conditions Not subject to performance conditions Total as at 28 January
R.
White Shares 372755     372755 LTIP shares  28662  278569  278569 ESOS shares    4784  4784 SAYE options     4771 4771 AESOP free shares  701 AESOP matching shares  116   492 492
Lorimer Shares 4294     4294 LTIP shares  3850  135078  135078 ESOS shares    5703 SAYE options     4232 4232 AESOP free shares  701 AESOP matching shares  117   135 135 Shares  nonbenecial holding      1032233
Kemp Shares 151249     151249 ESOS shares    4784  4784 LTIP shares  15030  146077  146077 SAYE options     4564 4564 AESOP free shares  701 AESOP matching shares  116   492 492
Memmott Shares 115602     115602 LTIP shares  13387  130109  130109 ESOS shares    4784  4784 SAYE options     4771 4771 AESOP free shares  701 AESOP matching shares  116   494 494
W.
Barr Shares 12468965     12468965 Shares  nonbenecial holding      10128708
Griths Shares 5400     5400
Nicolson Shares 5500     5500
Powell Shares
Ritchie Shares 1000     1000
Lorimers nonbenecial shareholding represents his position as director of Robert Barr Ltd the trustee of various employee benet trusts.
W.
Barrs nonbenecial shareholding represents his position as trustee of various family and charitable trusts.
The Owned outright shares set out in the table above are the shares owned outright by the directors.
These include any AESOP free shares awarded during the year and any shares retained during the year following the exercise of LTIP awards.
Directors Remuneration Report continued 73
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The number of AESOP free shares awarded and share options exercised under the LTIP in the year are included in the Exercised during the year column.
The following sections of the Remuneration Report are not subject to audit.
Performance graph and table The graph below shows the Companys Total Shareholder Return TSR performance against the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts over the past eight years.
In the opinion of the Board the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts is the most appropriate index against which the TSR of the Company should be measured because it represents a broad equity market index of which the Company is a constituent member.
Total shareholder return 40telYear to January
BARR  FTSE 250 Ex.
CEO remuneration for previous eight years The table below shows details of the total remuneration annual bonus and LTIP paid out for R.
White over the last eight nancial years.
Total remuneration Annual bonus as a % of maximum opportunity % LTIP as a % of maximum opportunity % Year ended 28 January 2017 915 23.0% 40.02% Year ended 30 January 2016 839 0% 37.89% Year ended 25 January 2015 1075 75.5% 31.9% Year ended 26 January 2014 989 57.8% 38.2% Year ended 26 January 2013 1086 50.0% 68.5% Year ended 28 January 2012 1070 46.0% 99.3% Year ended 29 January 2011 1204 75.0% 92.9% Year ended 30 January 2010 951 73.4% 45.0% Percentage change in CEO remuneration The table below sets out in relation to salary taxable benets car allowance fuel benet and AESOP awards only and annual bonus the increase between the pay for the year ended 30 January 2016 and the pay for the year ended 28 January 2017 for R.
White compared to the wider workforce.
For these purposes the wider workforce includes all Group employees who were continuously employed by the Group during the two years ended 28 January 2017 but excludes executive and nonexecutive directors.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Percentage change CEO
Salary 2.1% 2.3% Benets 0.0% 7.3% Annual bonus Na Na No annual bonus was paid out in respect of the year ended 30 January 2016.
This has meant that there is no comparative gure against which an increase can be measured.
Relative importance of spend on pay The following table sets out the percentage change in dividends and the overall expenditure on pay as a whole across the organisation.
Year ended 30 January 2016 Year ended 28 January 2017 000 % change Dividends 15565 16815 8.0% Overall expenditure on pay 43600 35500 18.6% Dividends payable in respect of the year ended 30 January 2016.
Dividends payable in respect of the year ended 28 January 2017.
Overall expenditure on pay for the year ended 28 January 2017 includes the eect of the closure of the dened benet pension scheme to future accrual on 1 May 2016 and the subsequent reduction in pension costs for the remainder of the year.
A full breakdown of sta costs for the Group for the year can be found in note 4 to the accounts.
Consideration by the Directors of matters relating to Directors Remuneration The following directors were members of the Remuneration Committee during the year D.
Ritchie Chairman W.
Barr
M.
Griths J.
Nicolson and P.
Powell.
The Remuneration Committee meets at least twice a year and is responsible for determining within agreed terms of reference all aspects of the remuneration of the executive directors and such other members of senior management as it is designated to consider.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the remuneration trends pay levels and employment conditions across the
The Remuneration Committee is also responsible for recommending the remuneration of the Chairman of the Company to the Board.
During the year the Remuneration Committee received advice from R.
White CEO in respect of the remuneration of the other executive directors who was not in attendance when his own remuneration was being discussed.
The Remuneration Committee received assistance from J.
Barr Company Secretary who acts as secretary to the Committee and from other members of management who may attend meetings by invitation except when matters relating to their own remuneration are being discussed.
External adviser During the year the Remuneration Committee was assisted in its work by the following external consultant Adviser Details of appointment Services provided by the Adviser Fees paid by the Company for advice to the Remuneration Committee and basis of charge Other services provided to the Company in the year ended 28 January 2017 Deloitte LLP Deloitte Appointed by the Remuneration Committee in January 2014 following a competitive tender process.
Review of LTIP metrics and calibration of performance targets.
Assistance with the preparation of the Directors Remuneration Policy and Annual Report on Remuneration.
Attendance at
Committee meetings.
Charged on a timecost basis or xed fee dependent on nature of project.
Share schemes advice.
Consulting services in relation to the implementation of the Enterprise Resource Planning system and Business Process
Directors Remuneration Report continued 75
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The Remuneration Committee is satised that all advice received was objective and independent.
Deloitte is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
Statement of voting at last AGM The following table sets out actual voting in respect of the resolutions to approve the 201516 Annual Report on Remuneration at the Companys AGM on 1 June 2016 and the 201314 Remuneration Policy at the Companys AGM on 27 May 2014.
Resolution Votes for % of vote Votes against % of vote Votes withheld Approve 201516 Annual Report on Remuneration 73218572 99.88 88075 0.12 2353086 Approve 201314 Remuneration Policy 73348375 96.83 2401469 3.17 34666 Additional information Executive directors interests in the LTIP The individual interests of the executive directors under the LTIP are as follows LTIP Director Date of award
30 January
Awarded
Number
Vested
Number
Lapsed
Number
At
28 January Number Exercisable from
White 09 April 2013 75645  28662 46983  09 April 2016 03 June 2014 84354    84354 03 June 2017 15 April 2015 88579    88579 15 April 2018 07 April 2016  105636   105636 07 April 2019
Lorimer 15 April 2015 10162  3850 6312  09 April 2016 15 April 2015 20325    20325 03 June 2017 15 April 2015 52337    52337 15 April 2018 07 April 2016  62416   62416 07 April 2019
Kemp 09 April 2013 39667  15030 24637  09 April 2016 03 June 2014 44234    44234 03 June 2017 15 April 2015 46449    46449 15 April 2018 07 April 2016  55394   55394 07 April 2019
Memmott 09 April 2013 35332  13387 21945  09 April 2016 03 June 2014 39399    39399 03 June 2017 15 April 2015 41371    41371 15 April 2018 07 April 2016  49339   49339 07 April 2019 Executive directors interests in the ESOS The individual interests of the executive directors under the ESOS are as follows ESOS Director Date of award
30 January
Awarded
Number
Vested
Number
Lapsed
Number
At
28 January Number Exercisable from
White 03 June 2014 4784    4784 03 June 2017
Lorimer 07 April 2016  5703   5703 07 April 2019
Kemp 03 June 2014 4784    4784 03 June 2017
Memmott 03 June 2014 4784    4784 03 June 2017 76
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Executive directors interests in the SAYE The individual interests of the executive directors under the SAYE scheme are as follows SAYE Director
30 January
Granted
Number
Exercised
Number
Lapsed
Number
At
28 January
Option
Pence Exercisable from
White 1089    1089 358 01 January 2018 3682    3682 567 01 October 2020
Lorimer 4232    4232 567 01 October 2020
Kemp 670    670 358 01 January 2018 3894    3894 567 01 October 2020
Memmott 1089    1089 358 01 January 2018 3682    3682 567 01 October 2020 AESOP free shares The following free share awards were made to the executive directors under the AESOP scheme Date of award and vesting date Share price on date of award
At
30 January
Shares awarded
Shares vested
Shares lapsed
At
28 January
Value vested
White 15 June 2016 513  701 701   4
Lorimer 15 June 2016 513  701 701   4
Memmott 15 June 2016 513  701 701   4
Kemp 15 June 2016 513  701 701   4
This Report was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by David J.
Ritchie
Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 28 March 2017 Directors Remuneration Report continued 77
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent Company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare Group and parent Company nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent Company nancial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the directors must not approve the nancial statements unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of aairs of the Group and parent Company and of the consolidated prot or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent Company nancial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and prepare the nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the parent Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sucient to show and explain the parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the parent Company and enable them to ensure that its nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the parent Company and the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also responsible for preparing a Directors Report Directors Remuneration Report and Corporate Governance Statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
A copy of the Group and parent Company nancial statements has been placed on the Companys website site The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may dier from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors statement pursuant to the disclosure and transparency rules Each of the directors whose names and functions are set out on pages 36 to 37 of this report conrm that to the best of their knowledge the nancial statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities and nancial position of the Group and parent Company and of the consolidated prot the Annual Report and Accounts includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties faced by the Group and they consider the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board
White
Chief Executive 28 March 2017
Lorimer
Finance Director Statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the annual report and the nancial statements 78
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of A.
BARR p.
Opinions and conclusions arising from our audit 1 Our opinion on the financial statements is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of A.
BARR p. for the year ended 28 January 2017 set out on pages 81 to 128.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 28 January 2017 and of the groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
2 Overview Audit coverage 100% of pbt before exceptionals A summary of our approach Our audit covered 100% of the Groups total revenue profit before tax and total assets and was completed at Cumbernauld and in London.
Materiality
3% pbt before exceptionals Overall group materiality 1.4m which represents 3% of profit before tax before exceptionals this year.
Signicant areas inventory and brand support accruals The accounting for the brand support accruals is a judgemental area.
Inventory is significant and raw materials are subject to price volatility so that is also a judgemental area.
There is no movement in the risk direction in either of these areas year on year.
There has been no change in our assessment of significant risks year on year.
3 Our assessment of risks of material misstatement In arriving at our audit opinion above on the financial statements the risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit were as follows unchanged from 2016 The area of focus Our approach Brand support discounts and costs accrual 14.7 million 2016 13.0 million Refer to page 49 Audit Committee Report pages 88 and 94 accounting policy and page 115 financial disclosures Risk direction unchanged The group agrees sales discounts and other payments with certain of its customers and incurs costs in supporting and developing its brands.
Accounting for such sales discounts and costs is judgmental where promotion and brand support campaigns either span the year end where settlement has not been fully and finally agreed by the year end or where prior year claims arise as the year end accrual can depend on information not yet made available by the customer.
Our procedures in relation to accounting for brand support discounts and costs included testing the groups authorisation controls over such discounts and costs and inspecting the detail of such discounts and costs.
In addition we agreed samples of specific items within accruals at the year end to supporting documentation to assess the accuracy of brand support discounts and costs and to ensure they are reflected in the correct period we agreed a sample of post year end claims relating to the period prior to the year end to accruals at the year end to give us comfort over the completeness of the year end accrual and we considered and challenged the judgements formed by management in relation to any prior year claims from customers that remained within accruals at the year end or claims prior to the year end where there may not be an accrual for costs.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The area of focus Our approach Valuation of inventories 17.3 million 2016 15.6 million Refer to page 49 Audit Committee Report pages 92 and 94 accounting policy and page 111 financial disclosures Risk direction unchanged Inventory is a significant balance and the groups main raw materials are commodities which are subject to price volatility.
As the group uses a standard cost as its basis of inventory valuation changes in price and production levels lead to purchase price or manufacturing variances which if not accounted for correctly may lead to the valuation of inventories being misstated.
In this area our procedures included testing of the controls in relation to purchases comparing the valuation of inventories for a sample of items to supporting documentation e. and challenging managements calculations as appropriate.
In addition our procedures included testing whether the standard costs which form the basis of the inventory valuation were set appropriately e. the time of production of yearend inventory.
4 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the group financial statements as a whole was set at 1.4m 2016 1.4m.
Materiality is determined with reference to a benchmark of group profit before tax normalised to exclude exceptional items.
Materiality this year is based on profit before tax normalized to exclude exceptional items of 43.1 million of which it represents 3% 2016 3% of profit before tax.
We have chosen profit before tax excluding exceptional items because it removes the nonrecurring distorting impact of exceptional items.
We report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected misstatements identified exceeding 250000 2016 250000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
This level was selected and agreed with the Audit Committee as given the nature and scale of operations adjustments under this level were not deemed to be of specific interest to them.
Audits for group reporting purposes were performed for all three components by the group audit team in Cumbernauld and in
These audits covered 100% of group turnover profit before tax and total assets.
The audits performed for group reporting purposes were all performed to materiality levels set individually for each component and ranged from 10000 to 1.1 million.
Materiality
Group materiallity PBT before exceptional items Component materiality range 10000 to 1.1m Group materiallity 3% 5 Our opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 is unmodified In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of A.
BARR p.
5 Our opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 is unmodified continued Based solely on the work required to be undertaken in the course of the audit of the financial statements and from reading the Strategic report and the Directors report we have not identified material misstatements in those reports and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
6 We have nothing to report on the disclosures of principal risks Based on the knowledge we acquired during our audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors statement of risk factors that could affect financial performance on pages 31 to 34 concerning the principal risks their management and based on that the directors assessment and expectations of the groups continuing in operation over the three years to 2020 or the disclosures in note 31 of the financial statements concerning the use of the going concern basis of accounting.
7 We have nothing to report in respect of the matters on which we are required to report by exception Under ISAs UK and Ireland we are required to report to you if based on the knowledge we acquired during our audit we have identified other information in the annual report that contains a material inconsistency with either that knowledge or the financial statements a material misstatement of fact or that is otherwise misleading.
In particular we are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our audit and the directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the groups position and performance business model and strategy or the Audit Committee Report does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the audit committee.
Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the directors statements set out on pages 35 and 42 in relation to going concern and longerterm viability and the part of the Corporate Governance Statement on pages 43 to 47 relating to the companys compliance with the eleven provisions of the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code specified for our review.
We have nothing to report in respect of the above responsibilities.
Scope and responsibilities As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 77 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditscopeukprivate.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body and is subject to important explanations and disclaimers regarding our responsibilities published on our website at siteauditscopeukco2014a which are incorporated into this report as if set out in full and should be read to provide an understanding of the purpose of this report the work we have undertaken and the basis of our opinions.
Alex Sanderson Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 319 St Vincent Street Glasgow G2 5AS 28 March 2017
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 28 Januarytel
Adjusted
Exceptional items
Total
Cost of sales 136.4  136.4 137.5 Gross profit 2 120.7  120.7 121.1 Other income 5 0.7  0.7 Operating expenses 67 78.3 0.7 77.6 79.0 Operating profit 43.1 0.7 43.8 42.1 Finance income 8    0.1 Finance costs 8 0.7  0.7 0.9 Profit before tax 42.4 0.7 43.1 41.3 Tax on profit 9 7.4 0.1 7.5 7.0 Profit attributable to equity holders 35.0 0.6 35.6 34.3 Earnings per share p Basic earnings per share 10 30.78 29.63 Diluted earnings per share 10 30.57 29.51 82
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 28 January 2017 Group Company
Profit after tax 35.6 34.3 25.7 22.8 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurements on defined benefit pension plans 27 21.9 5.4 21.9 5.4 Deferred tax movements on items above 24 2.7 2.5 2.7 2.5 Current tax movements on items above 9 1.0 1.3 1.0 1.3 Items that will be or have been reclassified to profit or loss Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges 16 1.4 1.7 1.4 1.7 Deferred tax movements on items above 24 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.3 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 19.4 5.6 19.4 5.6 Total comprehensive income attributable to equity holders of the parent 16.2 39.9 6.3 28.4 83
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 28 January 2017
Share capital
Share options reserve Cash flow hedge reserve
Total
At 30 January 2016 4.9 0.9 1.4 1.0 171.9 180.1 Profit for the year     35.6 35.6 Other comprehensive income    1.2 18.2 19.4 Total comprehensive income for the year    1.2 17.4 16.2 Company shares purchased for use by employee benefit trusts     1.0 1.0 Proceeds on disposal of shares by employee benefit trusts     1.3 1.3 Recognition of sharebased payment costs   0.9   0.9 Transfer of reserve on share award   0.4  0.4 Deferred tax on items taken direct to reserves   0.1   0.1 Dividends paid     15.6 15.6 At 28 January 2017 4.9 0.9 1.8 0.2 174.4 181.8 At 25 January 2015 4.9 0.9 2.3 0.4 148.8 156.5 Profit for the year     34.3 34.3 Other comprehensive income    1.4 4.2 5.6 Total comprehensive income for the year    1.4 38.5 39.9 Company shares purchased for use by employee benefit trusts     5.1 5.1 Proceeds on disposal of shares by employee benefit trusts     3.1 3.1 Recognition of sharebased payment costs   0.5   0.5 Transfer of reserve on share award   0.9  0.9 Deferred tax on items taken direct to reserves   0.5   0.5 Dividends paid     14.3 14.3
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 28 January 2017
Share capital
Share options reserve Cash flow hedge reserve
Total
At 30 January 2016 4.9 0.9 1.4 1.0 112.2 120.4 Profit for the year     25.7 25.7 Other comprehensive income    1.2 18.2 19.4 Total comprehensive income for the year    1.2 7.5 6.3 Company shares purchased for use by employee benefit trusts     1.0 1.0 Proceeds on disposal of shares by employee benefit trusts     1.3 1.3 Recognition of sharebased payment costs   0.9   0.9 Transfer of reserve on share award   0.4  0.4 Deferred tax on items taken direct to reserves   0.1   0.1 Dividends paid     15.6 15.6 At 28 January 2017 4.9 0.9 1.8 0.2 104.8 112.2 At 25 January 2015 4.9 0.9 2.3 0.4 100.6 108.3 Profit for the year     22.8 22.8 Other comprehensive income    1.4 4.2 5.6 Total comprehensive income for the year    1.4 27.0 28.4 Company shares purchased for use by employee benefit trusts     5.1 5.1 Proceeds on disposal of shares by employee benefit trusts     3.1 3.1 Recognition of sharebased payment costs   0.5   0.5 Transfer of reserve on share award   0.9  0.9 Deferred tax on items taken direct to reserves   0.5   0.5 Dividends paid     14.3 14.3
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Statements of Financial Position as at 28 January 2017 Group Company
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 13 106.0 107.5 18.8 20.0 Property plant and equipment 14 89.4 85.3 89.2 85.3 Pension prepayments 15   17.9 18.3 Investment in subsidiary undertakings 17   84.3 84.3 Current assets Inventories 19 17.3 15.6 16.7 15.2 Trade and other receivables 20 51.4 52.7 52.4 54.1 Derivative financial instruments 16 0.1 1.1 0.1 1.1 Assets classified as held for sale 14 1.3  1.3 Cash and cash equivalents 18 10.1 6.8 6.0 4.4 Total assets 275.6 269.0 286.7 282.7 Current liabilities Loans and other borrowings 21 0.5 0.7 1.7 1.9 Trade and other payables 22 52.3 37.4 123.7 101.9 Derivative financial instruments 16 0.3  0.3 Provisions 23 0.9 0.1 0.9 0.1 Current tax liabilities 2.7 3.6 0.1 0.9 Noncurrent liabilities Loans and other borrowings 21 0.1 17.5 19.5 37.2 Trade and other payables 22  4.5  4.5 Deferred tax liabilities 24 9.6 12.2 0.9 2.9 Retirement benefit obligations 27 27.4 12.9 27.4 12.9 Capital and reserves attributable to equity holders Share capital 28 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 Share premium account 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 Share options reserve 1.8 1.4 1.8 1.4 Cash flow hedge reserve 0.2 1.0 0.2 1.0 Retained earnings 174.4 171.9 104.8 112.2 Total equity and liabilities 275.6 269.0 286.7 282.7 Company Number SC The financial statements on pages 81 to 128 were approved by the Board of directors and authorised for issue on 28 March 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Roger White Stuart Lorimer Chief Executive Finance Director 86
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Cash Flow Statements for the year ended 28 January 2017 Group Company
Operating activities Profit before tax 43.1 41.3 31.0 28.1 Adjustments for Interest receivable 8  0.1 0.8 0.8 Interest payable 8 0.7 0.9 1.5 1.7 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 14 7.1 7.3 7.1 7.3 Amortisation of intangible assets 13 1.5 1.1 1.2 0.8 Sharebased payment costs 0.9 0.5 0.9 0.5 Loss on sale of property plant and equipment  0.2  0.2 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 53.3 51.2 40.9 37.8 IncreaseDecrease in inventories 1.7 1.8 1.5 Decrease in receivables 1.3 0.6 1.7 0.1 IncreaseDecrease in payables 11.0 16.8 18.3 4.5 Difference between employer pension contributions and amounts recognised in the income statement 7.9 0.7 7.9 0.7 Cash generated by operations 56.0 36.1 51.5 32.7 Tax on profit paid 7.2 6.8 4.3 3.9 Net cash from operating activities 48.8 29.3 47.2 28.8 Investing activities Acquisition of subsidiary net of cash acquired  15.7  17.5 Acquisition of intangible assets  4.8  4.8 Purchase of property plant and equipment 12.4 14.7 12.2 14.7 Proceeds on sale of property plant and equipment 0.1 0.9 0.1 1.4 Interest received  0.1 0.8 0.1 Net cash used in investing activities 12.3 34.2 11.3 35.5 Financing activities New loans received 25.5 34.0 25.5 34.0 Loans repaid 43.0 31.5 43.0 31.5 Bank arrangement fees paid  0.1  0.1 Movement in finance lease   0.3 0.8 Purchase of Company shares by employee benefit trusts 1.0 5.1 1.0 5.1 Proceeds from disposal of Company shares by employee benefit trusts 1.3 3.1 1.3 3.1 Dividends paid 15.6 14.3 15.6 14.3 Interest paid 0.2 0.3 1.0 1.7 Net cash used in financing activities 33.0 14.2 34.1 14.8 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 3.5 19.1 1.8 21.5 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 6.2 25.3 3.8 25.3 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 18 9.7 6.2 5.6 3.8 87
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Notes to the Accounts Accounting policies General information
BARR p. the Company and its subsidiaries together the Group manufacture distribute and sell soft drinks.
The Group has manufacturing sites in the UK and sells mainly to customers in the UK with some international sales.
The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchange and incorporated and domiciled in Scotland.
The address of its registered office is Westfield House 4 Mollins Road Cumbernauld G68 9HD.
The financial year represents the 52 weeks ended 28 January 2017 prior financial year 53 weeks ended 30 January 2016.
Summary of significant accounting policies The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
Basis of preparation The consolidated and parent Company financial statements of A.
BARR p.
International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
They have been prepared under the historical cost accounting rules except for the derivative financial instruments and the assets of the Group pension scheme which are stated at fair value and the liabilities of the Group pension scheme which are valued using the projected unit credit method.
The directors have adopted the going concern basis in preparing these accounts for the reasons set out in note 31.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements are disclosed on page 94.
The directors have taken advantage of the exemption available under s408 of the Companies Act 2006 and have not presented an income statement for the Company.
Changes in accounting policy and disclosures a New and amended standards adopted by the Group The following revised IFRSs have been adopted in this consolidated financial information.
The application of these revised IFRSs has not had any material impact on the amounts reported for the current and prior periods.
Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS 1 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation Amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 38 Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20122014 Cycle  IFRS 5 IFRS 7 IAS 19 and IAS 34 b New standards amendments and interpretations issued but not effective for the financial year beginning 31 January 2016 and not adopted early A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are effective for future year ends and have not been applied in preparing these financial statements.
These standards and amendments are listed in the table below.
Note this list is limited to those standards which are expected to impact the Group.
International Accounting Standards and Interpretations Financial year beginning which standard becomes effective Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows 29 January 2017 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Amendments to IAS 12 29 January 2017 Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions Amendments to IFRS 2 28 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 28 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases 27 January 2019 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments 28 January 2018 Standards not yet endorsed by the EU.
Management have considered the potential impact of the implementation of IFRS 9 IFRS 15 and IFRS 16.
It is expected that neither IFRS 9 nor IFRS 15 will have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements of the Group.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Accounting policies continued Changes in accounting policy and disclosures continued b New standards amendments and interpretations issued but not effective for the financial year beginning 31 January 2016 and not adopted early continued It is expected that IFRS 16 will materially affect the consolidated financial statements.
As at the reporting date the Group has noncancellable operating lease commitments of 9.8m refer to note 25 the vast majority of which relate to production equipment held at the Milton Keynes facility.
Management have performed an analysis of these leases to assess the expected impact of IFRS 16.
If IFRS 16 was implemented in the year to 28 January 2017 its effect would be to increase the net book value of property plant and equipment by 9.6m with a corresponding finance lease liability of 11.2m.
The net impact on the income statement for the year ended 28 January 2017 would be immaterial.
To date 6.6m of operating lease rentals have been recognised in respect of the assessed leases.
Under IFRS 16 5.8m of depreciation would have been charged plus a further 1.7m of interest charges.
Consolidation  subsidiaries Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Company.
The Company controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date over which control commences until the date on which control ceases.
The Group applies the acquisition method to account for business combinations.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is the fair values of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interests issued by the Group and for acquisitions prior to 1 July 2009 costs directly attributable to the acquisition.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
Currently there are no noncontrolling interests in any of the entities within the Group.
Goodwill is initially measured as the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred and the fair value of noncontrolling interest over the net identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
If this consideration is lower than the fair value of the net assets of the subsidiary acquired the difference is recognised as a credit in profit or loss.
Intercompany transactions balances income and expenses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Profits and losses resulting from intercompany transactions that are recognised in net assets are also eliminated.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries are consistent with those adopted by the Group.
Revenue recognition Revenue is the net invoiced sales value after deducting promotional sales related discounts invoiced by customers including brand support costs and exclusive of value added tax of goods and services supplied to external customers during the year.
Brand support costs are investments in customer promotional activities.
Sales are recorded based on the price specified in the sales invoices net of any agreed discounts and rebates.
Revenue is recognised when the goods have passed to the buyer and the amount can be measured reliably.
Sales related discounts and rebates are calculated based on the expected amounts necessary to meet the claims of the Groups customers in respect of these discounts and rebates.
Brand support accruals are included in the statement of financial position in respect of these.
Segment reporting An operating segment is a component of the Group that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses including revenues and expenses that relate to transactions with any of the Groups other components and for which discrete financial information is available.
Segment results that are reported to the management committee as chief operating decision maker include items directly attributable to a segment as well as those which can be allocated on a consistent basis.
Foreign currency translation a Functional and presentation currency Functional and presentation currency items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in  Sterling which is the Companys functional and the Groups presentation currency.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance b Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions or valuation where items are remeasured.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement in the same line in which the transaction is recorded.
Exceptional items As permitted by IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements an item is treated as exceptional if it is considered unusual by its nature and scale and is of such significance that separate disclosure is required for the financial statements to be properly understood.
Intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration of an acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the net identifiable assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is included in intangible assets.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment charges.
Impairment charges on goodwill are not reversed.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units for the purpose of impairment testing.
The allocation is made to those cashgenerating units or groups of cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the business combination in which the goodwill arose.
An intangible asset acquired as part of a business combination is recognised outside of goodwill if the asset is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights and its fair value can be measured reliably.
Brands
Separately acquired brands are recognised at cost at the date of purchase.
Brands acquired in a business combination are recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Brands acquired separately or through a business combination are assessed at the date of acquisition as to whether they have an indefinite life.
The assessment includes whether the brand name will continue to trade and the expected lifetime of the brand.
All brands acquired to date have been assessed as having an indefinite life as they are expected to continue to contribute to the long term future of the Group.
The brands are reviewed annually for impairment being carried at cost less accumulated impairment charges.
The fair value of a brand at the date of acquisition is based on the Relief from Royalties method which is a valuation model based on discounted cash flows.
Customer relationships Customer relationships acquired in a business combination are recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
The customer relationships have a finite useful life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated using the straightline method over the expected life of the customer relationship.
The closing balance in the current year represents the carrying value of the customer relationships acquired during the acquisitions of Groupe Rubicon Limited and Funkin Limited.
The fair value of the customer relationships at the acquisition date was based on the Multiple Excess Earnings Method MEEM which is a valuation model based on discounted cash flows.
The useful lives of customer relationships are based on the churn rate of the acquired portfolio and are up to 10 years corresponding to a yearly amortisation of between 10% and 33%.
The useful lives of all intangible assets are reviewed annually and amended as required on a prospective basis.
Internally generated software development costs Internally generated software development costs comprise of internal and third party consultancy costs incurred in relation to the Business Process Redesign project.
Amortisation is charged from the date the software is available for use.
This is calculated using the straightline method over the expected useful life of the software which is 10 years.
Property plant and equipment Land and buildings comprise mainly factories distribution sites and offices.
All property plant and equipment is stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and impairments.
Historical cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the assets.
The purchase price of an asset will include the fair value of the consideration paid to acquire the asset.
Borrowing costs directly attributable to acquisition construction and or production of assets that take a substantial time to complete are capitalised.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment continued Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
The carrying amount of any replaced part is derecognised.
All other repairs and maintenance are charged to the income statement during the financial period in which they are incurred.
Land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is charged from the date that assets other than land are available for use.
It is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost to the residual values of the related assets using the following rates Buildings  1% Leasehold buildings  Term of lease Plant equipment and vehicles  10% to 33% Computer hardware  20% The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each year end date.
The carrying value of the property plant and equipment is reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the recoverable amount may be less than the carrying value.
An assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
An item of property plant and equipment is derecognised on disposal or where no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the net proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised within administration costs in the income statement.
Leases
Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
The Group has two heritable properties held under operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases net of any incentives received from the lessor are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Leases of property plant and equipment where the Group has substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classified as finance leases.
Finance leases are capitalised at the leases commencement at the lower of the fair value of the leased property and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Each lease payment is allocated between the liability and finance charges.
The corresponding rental obligations net of finance charges are included in other long term payables.
The interest element of the finance cost is charged to the income statement over the lease period so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability for each period.
The property plant and equipment acquired under finance leases is depreciated over the shorter of the useful life of the asset and the lease term.
Impairment of nonfinancial assets Assets that have an indefinite useful life are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment charge is recognised in the income statement for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that is based on current market assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to the asset for which the future cash flow estimates have not been adjusted.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows cashgenerating units.
Nonfinancial assets other than goodwill that suffered an impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance A previously recognised impairment loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the assets recoverable amount since the impairment loss was recognised although any reversal cannot result in a carrying amount that would exceed the carrying amount that would have been recognised net of depreciation had no impairment loss been recognised in prior years.
Nonderivative financial instruments Nonderivative financial instruments comprise investments in equity and debt securities trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents loans and borrowings and trade payables.
Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment losses.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the estimated cash flows.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of a bad debt provision account and the amount of the loss is recognised in the income statement within administration costs.
When a trade receivable becomes uncollectable it is written off against the bad debt provision.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Investments
Investments in subsidiaries are carried at cost less impairment in the parent Company accounts.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and call deposits.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a component of cash and cash equivalents for the purpose only of the cash flow statement.
Interestbearing borrowings Interestbearing borrowings are recognised initially at fair value less attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition interestbearing borrowings are stated at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value.
The gain or loss on remeasurement to fair value is recognised immediately in the income statement.
However where derivatives qualify for hedge accounting recognition of any resultant gain or loss depends on the nature of the item being hedged.
At the inception of the transaction the Group documents the relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items as well as its risk management objectives and strategy for undertaking various hedging transactions.
The Group also documents its assessment both at hedge inception and on an ongoing basis of whether the derivatives that are used in hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in fair values or cash flows of hedged items.
The fair values of the derivative instruments used for hedging purposes are disclosed in note 16.
Movements on the hedging reserve in shareholders equity are shown in the statement of changes in equity.
The full fair value of a hedging derivative is classified as noncurrent when the remaining maturity of the hedged item is more than 12 months from the statement of financial position date and as current when the remaining maturity of the hedged item is less than 12 months from the statement of financial position date.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Accounting policies continued Cash flow hedges The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges are recognised in equity.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement within administration costs.
Amounts accumulated in equity are recycled through the income statement in the periods when the hedged item affects profit or loss.
The gain or loss relating to the effective portion of forward foreign currency contracts hedging overseas purchases is recognised in equity.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised in the income statement within administration costs.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss existing in equity at that time remains in equity and is recognised within the income statement when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in the income statement.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs of completing production and selling expenses.
The cost of inventories is based on the firstin firstout principle and includes expenditure incurred in acquiring the inventories and bringing them to their primary distribution location and condition.
This includes direct labour costs and an appropriate share of overheads based on normal operating activity.
Company shares held by employee benefit trusts Company shares are purchased on behalf of employee benefit trusts to satisfy the liability of various employee share schemes.
The amount of the consideration paid including directly attributable costs is recognised as a charge in equity.
Purchased shares are classified as Company shares held by employee benefit trusts and presented as a deduction from retained earnings.
Current and deferred income tax Tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Current tax is charged in the income statement except where it relates to tax on items recognised directly in equity in which case it is charged to equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the year end date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is provided in full using the liability method providing for temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
The following temporary differences are not provided for the initial recognition of goodwill and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will probably not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Where the carrying value of an asset is to be recovered through both use and subsequent disposal a single tax base is attributed to that asset resulting in a single temporary difference being recognised.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the year end date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.
Employee benefits Retirement benefit plans The Group operates two pension schemes as detailed in note 27.
The schemes are generally funded through payments to trusteeadministered funds.
The Group has both defined benefit and defined contribution plans.
Defined contribution pension plans A defined contribution plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions into a separate entity.
Obligations
The Group has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Defined benefit pension plans A defined benefit plan is a pension plan that is not a defined contribution plan.
Typically defined benefit plans define an amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on retirement usually dependent on one or more factors such as age years of service and compensation.
The liability recognised in the statement of financial position in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the present value of plan assets less the fair value of the defined benefit obligation.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of high quality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension liability.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to equity in other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
The Group recognises gains and losses on the settlement of a defined benefit plan when the settlement occurs.
The gain or loss on a settlement is the difference between the present value of the defined benefit obligation being settled as determined on the date of settlement and the settlement price including any plan assets transferred and any payments made directly by the Group in connection with the settlement.
The Groups defined benefit plan was closed to future accrual on 1 May 2016.
Refer to note 27.
Sharebased compensation The Group grants equity settled sharebased payments to certain employees.
These are measured at fair value excluding the effect of non marketbased vesting conditions at the grant date.
The fair value of the equity settled sharebased payment determined at the grant date is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of the shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of non marketbased vesting conditions.
Fair value is measured using the BlackScholes pricing model.
The Group also provides employees with the ability to purchase the Companys ordinary shares at a discount to the current market value through payroll.
The Group records as an expense the fair value of the discount on the shares purchased by the employee as a charge to the income statement and a credit to the share options reserve.
At each year end date the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest based on the non market vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to the share options reserve.
Profitsharing and bonus plans The Group recognises a liability and an expense for various bonuses based on formulae that take into consideration the profit attributable to the Companys shareholders after certain adjustments.
The Group recognises a provision where there is a contractual obligation or where there is a past practice that has created a constructive obligation.
Provisions
A provision is recognised if as the result of a past event the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation that can be estimated reliably and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
A restructuring provision is recognised when the Group has approved a detailed and formal restructuring plan which has been either announced or has commenced.
Future operating costs are not provided for.
Dividend distributions Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Accounting policies continued Key judgements and sources of estimation uncertainty The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities as at the statement of financial position date and the amounts reported for revenues and expenses during the year.
Due to the nature of estimation the actual outcomes may well differ from these estimates.
The principal estimates and judgements that have a significant effect on the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities are discussed below Valuation of inventory judgement Inventory is a significant balance in the consolidated statement of financial position.
The Group purchases commodities for use in the manufacture of soft drinks and these purchases are subject to price volatility.
As the Group uses standard costing to value its inventory management review price variances arising from the purchases of commodities to ensure that the closing inventory correctly reflects the costs incurred in bringing the inventory to its current state and location.
Carrying value of brand support accruals judgement and estimation uncertainty The Group incurs significant costs in the support and development of the Groups brands.
Judgement is required in determining the level of closing accrual required at a year end for promotions and brand support campaigns that either span two financial years or where the costs have not been fully settled by the year end date.
This includes sales related discounts which are included within revenue as disclosed in the revenue recognition policy above.
At 28 January 2017 the closing brand support accrual was 14.7m 30 January 2016 13.0m.
In addition the following area of judgement had an effect on the carrying value of assets and liabilities Retirement benefit obligations estimation uncertainty The determination of any defined benefit pension scheme surplusobligation is based on assumptions determined with independent actuarial advice.
The assumptions used include discount rate inflation pension increases salary increases the expected return on scheme assets and mortality assumptions.
Segment reporting The Groups management committee has been identified as the chief operating decision maker.
The management committee reviews the Groups internal reporting in order to assess performance and allocate resources.
The management committee has determined the operating segments based on these reports.
The management committee considers the business from a product perspective.
This has led to the operating segments identified in the table below there has been no change to the segments during the year after aggregation.
The performance of the operating segments is assessed by reference to their gross profit before exceptional items.
The operating segments disclosed have been aggregated by the nature of the products and the production processes that they share in addition to similar longterm average gross margins for the operating segments.
Year ended 28 January 2017
Still drinks and water
Total
Total revenue 188.3 56.0 12.8 257.1 Gross profit before exceptional items 97.3 17.0 6.4 120.7 Year ended 30 January 2016
Still drinks and water
Total
Total revenue 189.7 57.1 11.8 258.6 Gross profit 98.6 16.9 5.6 121.1 There are no intersegment sales.
All revenue is from external customers.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Other segments represent income from the sale of Funkin cocktail solutions the sale of ice cream and other soft drink related items.
The gross profit from the segment reporting is stated before exceptional costs.
There are no exceptional costs included within gross profit for either year presented.
The gross profit from the segment reporting is reconciled to the total profit before income tax as shown in the consolidated income statement.
All of the assets and liabilities of the Group are managed by the management committee on a central basis rather than at a segment level.
As a result no reconciliation of segment assets and liabilities to the statement of financial position has been disclosed for either of the periods presented.
All of the segments included within Carbonates and Still drinks and water meet the aggregation criteria set out in IFRS 8 Operating Segments.
Geographical information The Group operates predominately in the UK with some worldwide sales.
All of the operations of the Group are based in the UK.
Revenue
Rest of the world 10.5 9.2 The Rest of the world revenue includes sales to Ireland and wholesale export houses.
All of the assets of the Group are located in the UK.
Major customers No single customer accounted for 10% or more of the Groups revenue in either of the years presented.
Profit before tax The following items have been included in arriving at profit before tax Depreciation of property plant and equipment 7.1 7.3 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment  0.2 Research and development costs 1.1 1.1 Impairment of inventories 0.6 0.4 Amortisation of intangible assets 1.5 1.1 Cost of inventories charged in cost of sales 136.4 137.5 Operating lease rentals payable  property 0.4 0.4 Operating lease rentals payable  motor vehicles 1.1 1.1 Operating lease rentals payable  plant 2.0 1.8 Trade receivables impairment movement 0.2 0.4 Acquisition costs note 12  0.7 Sharebased payment costs 0.9 0.5 96
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Profit before tax continued Included within administration costs note 6 is the auditors remuneration including expenses for audit and nonaudit services.
The cost includes services from the Companys auditor and its associates Statutory audit services Fees payable to the auditor of the parent Company and consolidated accounts 88 91 Fees payable to the auditor for other services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 10 20 Nonaudit services Audit related assurance services 21 20 Other assurance services 152 97 Pension advisory services Tax compliance services 68 22 Tax advisory services 15 22 Fees in respect of the Groups pension plans Audit 16 16 Employees and directors 2017 2016 Average monthly number of people employed by the Group including executive directors Production and distribution 743 745 Administration 258 287 1001 1032 Staff costs for the Group for the year Wages and salaries 36.3 37.9 Social security costs 3.8 4.0 Sharebased payments 0.9 0.5 Pension costs  defined contribution plans 3.1 2.8 Pension costs  defined benefit plans 4.8 2.4 Redundancy payments 1.9 Other income 2017 2016
Exceptional items
Total
Compensation received in respect of termination of distribution contract 0.7  0.7 Compensation of 0.7m was received by the Group during the year from a third party distributor who terminated their distribution arrangement before the contract was set to end.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Net operating expenses before exceptional items 2017 2016
Exceptional items
Total
Distribution costs including selling costs 57.6 2.3 59.9 57.3 Administration costs 20.7 3.0 17.7 21.7 Exceptional items Abortive acquisition costs 0.4 Investigation of online sales capabilities 0.5 Redundancy costs  reorganisation of direct sales routes 0.6 Redundancy costs for business reorganisation 2.7 Other costs relating to business reorganisation 0.6 Curtailment gain on closure of pension scheme to future accrual 7.0 Other costs relating to pension scheme closure to future accrual 1.5 Total exceptional net credit 0.7 Items included in selling and distribution costs Redundancy costs  reorganisation of direct sales routes 0.6 Costs relating to closure of pension scheme to future accrual 0.2 Redundancy costs for business reorganisation 1.2 Other costs relating to business reorganisation 0.3 Total included in selling and distribution costs 2.3 Items included in administration costs Abortive acquisition costs 0.4 Investigation of online sales capabilities 0.5 Curtailment gain 7.0 Other costs relating to pension scheme closure to future accrual 1.3 Redundancy costs for business reorganisation 1.5 Other costs relating to business reorganisation 0.3 Total included in administration costs 3.0 Total exceptional net credit 0.7 During the period 0.4m of acquisition fees were incurred in relation to an unsuccessful acquisition.
These costs included advisory and legal fees.
0.5m of advisory costs have been incurred as part of a strategic review of the market threats posed by new and emerging digital trading models.
0.6m of redundancy costs have been incurred arising from a reorganisation of direct sales routes that was completed in the six months ended 30 July 2016.
A further 2.7m of redundancy costs were incurred in the six months ended 28 January 2017 following the announcement of a Company restructuring in September 2016.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Exceptional items continued Following the announcement of the business restructuring and reorganisation a further 0.6m of costs were incurred being mainly recruitment costs accrual for unpaid holiday entitlement business development consultancy fees legal fees and termination costs for employee vehicles and mobile phone contracts.
The Groups defined benefit pension scheme closed to future accrual in May 2016.
This resulted in a 7.0m curtailment gain.
Offsetting the curtailment gain is a further 1.5m of costs incurred in relation to the closure of the defined benefit pension scheme.
This includes the cost of 1.3m past service cost for one years additional service negotiated with the active members of the scheme and 0.2m of further costs relating to the closure of the scheme to future accrual.
Finance income and finance costs Finance income Interest receivable  0.1 Finance costs Interest payable 0.1 0.1 Finance costs relating to defined benefit pension plans note 27 0.5 0.7 Amortisation of loan arrangement fees 0.1 0.1
2017 2016
Adjusted
Exceptional items
Total
Current tax Current tax on profits for the year 8.6 0.9 7.7 9.0 Adjustments in respect of prior years 0.4  0.4 0.7 Total current tax expensecredit 8.2 0.9 7.3 8.3 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of Temporary differences 0.2 1.0 1.2 0.3 Adjustment for change in deferred tax rate 0.9  0.9 1.6 Adjustments in respect of prior years 0.1  0.1 Total deferred tax creditexpense note 24 0.8 1.0 0.2 1.3 Total tax expense 7.4 0.1 7.5 7.0 In addition to the above movements in deferred tax a deferred tax credit of 2.9m 2016 charge of 2.8m has been recognised in other comprehensive income and a charge of 0.1m 2016 a charge of 0.5m has been taken direct to reserves note 24.
A current tax credit of 1.0m 2016 a credit of 1.3m has been recognised in other comprehensive income.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The tax on the Groups profit before tax differs from the amount that would arise using the tax rate applicable to the consolidated profits of the Group as follows % % Profit before tax 43.1 41.3 Tax at 20.0% 2016 20.2% 8.6 20.0 8.3 20.2 Tax effects of Items that are not deductible in determining taxable profit 0.3 0.7 1.0 2.4 Current tax adjustment in respect of prior years 0.4 0.9 0.7 1.7 Deferred tax adjustment in respect of prior years 0.1 0.2 Deferred tax adjustment in respect of change of deferred tax rate 0.9 2.1 1.6 3.9 Total tax expense 7.5 17.4 7.0 17.1 The weighted average tax rate was 17.4% 2016 17.1%.
The Chancellor announced in his Autumn Budget on 23 November 2016 that the main rate of corporation tax will be reduced to 19% from 1 April 2017 and 17% from 1 April 2020 and the future charges will reduce accordingly.
Finance No.2 Bill 2016 became substantively enacted on 23 November 2016.
The deferred tax liability at 28 January 2017 has therefore been calculated having regard to the rate of 17% substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Earnings per share Basic earnings per share have been calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to equity holders of the parent by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year excluding shares held by the employee share scheme trusts.
2017 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Company m 35.6 34.3 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 115664757 115714487 Basic earnings per share pence 30.78 29.63 For diluted earnings per share the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue is adjusted to assume conversion of all potentially dilutive ordinary shares.
These represent share options granted to employees where the exercise price is less than the average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year.
The number of shares calculated as above is compared with the number of shares that would have been issued assuming the exercise of the share options.
2017 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Company m 35.6 34.3 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 115664757 115714487 Adjustment for dilutive effect of share options 781074 505871 Diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 116445831 116220358 Diluted earnings per share pence 30.57 29.51 100
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Earnings per share continued The underlying EPS figure is calculated by using Profit attributable to equity holders before exceptional items 2017 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Company before exceptional items m 35.0 34.3 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 115664757 115714487 Underlying earnings per share pence 30.26 29.63 This measure has been included in the financial statements as it provides a closer guide to the underlying financial performance as the calculation excludes the effect of exceptional items.
Dividends per share per share Final dividend 9.97p 9.01p 11.5 10.4 Interim dividend 3.53p 3.36p 4.1 3.9 The directors have proposed a final dividend in respect of the year ended 28 January 2017 of 10.87p per share amounting to a dividend of 12.7m.
It will be paid on 9 June 2017 to all shareholders who are on the Register of Members on 12 May 2017.
Dividends payable in respect of the financial year were as follows per share per share Final dividend proposed in respect of financial year 10.87p 9.97p Interim dividend paid 3.53p 3.36p Acquisition of subsidiary On 2 February 2015 the Group acquired 100% of the share capital of Funkin Limited Funkin a company which offers a broad range of premium cocktail solutions including fruit pures cocktail mixers and syrups.
Consideration transferred The following table summarises the acquisitiondate fair value of each major class of consideration transferred Cash paid in the year ended 30 January 2016 17.5 Contingent consideration payable in the year ending 27 January 2018 4.5 Total consideration 22.0 Contingent consideration The Group has agreed to pay the former owners of Funkin a contingent consideration based on the achievement of certain financial targets by Funkin in the two years ending 28 January 2017.
The fair value of the contingent consideration arrangement of 4.5m was estimated by assessing the expected growth of Funkin over the two years trading post acquisition.
No discount rate has been applied to the fair value estimate of the contingent consideration due to the short time period the effect of discounting has a negligible effect on the fair value.
Management believe that Funkin has achieved the financial targets and that the contingent consideration of 4.5m will be paid to the former owners before 29 July 2017.
This will be subject to the audit of the Funkin statutory accounts for the year ended 31 January 2017 and completion of the necessary legal documentation relating to the acquisition.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Intangible assets
Goodwill
Brands
Customer relationships
Software development costs
Cost
At 25 January 2015 23.3 50.3 3.5 0.7 7.1 84.9 Acquisitions through business combinations 15.7 6.8 0.4   22.9 Acquisitions     4.8 4.8 At 30 January 2016 39.0 57.1 3.9 0.7 11.9 112.6 At 30 January 2016 39.0 57.1 3.9 0.7 11.9 112.6
At 28 January 2017 39.0 57.1 3.9 0.7 11.9 112.6 Amortisation and impairment losses At 25 January 2015 0.4 0.3 2.6 0.7  4.0 Amortisation for the year   0.3  0.8 1.1 At 30 January 2016 0.4 0.3 2.9 0.7 0.8 5.1 Amortisation for the year   0.3  1.2 1.5 At 28 January 2017 0.4 0.3 3.2 0.7 2.0 6.6 Carrying amounts At 28 January 2017 38.6 56.8 0.7  9.9 106.0 At 30 January 2016 38.6 56.8 1.0  11.1 107.5 The acquisitions through business combinations for the year to 30 January 2016 represent the goodwill brands and customer relationships obtained in the acquisition of Funkin Limited.
Software development costs were incurred in the year to 30 January 2016 which represented internally generated software development costs and third party consultancy costs incurred in relation to the Business Process Redesign project.
This project introduced a more effective modern and robust Enterprise Resource Planning software.
This project was completed during the year to 30 January 2016.
The opening customer relationships balance represents intangible assets recognised on the acquisition of the Strathmore Water business and Groupe Rubicon Limited.
The amortisation charge represents the spreading of the cost over the assets expected useful lives the Strathmore customer relationships are fully amortised.
The Rubicon asset has two years remaining and the Funkin asset has eight years remaining.
These periods have been reviewed at the statement of financial position date and remain appropriate.
The amortisation costs for the year ended 28 January 2017 have been included in the income statement as administration costs.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Intangible assets continued
Goodwill
Brands
Customer relationships
Software development costs
Cost
At 25 January 2015 1.9 7.3 1.0 0.7 7.1 18.0 Acquisitions     4.8 4.8 At 30 January 2016 1.9 7.3 1.0 0.7 11.9 22.8 At 28 January 2017 1.9 7.3 1.0 0.7 11.9 22.8 Amortisation and impairment losses At 25 January 2015  0.3 1.0 0.7  2.0 Amortisation for the year     0.8 0.8 At 30 January 2016  0.3 1.0 0.7 0.8 2.8 Amortisation for the year     1.2 1.2 At 28 January 2017  0.3 1.0 0.7 2.0 4.0 Carrying amounts At 28 January 2017 1.9 7.0   9.9 18.8 At 30 January 2016 1.9 7.0   11.1 20.0 All intangible assets noted above were either recognised on the acquisition of the Strathmore Water business or represent internally generated software development costs and third party consultancy costs incurred in relation to the Business Process Redesign project.
At 28 January 2017 the Group and the Company had entered into contractual commitments for the acquisition of intangible assets amounting to nil 2016 nil.
Impairment tests for goodwill and brands For impairment testing goodwill and brands are allocated to the cashgenerating unit CGU representing the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
The aggregate carrying amounts of goodwill allocated to each CGU are At 28 January 2017
Brands
Customer relationships
Rubicon operating unit 21.0 43.0 0.4 64.4 Funkin operating unit 15.7 6.8 0.3 22.8 Strathmore operating unit 1.9 7.0  8.9
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance At 30 January 2016
Brands
Customer relationships
Rubicon operating unit 21.0 43.0 0.7 64.7 Funkin operating unit 15.7 6.8 0.3 22.8 Strathmore operating unit 1.9 7.0  8.9 The recoverable amount of a CGU is determined based on value in use calculations.
These calculations use pretax cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by management which cover a three year period.
Cash flows beyond the three years are extrapolated using the growth rates and other key assumptions as stated below Key assumptions 2017 2016 Gross margin % Growth rate % Discount rate % Gross margin % Growth rate % Discount rate % Rubicon operating unit 30.2 2.25 10.25 38.5 2.25 11.00 Funkin operating unit 48.5 2.25 10.25 52.4 2.25 11.00 Strathmore operating unit 37.3 2.25 10.25 30.2 2.25 11.00 The budgeted gross margin is based on past performance and managements expectation of market development.
The weighted average growth rates used are consistent with the forecasts included in industry reports.
The discount rates used are pretax.
The discount rate reflects managements estimate of pretax cost of capital adjusted for the specific risks impacting on each operating unit.
The estimated pretax cost of capital is a benchmark for the Group provided by an independent third party.
Advertising and promotional costs are included in the analysis using latest annual budgets for the year to 27 January 2018 and projected costs thereafter.
Sensitivity analysis was carried out on the above calculations to review possible levels of impairment after adjusting discount rates.
At a pretax rate of 15% none of the CGUs were impaired.
Whilst cash flow projections used within the impairment reviews are subject to inherent uncertainty changes within reason to the key assumptions applied in assessing the value in use calculation would not result in a change in the impairment conclusions reached.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Property plant and equipment Land and buildings
Freehold
Long leasehold
Assets under construction
Cost or deemed cost At 25 January 2015 55.1 0.5 76.1 6.7 138.4 Additions 5.8  3.8 4.5 14.1 Transfer from assets under construction 0.5  5.2 5.7 Disposals 2.4 0.1 2.0  4.5 At 30 January 2016 59.0 0.4 83.1 5.5 148.0 Additions 0.8  4.1 7.7 12.6 Transfer from assets under construction 4.5  5.0 9.5 Disposals   1.3  1.3 Reclassified as held for sale 2.0    2.0 At 28 January 2017 62.3 0.4 90.9 3.7 157.3
At 25 January 2015 5.7 0.5 52.6  58.8 Amount charged for year 1.0  6.3  7.3 Disposals 1.3 0.1 2.0  3.4 At 30 January 2016 5.4 0.4 56.9  62.7 Amount charged for year 0.6  6.5  7.1 Disposals   1.2  1.2 On assets reclassified as held for sale 0.7    0.7 At 28 January 2017 5.3 0.4 62.2  67.9 Net book value As at 28 January 2017 57.0  28.7 3.7 89.4 As at 30 January 2016 53.6  26.2 5.5 85.3 The Walthamstow distribution site has been classified as held for sale at 28 January 2017.
The site was sold on 1 February 2017 for 3.8m.
The Group has entered into a 3 year operating lease to continue to operate from the site for the short term.
The cost and accumulated depreciation in relation to the asset is detailed below Cost 2.0 Accumulated depreciation 0.7 Net book value 1.3 105
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Property plant and equipment includes the following amounts where the Group and Company is a lessee under a finance lease Costcapitalised finance lease 0.3 0.2 Accumulated depreciation 0.1 Net book value 0.2 0.2 Land and buildings
Freehold
Long leasehold
Assets under construction
Cost or deemed cost At 25 January 2015 54.7 0.4 74.5 6.7 136.3 Additions 5.8  3.8 4.5 14.1 Transfer from assets under construction 0.5  5.2 5.7 Transfer of assets from other Group companies 0.1  0.8  0.9 Disposals 2.4 0.1 2.0  4.5 At 30 January 2016 58.7 0.3 82.3 5.5 146.8 Additions 0.8  3.8 7.7 12.3 Transfer from assets under construction 4.5  5.0 9.5 Disposals   0.8  0.8 Reclassified as held for sale 2.0    2.0 At 28 January 2017 62.0 0.3 90.3 3.7 156.3
At 25 January 2015 5.4 0.4 51.3  57.1 Amount charged for year 1.0  6.3  7.3 Disposals 1.3 0.1 1.5  2.9 At 30 January 2016 5.1 0.3 56.1  61.5 Amount charged for year 0.6  6.5  7.1 Disposals   0.8  0.8 On assets reclassified as held for sale 0.7    0.7 At 28 January 2017 5.0 0.3 61.8  67.1 Net book value As at 28 January 2017 57.0  28.5 3.7 89.2 As at 30 January 2016 53.6  26.2 5.5 85.3 At 28 January 2017 the Group and the Company had entered into contractual commitments for the acquisition of property plant and equipment amounting to 6.0m 2016 6.1m.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Property plant and equipment continued Property plant and equipment includes the following amounts where the Group and Company is a lessee under a finance lease Costcapitalised finance lease 23.5 23.3 Accumulated depreciation 3.1 2.7 Net book value 20.4 20.6 The Walthamstow distribution site has been classified as held for sale at 28 January 2017.
The site was sold on 1 February 2017 for 3.8m.
The Group has entered into a 3 year operating lease to continue to operate from the site for the short term.
Pension prepayment The Company established the A.
BARR p.
Scottish Limited Partnership the Partnership in the year to 26 January 2014 and through the Partnership has entered into a long term pension funding arrangement with the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme.
Company
Noncurrent 17.9 18.3 Current 1.2 1.2 Prepayment of pension contributions 19.1 19.5 The element of the prepayment classified as current is included within the prepayments figure of 4.1m 2016 3.8m as set out in note 20.
The Partnership is controlled by A.
BARR p. and its results are consolidated by the Group.
A structured entity is an entity that has been designed so that voting or similar rights are not the dominant factor in deciding who controls the entity such as when any voting rights relate only to administrative tasks and the relevant activities are directed by means of contractual arrangements.
As outlined in note 27 during a prior year certain freehold properties were transferred to a limited partnership a structured entity established by the Group the main purpose of which is to lease these properties to a Group company and as a result to provide the Groups pension scheme with a distribution of the profits of the Partnership.
The distribution is subject to discretion exercisable by the Group in certain circumstances however given that the Group has the ability to control the limited Partnership by making an additional contribution into the scheme it is the view of the directors that the Group controls the limited Partnership and therefore it is treated as a consolidated entity.
The carrying value of the properties sold to the Partnership and leased back to the Company remain included on the Groups and Companys balance sheet and continued to be depreciated in line with the Groups and Companys accounting policies with the Group and Company retaining full operational control over these properties.
The Group has taken advantage of the exemption conferred by Regulation 7 of the Partnerships Accounts Regulations 2008 and has therefore not appended the accounts of this qualifying partnership to these financial statements.
Separate accounts for the Partnership are not required to be and have not been filed at UK Companies House.
As part of the funding arrangement the Company made a one off payment to the Pension Scheme of 20.4m to allow it to invest in the Partnership and this is treated as a prepayment of pension contributions.
Further information on the asset backed funding arrangement is included within note 27.
As the Partnership results are consolidated within the Group results no prepayment is recognised in the consolidated statement of financial position.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Derivative financial instruments Group and Company Fair value hierarchy IFRS 7 requires all financial instruments carried at fair value to be analysed under the following levels Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. as prices or indirectly i. derived from prices.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an active market for example overthecounter derivatives is determined by using valuation techniques.
These valuation techniques maximise the use of observable market data where it is available and rely as little as possible on entity specific estimates.
The fair value of the forward foreign exchange contracts is determined using forward exchange rates at the date of the statement of financial position with the resulting value discounted accordingly as relevant.
The following tables show the carrying amounts and fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities including their levels in the fair value hierarchy.
It does not include fair value information for financial assets and financial liabilities not measured at fair value if the carrying amount is a reasonable approximation of fair value.
Carrying amount Fair value
At 28 January 2017 Fair value hedging instruments Loans and receivables Other financial liabilities at amortised cost
Level 2 Financial assets not measured at fair value Foreign exchange contracts used for hedging 0.1   0.1 0.1 Trade receivables  48.3  48.3 48.3 Cash and cash equivalents  10.1  10.1 10.1 Financial liabilities measured at fair value Contingent consideration note 12   4.5 4.5 4.5 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Foreign exchange contracts used for hedging 0.3   0.3 0.3 Finance lease liabilities   0.2 0.2 0.2 Unsecured bank borrowings   0.4 0.4 0.4 Trade payables   15.8 15.8 15.8
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Derivative financial instruments continued Group and Company continued Carrying amount Fair value
At 30 January 2016 Fair value hedging instruments Loans and receivables Other financial liabilities at amortised cost
Level 2 Financial assets not measured at fair value Foreign exchange contracts used for hedging 1.1   1.1 1.1 Trade receivables  50.0  50.0 50.0 Cash and cash equivalents  6.8  6.8 6.8 Financial liabilities measured at fair value Contingent consideration note 12   4.5 4.5 4.5 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Finance lease liabilities   0.2 0.2 0.2 Unsecured bank borrowings   18.0 18.0 18.0 Trade payables   8.4 8.4 8.4 Carrying amount Fair value
At 28 January 2017 Fair value hedging instruments Loans and receivables Other financial liabilities at amortised cost
Level 2 Financial assets not measured at fair value Foreign exchange contracts used for hedging 0.1   0.1 0.1 Trade and other receivables and amounts due from subsidiary companies  48.3  48.3 48.3 Cash and cash equivalents  6.0  6.0 6.0 Financial liabilities measured at fair value Contingent consideration note 12   4.5 4.5 4.5 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Foreign exchange contracts used for hedging 0.3   0.3 0.3 Unsecured bank borrowings   0.4 0.4 0.4 Finance lease liabilities   20.8 20.8 20.8 Trade payables and amounts due to other subsidiary companies   88.4 88.4 88.4
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Carrying amount Fair value
At 30 January 2016 Fair value hedging instruments Loans and receivables Other financial liabilities at amortised cost
Level 2 Financial assets not measured at fair value Foreign exchange contracts used for hedging 1.1   1.1 1.1 Trade and other receivables and amounts due from subsidiary companies  50.3  50.3 50.3 Cash and cash equivalents  4.4  4.4 4.4 Financial liabilities measured at fair value Contingent consideration note 12   4.5 4.5 4.5 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Unsecured bank borrowings   18.0 18.0 18.0 Finance lease liabilities   21.1 21.1 19.7 Trade payables and amounts due to other subsidiary companies   73.6 73.6 73.6 Cash and cash equivalents held by the Group have an original maturity of three months or less.
The carrying amount of these assets approximates to their fair value.
The fair value of the current trade and other receivables and the current trade and other payables approximates to their book value as none of the balances are interest bearing.
For the current borrowings the impact of discounting is not significant as the borrowings will be paid within 12 months of the year end date.
The carrying amount approximates their fair value.
The fair value of the noncurrent borrowings is based on cash flows discounted using the current variable interest rate charged on the borrowings of 1.5% a discount rate of 1.5% and are within level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
Contingent consideration The Group has agreed to pay the former owners of Funkin a contingent consideration based on the achievement of certain financial targets by Funkin in the two years from the date of its acquisition by the Group.
The potential undiscounted amount of all future payments that the Group could make under the acquisition agreement is between nil and 4.5m.
The fair value of the contingent consideration arrangement of 4.5m was estimated by assessing the expected growth of Funkin over the two years trading post acquisition.
No discount rate has been applied to the fair value estimate of the contingent consideration as due to the short time period the effect of discounting has a negligible effect on the fair value.
The Group expects to make a payment of 4.5m within 6 months of the year ended 28 January 2017 note 12.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Investment in subsidiaries Opening investment in subsidiaries 84.3 62.3 Investment in year  22.0 Closing investment in subsidiaries 84.3 84.3 During the year the following dormant subsidiary companies were dissolved Hampshire Mineral Water Company Limited Barr Leasing Limited Rubicon Beverages Limited Rubicon Products Limited St Clements UK Limited Funkin France Limited The investment made by the Company in the year to 30 January 2016 was in relation to the acquisition of Funkin Limited.
The carrying value of the investment represents the fair value of the consideration paid at the date the investments were acquired.
The principal subsidiaries are as follows Principal subsidiary Principal activity Country of incorporation Country of principal operations Funkin Limited Distribution and selling of cocktail solutions England UK Funkin USA Limited Distribution and selling of cocktail solutions England USA Rubicon Drinks Limited Manufacture distribution and selling of soft drinks England UK
BARR p. holds 100% of the equity and votes of the subsidiaries.
The subsidiaries have the same year end as A.
BARR p. and have been included in the Group consolidation.
The companies listed are the trading subsidiaries.
Refer to note 32 for a full list of subsidiary companies.
Cash and cash equivalents Group Company Cash and cash equivalents 10.1 6.8 6.0 4.4 Cash and cash equivalents include the following for the purposes of the cash flow statements Group Company Cash and cash equivalents 10.1 6.8 6.0 4.4 Bank overdrafts note 21 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.6 The credit quality of the holder of the Cash at bank is A3 rated 2016 AA rated.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Group Company Materials 7.1 4.8 7.1 4.7 Finished goods 10.2 10.8 9.6 10.5 Trade and other receivables Group Company Trade receivables 48.7 50.6 46.9 49.2 Less provision for impairment of receivables 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.6 Trade receivables  net 48.3 50.0 46.6 48.6 Prepayments 3.1 2.7 4.1 3.8 Amounts due by subsidiary companies   1.7 1.7 The fair values of the trade and other receivables are taken to be their book values less any provision for impairment as there are no interest bearing receivables.
The amounts due from subsidiary companies are considered to be fully recoverable.
The Groups and Companys most significant customer a UK major customer accounts for 6.1m of the trade receivables carrying amount at 28 January 2017 30 January 2016 7.3m.
The ageing of the Group and Companys trade receivables and their related impairment at the reporting date was
Gross
Impairment
Gross
Impairment
Not past due 43.2  44.9 0.1 Past due 1 to 30 days 3.6 0.1 3.4 0.1 Past due 31 to 60 days 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.1 Past due 61 days 1.3 0.1 2.0 0.3
Gross
Impairment
Gross
Impairment
Not past due 42.4  44.4 0.1 Past due 1 to 30 days 2.8 0.1 2.7 0.1 Past due 31 to 60 days 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 Past due 61 days 1.3 0.1 1.8 0.3 Group Companytel 2016 Trade receivables overdue in excess of 30 days 3.9% 4.6% 3.6% 4.4% 112
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Trade and other receivables continued The maximum exposure for both the Group and the Company to credit risk for trade receivables at the reporting date by type of customer was Group Company Major customers 46.1 48.6 44.3 47.2 Direct to store customers 2.6 2.0 2.6 2.0 The carrying amount of the Group and Companys external trade and other receivables are denominated in the following currencies Group Company UK Sterling 50.7 51.7 50.0 51.4 Movements in the Group and Companys provisions for impairment of trade receivables were as follows Group Company Group and Company At start of year 0.6 1.0 0.6 1.0 Net provision released during the year 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.4 At end of year 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.6 The provision allowance in respect of trade receivables is used to record impairment losses unless the Group and Company are satisfied that no recovery of the amount owing is possible.
At that point the amounts are considered irrecoverable and are written off against the trade receivable directly with a corresponding charge being recorded in administration costs.
Where trade receivables are past due an assessment is made of individual customers and the outstanding balance.
No provision is required in respect of amounts owed by subsidiary companies.
The creation and release of the trade receivables provision has been included within administration costs in the income statement.
The other classes within trade and other receivables do not contain impaired assets.
Borrowings
Group Company
Bank borrowings 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.6 Finance lease liabilities 0.1 0.1 1.3 1.3
Bank borrowings  17.5  17.5 Finance lease liabilities 0.1 0.1 19.5 19.8 Total borrowings 0.6 18.3 21.2 39.2 All of the Groups borrowings are denominated in UK Sterling.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance During the year to 30 January 2016 the Group renegotiated a 35m revolving credit facility.
A total arrangement fee of 0.1m was incurred and is being amortised over the life of the loan facility.
The revolving credit facility was due to expire in January 2018 but has been replaced by a 20m revolving credit facility that will expire in January 2022 see note 33.
A further 10m revolving credit facility was arranged in the year to 26 January 2014 and expired in March 2017.
During the year to 26 January 2014 certain property assets were transferred into A.
BARR Scottish Limited Partnership and are being leased back to the Company under a 21 year lease agreement.
Further details are included within note 27.
The amortisation charge is included in the finance costs line in the income statement.
Group Company Current bank borrowings 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.6 Finance lease liability payable within one year 0.1 0.1 1.3 1.3 Current loans and other borrowings disclosed in the statement of financial position 0.5 0.7 1.7 1.9 Group Company Noncurrent bank borrowings  17.5  17.5 Unamortised arrangement fee  0.1  0.1 Finance lease liability payable after more than one year 0.1 0.1 19.5 19.8 Noncurrent loans and other borrowings disclosed in the statement of financial position 0.1 17.5 19.5 37.2 The movements in the Group borrowings are analysed as follows Opening borrowings balance 18.1 15.1 Borrowings made 25.5 34.0 Repayments of borrowings 43.0 31.5 Bank overdrafts repaiddrawn 0.2 0.5 Closing borrowings balance 0.4 18.1 Reconciliation to net fundsdebt Closing borrowings balance 0.4 18.1 Cash and cash equivalents note 18 10.1 6.8 Net fundsdebt 9.7 11.3 114
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Borrowings continued The undrawn facilities at 28 January 2017 were as follows Total facility
Undrawn
Revolving credit facility  three years expires January 2018 35.0  35.0 Revolving credit facility  three years expires February 2017 10.0  10.0 Overdraft 5.0 0.4 4.6 The undrawn facilities as at 30 January 2016 were as follows Total facility
Undrawn
Revolving credit facility  three years expires January 2018 35.0 17.5 17.5 Revolving credit facility  three years expires February 2017 10.0  10.0 Overdraft 5.0 0.6 4.4 The maturity profile of the borrowings is as follows Less than one year 0.4 0.6 One to two years Two to five years  17.5 The gross value of finance lease liabilities for the Group is as follows Gross finance lease liabilities  minimum lease payments Less than one year 0.1 0.1 Two to five years 0.1 0.1 Later than five years Future finance charges on finance lease liabilities Present value of finance lease liabilities 0.2 0.2 The present value of finance lease liabilities for the Group is as follows Less than one year 0.1 0.1 Two to five years 0.1 0.1 Later than five years The Group leases certain IT assets under a finance lease agreement.
The lease term is 5 years.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance The gross value of finance lease liabilities for the Company is as follows Gross finance lease liabilities  minimum lease payments Less than one year 1.3 1.3 Two to five years 5.3 5.2 Later than five years 23.8 24.1 Future finance charges on finance lease liabilities 9.6 9.5 Present value of finance lease liabilities 20.8 21.1 The present value of finance lease liabilities for the Company is as follows Less than one year 1.3 1.3 Two to five years 4.9 4.8 Later than five years 14.6 15.0 As well as the IT assets noted within the Group the Company leases certain property assets under a finance lease agreement.
The lease term is 21 years and further details can be found within note 27.
Trade and other payables Group Company Trade payables 15.8 8.4 14.5 7.4 Other taxes and social security costs 5.1 5.3 5.1 4.8 Accruals 26.9 23.7 25.7 23.5 Contingent consideration note 12 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 Amounts due to subsidiary companies   73.9 66.2 Noncurrent  4.5  4.5 The tables below analyse the Group and Companys financial liabilities into the relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period to the contractual maturity date as at the statement of financial position date.
The amounts disclosed in the table below are the contractual undiscounted cash flows
At 28 January 2017
Finance lease liabilities
Financial instruments
0 to 6 months 0.4  15.8 4.5 20.7 7 to 12 months  0.1   0.1 1 to 2 years  0.1   0.1 2 to 5 years 5 years
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Trade and other payables continued At 30 January 2016
Finance lease liabilities
Financial instruments
0 to 6 months 0.7  8.4  9.1 7 to 12 months 0.1    0.1 1 to 2 years 0.2 0.1  4.5 4.8 2 to 5 years 17.5 0.1   17.6 5 years As trade payables are not interest bearing their fair value is taken to be the book value.
The movement in the borrowings analysis from 30 January 2016 to 28 January 2017 reflects the repayments of the revolving credit facility that was outstanding at 30 January 2016.
Disclosures relating to borrowings are included in note 21.
Company
At 28 January 2017
Finance lease liabilities
Financial instruments
7 to 12 months  0.7   0.7 1 to 2 years  1.3   1.3 2 to 5 years  4.0   4.0 5 years  23.8   23.8 At 30 January 2016
Finance lease liabilities
Financial instruments
0 to 6 months 0.7 0.6 7.4  8.7 7 to 12 months 0.1 0.6   0.7 1 to 2 years 0.2 1.3  4.5 6.0 2 to 5 years 17.5 4.0   21.5 5 years  24.1   24.1 As trade payables are not interest bearing their fair value is taken to be the book value.
Disclosures relating to borrowings are included in note 21.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Group and Company Opening provision 0.1 1.0 Provision created during the year 0.9 Provision utilised during the year 0.1 0.9 Closing provision 0.9 0.1 The closing provision relates to the redundancy costs associated with the business reorganisation that has taken place in the year.
During the prior year provisions related to redundancy costs associated with the closure of the Tredegar manufacturing facility.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities
Retirement benefit obligations
Foreign exchange contract hedge
Retirement benefit obligations
Accelerated tax depreciation
Net deferred tax liability Credit to the income statement note 9 0.4 0.1  0.5   0.8 0.8 1.3 Charge to other comprehensive income 2.5  0.3 2.8     2.8 Deferred tax arising on acquisition       1.5 1.5 1.5 Transfer between asset and liability categories 0.5  0.2 0.3 0.5 0.2  0.3 Charge to other reserves  0.5  0.5     0.5 At 30 January 2016  0.3  0.3 0.5 0.2 11.8 12.5 12.2 Chargecredit to the income statement note 9  0.2  0.2 1.0  1.0  0.2 Credit to other comprehensive income     2.7 0.2  2.9 2.9 Transfer between asset and liability categories 1.2   1.2 1.2   1.2 Charge to other reserves  0.1  0.1     0.1 At 28 January 2017 1.2   1.2   10.8 10.8 9.6 118
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Deferred tax assets and liabilities continued
Retirement benefit obligations
Foreign exchange contract hedge
Retirement benefit obligations
Accelerated tax depreciation
Net deferred tax liability asset At 25 January 2015 2.6 0.7 0.1 3.4 1.0  2.4 3.4 Creditcharge to the income statement note 9 0.4 0.1  0.5   0.1 0.1 0.4 Charge to other comprehensive income 2.5  0.3 2.8     2.8 Transfer between asset and liability categories 0.5  0.2 0.3 0.5 0.2  0.3 Charge to other reserves  0.5  0.5     0.5 At 30 January 2016  0.3  0.3 0.5 0.2 2.5 3.2 2.9 Chargecredit to the income statement  0.2  0.2 1.0  0.4 0.6 0.8 Credit to other comprehensive income     2.7 0.2  2.9 2.9 Transfer between asset and liability categories 1.2   1.2 1.2   1.2 Charge to other reserves  0.1  0.1     0.1 At 28 January 2017 1.2   1.2   2.1 2.1 0.9 No deferred tax asset is recognised in the statement of financial position for unused capital losses of 4.0m 2016 2.4m.
Lease commitments The total future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows for the Group and Company No later than one year 3.1 3.1 More than one year but not more than five years 6.7 9.1 Due beyond five years  2.7 Total lease commitments 9.8 14.9 Financial risk management Financial risk factors The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks market risk including foreign exchange risk cash flow and fair value interest rate risk and price risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments to hedge certain risk exposures.
Risk management is carried out in accordance with policies approved by the board of directors.
Management identifies evaluates and manages financial risks in close cooperation with the Groups business units.
The Board provides guidance on overall market risk management including use of derivative financial instruments and investment of excess liquidity.
In addition treasury matters are dealt with by the Treasury Committee.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Market risk Foreign exchange risk The Group operates internationally.
The Group primarily buys and sells in Sterling but does make purchases and sales denominated in US Dollars and Euros.
Due to the hedging arrangements that have been in place for the year ended 28 January 2017 if Sterling had weakenedstrengthened by 10% against the US Dollar or Euro with all other variables held constant there would have been an immaterial effect on posttax profit year ended 30 January 2016 immaterial impact on posttax profit.
The Group periodically enters into forward option contracts to purchase foreign currencies for known purchases where the value and volume of trading purchases is known.
The Treasury Committee assesses whether hedge accounting should be applied for each forward option contract.
Price risk The Group is not exposed to equity securities price risk because no such investments are held by the Group other than within Pension Scheme assets.
The Group purchases a wide range of commodities in the ordinary course of business.
Exposure to changes in the market price of certain of these commodities including sugar plastic aluminium and mango is managed through the use of forward physical supply contracts primarily to convert floating or indexed prices to fixed prices.
The use of such contracts to hedge commodity exposures is governed by the Groups risk management policies and is continually monitored by the Treasury Committee.
Commodity derivatives also provide a way to meet customers pricing requirements whilst achieving a price structure consistent with the Groups overall pricing strategy.
All of the Groups commodity derivatives are treated as own use contracts which are outside the scope of IAS 39 since they are both entered into and continue to be held for the purposes of the Groups ordinary operations and are not net settled the Group takes physical delivery of the commodity concerned.
Own use contracts do not require accounting entries until the commodity purchase actually crystallises.
The majority of the Groups forward physical contracts and commodity derivatives have original maturities of less than one year.
As all of the commodity contracts qualify for the own use treatment no sensitivity analysis has been carried out.
Cash flow and fair value interest rate risk As the Group has no significant interestbearing assets the Groups income and operating cash inflows are substantially independent of changes in market interest rates.
The Groups interest rate risk arises from long term borrowings.
Borrowings obtained at variable rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk which is partially offset by cash held at variable rates.
For the year ended 28 January 2017 if interest rates on Sterlingdenominated borrowings at that date had been 0.5% higher lower with all other variables held constant there would have been an immaterial change in the posttax profit for the year year ended 30 January 2016 immaterial impact.
Credit risk Credit risk is managed on a Group basis.
Credit risk arises from cash and cash equivalents and deposits with banks and financial institutions as well as credit exposures to major and direct to store customers including outstanding receivables and committed transactions.
For banks and financial institutions only independently rated parties with a minimum rating of A are accepted.
If major customers are independently rated these ratings are used.
Otherwise if there is no independent rating risk control processes assess the credit quality of the customer taking into account its financial position past experience and other factors.
Individual
The utilisation of credit limits is regularly monitored.
Sales to direct to store customers are largely settled in cash in order to manage credit risk from smaller independent stores.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Financial risk management continued Liquidity risk Prudent liquidity risk management implies maintaining sufficient cash and marketable securities the availability of funding through an adequate amount of committed credit facilities and the ability to close out market positions.
Due to the dynamic nature of the underlying business the Group maintains flexibility in funding by maintaining sufficient cash reserves and the availability of borrowing facilities.
Management monitors rolling forecasts of the Groups liquidity reserve which comprises undrawn borrowing facilities and cash and cash equivalents on the basis of expected cash flows.
This is carried out at a Group level and involves projecting forward cash flows and considering the level of liquid assets necessary to meet excesses of expenditure relative to income.
Capital risk management The Group defines capital as being net cashdebt plus equity.
The Groups objective when managing capital is to maintain an appropriate capital structure to balance the needs of the Group whilst operating within its bank covenants.
The Group manages its capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions.
To maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group has a number of options available to it including modifying dividend payments to shareholders returning capital to shareholders or issuing new shares.
In this way the Group balances returns to shareholders between long term growth and current returns whilst maintaining capital discipline in relation to investing activities and taking any necessary action on costs to respond to the current environment.
The Group monitors existing equity in issuance on the basis of the net cashdebtEBITDA ratio.
Net cashdebt is calculated as being the net of cash and cash equivalents interestbearing loans and borrowings.
The net debt position is discussed in the Financial Review on pages 26 to 30.
The net cashdebtEBITDA ratio enables the Group to plan its capital requirements in the medium term.
The Group uses this measure to provide useful information to financial institutions and investors.
The Group believes that the current net cashdebtEBITDA ratio together with existing shares in issuance provides an efficient capital structure and an acceptable level of financial flexibility.
For the year ended 28 January 2017 there was a net cash surplus of 9.7m year ended 30 January 2016 net debt of 11.3m.
The Group monitors capital efficiency on the basis of the return on capital employed ratio ROCE.
In the financial year ended 28 January 2017 ROCE increased to 20.2% from 18.8%.
Retirement benefit obligations During the year the Company operated two pension schemes the A.
BARR p.
Defined Contribution Scheme and the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme.
The latter is a funded defined benefit scheme based on final salary which also includes a defined contribution section for the pension provision of new executive entrants.
Under the defined benefit scheme the employees are entitled to retirement benefits based on final pensionable pay.
No other postretirement benefits are provided.
Defined benefit scheme actuarial valuation The assets of the schemes are held separately from those of the Company and are invested in managed funds.
A full valuation of the defined benefit scheme was conducted as at 5 April 2014 using the attained age method.
A surplus of 12.2m was determined at the valuation date.
The defined benefit scheme exposes the Group to actuarial risks such as longevity risk interest rate risk and market investment risk.
Responsibility for governance of the plans including investment decisions and contribution schedules lies jointly with the Company and the board of trustees.
The board of trustees is composed of representatives from the Company scheme members as set out in the plans rules.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Defined benefit scheme IAS 19 information The full actuarial valuation carried out at 5 April 2014 was updated to 28 January 2017 by a qualified independent actuary.
The valuation used for the defined benefit schemes has been based on market conditions as at the Company year end.
The amounts recognised in the statement of financial position are as follows Group and Company Present value of funded obligations 139.2 120.2 Fair value of scheme assets 111.8 107.3 Deficit recognised in the statement of financial position 27.4 12.9 The movement in the defined benefit obligation over the year is as follows Group and Company Fair value of plan assets Present value of obligation
At 30 January 2016 107.3 120.2 12.9 Current service cost  0.4 0.4 Past service cost  1.3 1.3 Curtailment gain  7.0 7.0 Interest incomeexpense 3.9 4.4 0.5 Total cost recognised in income statement 3.9 0.9 4.8
Total remeasurements recognised in other comprehensive income 3.5 25.4 21.9
Employer contributions 2.6  2.6 Benefits paid 5.5 5.5 Premiums paid Total cash outflow 2.9 5.5 2.6 As at 28 January 2017 111.8 139.2 27.4 On 1 May 2016 the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme was closed to future accrual following a negotiated agreement between the Company and the board of trustees.
A curtailment gain of 7.0m arose on the closure to future accrual.
A past service cost of 1.3m has also been recognised as active members were awarded one years further service as part of the negotiated closure.
Following the closure the Company incurred a further 0.2m of costs in relation to the closure of the Scheme to future accrual.
These three items have been treated as exceptional items in the year to 28 January 2017 note 7.
The Company made a 1.0m contribution to the scheme in May 2016 and will make a further 1.0m contribution to the scheme in May 2017.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Retirement benefit obligations continued Defined benefit scheme IAS 19 information continued The movement in the defined benefit obligation in the year to 30 January 2016 was as follows Group and Company Fair value of plan assets Present value of obligation
At 25 January 2015 112.7 131.0 18.3 Current service cost  1.9 1.9 Curtailment gain  0.2 0.2 Interest incomeexpense 3.6 4.3 0.7 Total cost recognised in income statement 3.6 6.0 2.4
Total remeasurements recognised in other comprehensive income 7.3 12.7 5.4
Employer contributions 2.4  2.4 Benefits paid 4.0 4.0 Premiums paid 0.1 0.1 Total cash outflow 1.7 4.1 2.4 As at 30 January 2016 107.3 120.2 12.9 Asset backed funding arrangement During the year to 26 January 2014 the Company established the A.
BARR Scottish Limited Partnership the Partnership and through the Partnership has entered into a long term pension funding arrangement with the Pension Scheme.
Under this arrangement certain property assets were transferred into the Partnership and are being leased back to A.
BARR p. annually in line with inflation.
The Partnership is controlled by A.
BARR p. and its results are consolidated by the Group.
The value of the properties transferred into the Partnership remains included on the Groups and Companys balance sheet at carrying values at the date of transfer with the Group and Company retaining full operational control over these properties.
At the end of the term of the relevant lease or earlier if the Scheme becomes fully funded to the extent that the members benefits can be secured with an insurance company the Company has the option to repurchase the properties in the Partnership for an agreed fixed price.
Financial assumptions 2017 2016 Discount rate 3.0% 3.7% Future salary increases 4.7% 4.2% Inflation assumption 3.7% 3.2% 123
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Mortality assumptions 2017 2016 Average future life expectancy in years for a male pensioner aged 65 25 25 Average future life expectancy in years for a female pensioner aged 65 25 24 Average future life expectancy in years at age 65 for a male nonpensioner aged 45 27 27 Average future life expectancy in years at age 65 for a female nonpensioner aged 45 27 27 The mortality tables adopted in finalising the fair value of the liabilities are the 2013 VITA tables based on the members year of birth.
This assumes that the expected age at death for both males and females is 90 to 92 depending on their age at 28 January 2017.
The fair value of scheme assets at the year end dates is analysed as follows Property 0.5 0.4 0.3 Buyin policy 31.5 Total market value of scheme assets 111.8 107.3 112.7 97.2 86.9 Sensitivity review The sensitivity of the overall pension liability to changes in the weighted principle assumptions is Impact on overall liabilities Change in assumption Year to 28 January 2017 Year to 30 January 2016 Discount rate Increasedecrease by 0.1% Decreasesincreases liabilities by 2.3m Decreasesincreases liabilities by 2.2m Rate of inflation Increasedecrease by 0.1% Increasesdecreases liabilities by 2.0m Increasesdecreases liabilities by 1.5m Life expectancy Increasedecrease by 1 year Increasesdecreases liabilities by 5.6m Increasesdecreases liabilities by 4.3m Methods and assumptions used in preparing the sensitivity analyses The sensitivities disclosed were calculated using approximate methods taking into account the duration of the Schemes liabilities.
They have been calculated consistently with last periods disclosures however these change over time with financial conditions and assumptions.
Risks to which the Scheme exposes the Company The nature of the Scheme exposes the Company to the risk of paying unanticipated additional contributions to the Scheme in times of adverse experience.
The most financially significant risks are likely to be Asset volatility The Schemes liabilities are calculated using a discount rate set with reference to corporate bond yields in line with the requirements of IAS 19R.
If the Scheme assets underperform this yield this will create a deficit.
The plan holds investments in a portfolio of equity and bonds which are expected to outperform corporate bonds in the long term but provide volatility and risk in the short term.
The Trustees have made a number of steps to control the level of investment risk within the Scheme over the last 12 months.
The Trustee and the Company agreed in April 2016 to purchase an annuity policy with Canada Life to cover all future pension payments to certain members of the Scheme.
This policy was purchased at a cost of 34.7m and secures the total amount of future pension payments for 100 of the Schemes pensioner members.
The Trustees will continue to review the risk exposures in light of the longer term objectives of the Scheme.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Retirement benefit obligations continued Risks to which the Scheme exposes the Company continued Changes in bond yields A decrease in corporate bond yields will increase plan liabilities.
In the event of a reduction in the corporate bond yields there will be an increase in the value of the Schemes bond holdings.
Inflation risk The Group pension obligations are linked to inflation and higher inflation will lead to higher liabilities.
The majority of the Schemes assets are either unaffected by inflation fixed interest bonds or loosely correlated with inflation equities meaning that an increase in inflation will also increase the deficit.
Life expectancy The Schemes obligation is to provide benefits for the life of the members.
An increase in life expectancy will result in an increase in the Schemes liabilities.
Policy for recognising gains and losses The Company recognises actuarial gains and losses immediately through the remeasurement of the net defined benefit liability.
Assetliability matching strategies used by the Scheme or the Company The Trustees current investment strategy having consulted with the Company is to invest circa 40% of the Schemes assets in a mix of equities and diversifying return seeking assets with the balance in an annuity policy long dated gilts and corporate bonds in order to strike a balance between maximising the returns on the Schemes assets and minimising the risks associated with the lower than expected returns on the Schemes assets.
Description of funding arrangements and funding policy that affect future contributions The Schedule of Contributions dated 9 January 2015 sets out the current contributions payable by the Company to the
This was revised based on the actuarial valuation performed as at 5 April 2014 to allow for the rental income stream from the asset backed funding arrangement effectively being a commitment which will offset the requirement for future deficit contributions.
Expected contributions over the next accounting period
BARR p. expects to contribute approximately 1.0m to the A.
BARR p.
Pension and Life Assurance Scheme in the period ending 28 January 2017 and the Scheme expects to receive further contributions of approximately 1.2m from the asset backed funding arrangement in which the Scheme holds an interest.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation is 20 years.
The expected maturity analysis of the undiscounted defined benefit pension benefit estimated on the Schemes funding is as follows Less than one year One to two years Two to five years Greater than five years Proportion of total pension benefits to be paid as at 5 April 2016 1% 1% 3% 95% Proportion of total pension benefits to be paid as at 5 April 2015 1% 1% 3% 95% Defined contribution scheme The pension costs for the defined contribution schemes are as follows Defined contribution costs 3.1 2.8 125
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Share capital 2017 2016 Group and Company Shares m Shares m Issued and fully paid 116768778 4.9 116768778 4.9 The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
During the year to 28 January 2017 the Companys employee benefit trusts purchased 203410 2016 913724 shares.
The total amount paid to acquire the shares has been deducted from shareholders equity and is included within retained earnings.
At
28 January 2017 the shares held by the Companys employee benefit trusts represented 1103160 2016 1254095 shares at a purchased cost of 6.3m 2016 8.9m.
Sharebased payments As disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report the Group runs a number of share award plans and share option plans Savings Related Share Option Scheme which is open to all employees LTIP and ESOS options which are granted to executive directors AESOP awards that are available to all employees Savings Related Share Option Scheme SAYE All SAYEs outstanding at 28 January 2017 and 30 January 2016 have no performance criteria attached other than the requirement for the employee to remain in the employment of the Company and to continue contributing to the plan.
Options
The SAYE is open to all qualifying employees in employment at the date of inception of the scheme.
Options are normally exercisable after five years from the date of grant.
The price at which options are offered is not less than 80% of the average of the middlemarket price of the five dealing days immediately preceding the date of invitation.
The movements in the number of share options outstanding and their related weighted average exercise prices are as follows 2017 2016
Average exercise price in pence per share Options
At start of the year 1413428 471p 1418930 305p Granted in the year   819858 567p Forfeited 163567 332p 98477 449p Exercised 46468 326p 726883 256p At end of the year 1203393 469p 1413428 471p None of the options listed above were exercisable at the respective year end dates.
The outstanding options at the year end had exercise prices of 3.58 and 5.67 2016 2.54 3.58 and 5.67.
The weighted average share price on the dates that options were exercised in the year to 28 January 2017 was 5.11.
The weighted average remaining contractual life of the outstanding share options at the year end is 2 years 2016 3 years.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Sharebased payments continued
During the year an award of shares was made to the executive directors as disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report.
The weighted average fair value of the share awards made during the period was determined using the BlackScholes valuation model.
The significant inputs to the model were as follows Date of grant 7 April 2016 Number of share awards granted 272785 Share price at date of grant 527p Contractual life in years 3 Dividend yield 2.19% Expected outcome of meeting performance criteria at grant date 50% Fair value determined at grant date 493p
As described in the Directors Remuneration Report there are two elements to the AESOP.
The partnership share element provides that for every three shares that a participant purchases in A.
BARR p. maximum contribution of 150 per month the Company will purchase one matching share.
The matching shares purchased are held in trust in the name of the individual.
There are various rules as to the period of time that the shares must be held in trust but after five years the shares can be released tax free to the participant.
The second element of free shares allows participants to receive shares to the value of a common percentage of their earnings related to the performance of the Group.
The maximum value of the annual award is 3600 and the shares awarded are held in trust for five years.
Under the terms of the AESOP rules any award of free shares to employees is made by the Trustee of the AESOP subject to the Companys consent.
Related party transactions Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties of the Company have been eliminated on consolidation.
Details of transactions between the Company and related parties are as follows Sales of goods and services Purchase of goods and services Rubicon Drinks Limited 41.1 40.3 53.4 52.4 Funkin Limited  0.5 The amounts disclosed in the table below are the amounts owed to and due from subsidiary companies that are trading subsidiaries.
The difference between the total of these balances and the amounts disclosed as amounts due by note 20 and to subsidiary companies note 22 are balances due by and due to dormant subsidiary companies.
Amounts owed by related parties Amounts due to related parties Rubicon Drinks Limited   72.0 62.2 Funkin Limited 0.5 0.5 Findlays Limited   2.9 2.9 127
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Compensation of key management personnel The remuneration of the executive directors and other members of key management the management committee during the year was as follows Salaries and short term benefits 3.2 3.3 Pension and other costs 0.5 0.5 Sharebased payments  0.1 The Directors Remuneration Report can be found on pages 51 to 76.
Retirement benefit plans The Groups retirement benefit plans are administered by an independent third party service provider.
During the year the service provider charged the Group 0.4m 2016 0.3m for administration services in respect of the retirement benefit plans.
At the year end nil 2016 nil was outstanding to the service provider on behalf of the retirement benefit plans.
Going concern The directors are confident that it is appropriate for the going concern basis to be adopted in preparing the financial statements.
The statement of financial position shows consolidated net assets of 181.8m 2016 180.1m and the Company has sufficient reserves to continue making dividend payments.
Further the Groups net cash position has increased from a deficit of 11.3m at 30 January 2016 to a surplus of 9.7m at 28 January 2017.
Subsidiaries
The Groups subsidiaries at 28 January 2017 are set out below.
Unless otherwise stated they have share capital consisting solely of ordinary shares that are held directly by the Group and the proportion of ownership interests held equals the voting rights held by the Group.
The country of incorporation or registration is also their principal place of business.
Name of entity Place of business country of incorporation Address Ownership interest held by the Group Principal activities % % Findlays Limited UK Cumbernauld 100 100 Nontrading entity Funkin Limited UK Milton Keynes 100 100 Distribution and selling of cocktail solutions Funkin USA Limited USA Milton Keynes 100 100 Distribution and selling of cocktail solutions Rubicon Drinks Limited UK Milton Keynes 100 100 Manufacturing distribution and selling of exotic soft drinks
BARR Capital Partner Limited UK Milton Keynes 100 100 Investment holding company
BARR General Partner Limited UK Cumbernauld 100 100 Investment holding company
BARR Pension Trustee Limited UK Cumbernauld 100 100 Investment holding company
BARR Scottish Limited Partnership UK Cumbernauld 100 100 Investment holding company Robert Barr Limited UK Cumbernauld 100 100 Nontrading entity Mandora St Clements Limited UK Milton Keynes 100 100 Nontrading entity Taut UK Ltd UK Milton Keynes 100 100 Nontrading entity Tizer Limited UK Milton Keynes 100 100 Nontrading entity Groupe Rubicon Limited Jersey Jersey 100 100 Nontrading entity The full address for Cumbernauld is Westfield House 4 Mollins Road Cumbernauld G68 9HD.
The full address for Milton Keynes is Crossley Drive Magna Park Milton Keynes England MK17 8FL.
The full address for Jersey is PO Box 87 22 Grenville Street St Helier Jersey JE4 9PX.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes to the Accounts continued Subsequent events In February 2017 the Group entered into three revolving credit facilities over periods of 35 years with Royal Bank of Scotland plc Bank of Scotland plc and HSBC Bank plc.
These facilities provide 60m of Sterling debt facilities to 201920 reducing to 20m for the period to 202122.
On 1 February 2017 the Group completed on the sale of the Walthamstow distribution site.
The asset was held for sale at 28 January 2017 refer to note 14.
Total proceeds of 3.8m were received against a net book value of 1.3m giving rise to a gain on sale of 2.5m which will be recognised in the year to 27 January 2018.
The Group has entered into a 3 year operating lease to continue to operate from the site for the short term.
The Board has approved a share repurchase programme of up to 30m as part of the Groups approach to capital allocation and under the authority to repurchase up to 10% of its own shares granted at the AGM in May 2016.
This programme is anticipated to commence in the spring of 2017 and complete within 24 months.
The AGM in May 2017 will be requested to approve the renewal of the authority for the Board to repurchase up to 10% of the Companys own shares.
The Directors do not believe that the repurchase programme will have any material impact on the Groups ability to secure acquisition opportunities should these be identified.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Review of Trading Results
Not restated Not restated Other income 0.7  0.7 Distribution costs including selling costs 57.6 57.3 57.2 50.2 47.4 Administration costs 20.7 21.7 21.3 27.4 25.7 Operating expenses 77.6 79.0 77.8 77.6 73.1 Operating profit before exceptional items 43.1 42.1 42.1 38.6 34.9 Exceptional items 0.7  3.3 3.8 3.2 Operating profit after exceptional items 43.8 42.1 38.8 34.8 31.7 Finance income  0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 Finance expense 0.7 0.9 0.3 0.5 0.4 Net finance expense 0.7 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.2 Profit before tax 43.1 41.3 38.6 34.5 31.5 Tax on profit 7.5 7.0 8.6 6.1 6.2 Profit after tax 35.6 34.3 30.0 28.4 25.3 Earnings per share on issued share capital pence 30.49 29.37 25.69 24.13 21.74 Dividends recognised as an appropriation in the Closing share price 5.02 5.28 6.25 6.05 5.50 The results to 25 January 2015 were restated in the year to 30 January 2016 to reflect the change in accounting policy for the recognition of some logistics and warehouse related costs within cost of sales which more accurately reflected the costs incurred in manufacturing products.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Glossary
NonGAAP measures are provided because they are tracked by management to assess the Groups operating performance and to inform financial strategic and operating decisions.
The term underlying has been used to improve comparability between the 52 week reporting period ended 28 January 2017 and the 53 weeks ended 30 January 2016.
In the 53 week reporting period ended 30 January 2016 the Group received non recurring income associated to the termination of the Orangina franchise and incurred oneoff transaction fees associated to corporate development activities including Funkin Limited.
The underlying figures for the 53 week reporting period ended 30 January 2016 have been adjusted for the revenue and profit associated to week 53 and the nonrecurring Orangina franchise and oneoff corporate development transaction fees.
The underlying figures for the period ended 28 January 2017 are the reported figures before exceptional items as disclosed in the consolidated income statement.
Capital expenditure is a nonGAAP measure and defined as the cash purchases of property plant and equipment as disclosed in the consolidated cash flow statement.
Carbonates gross margin is a nonGAAP measure calculated by dividing the gross profit for carbonates by the revenue for carbonates using the values disclosed in the segment reporting note.
EBITDA is a nonGAAP measure defined as operating profit before exceptional items depreciation and amortisation.
It is reconciled in the free cash flow statement.
EBITDA margin is a nonGAAP measure and calculated as EBITDA divided by revenue.
EBITDA to free cash flow conversion is a nonGAAP measure and calculated as free cash flow divided by EBITDA.
Expansionary capex is a nonGAAP measure and is defined as the purchase of property plant and equipment that is not the normal replacement of property plant and equipment that has come to the end of its useful life.
Maintenance capex is a nonGAAP measure and is defined as the purchase of property plant and equipment that is the normal replacement of property plant and equipment that has come to the end of its useful life.
Expansionary capex and maintenance capex add together to the value of purchase of property plant and equipment that appears in the consolidated cash flow statement.
Free cash flow is a nonGAAP measure and is defined as the net cash flow as per the cash flow statement excluding the movements in borrowings expansionary capex the net cash flow on the purchase and sale of shares by employee benefit trusts dividend payments and noncash exceptional items.
Full year dividend per share is a nonGAAP measure calculated as the sum of all interim dividends declared during the reporting period plus any proposed dividend payable in respect of that reporting period.
Gross margin is a nonGAAP measure calculated by dividing gross profit by revenue.
Market capitalisation is a nonGAAP measure and defined as the closing share price at the end of a reporting period multiplied by the number of issued and fully paid shares of the Company.
Net asset growth is a nonGAAP measure and defined as the increase in net assets from one reporting period to another.
Net assets is a nonGAAP measure and defined as total assets less current liabilities less noncurrent liabilities.
Operating margin is a nonGAAP measure calculated by dividing operating profit by revenue.
Operating margin before exceptional items is a nonGAAP measure calculated by dividing operating profit before exceptional items by revenue.
Operating profit before exceptional items is a nonGAAP measure calculated as operating profit less any exceptional items.
This figure appears on the income statement.
Profit before tax and exceptional items is a nonGAAP measure calculated as profit before tax less any exceptional items.
This figure appears on the income statement.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Revenue underlying basis adjusts the reported revenue for the 53 weeks ended 30 January 2016 by the revenue in the final week and nonrecurring revenue related to the terminated Orangina franchise to provide a comparable 52 week period.
Revenue growth is a nonGAAP measure calculated as the difference in revenue between two reporting periods divided by the revenue of the earlier reporting period.
ROCE is a nonGAAP measure and defined as operating profit before exceptional items as a percentage of invested capital.
Invested capital is a nonGAAP measure defined as period end noncurrent plus current assets less current liabilities excluding all balances relating to any provisions financial instruments interestbearing liabilities and cash or cash equivalents.
Reconciliation of underlying measures 52 weeks to 28 January 2017
Gross profit
Profit before tax 201617 as reported 52 week period ended 28 January 2017 257.1 120.7 43.8 43.1 Exceptional items   0.7 0.7 Underlying 257.1 120.7 43.1 42.4 53 weeks to 30 January 2016
Gross profit
Profit before tax 201516 as reported 53 week period ended 30 January 2016 258.6 121.1 42.1 41.3 Orangina franchise 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 Corporate development   0.8 0.8 Underlying 253.2 118.6 40.4 39.6 Reconciliations of nonGAAP measures Free cash flow Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 3.5 19.1 Expansionary capex 6.9 12.9 Dividends 15.6 14.3 Acquisition of subsidiary net of cash acquired  15.7 Acquisition of intangible assets  4.8 Purchase of Company shares by employee benefit trusts 1.0 5.1 Proceeds from disposal of Company shares by employee benefit trusts 1.3 3.1 New loans received 25.5 34.0 Loans repaid 43.0 31.5 Bank arrangement fees paid  0.1 Free cash flow 43.2 28.2 132
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Reconciliations of nonGAAP measures continued
201617 201516 Profit before tax 43.1 41.3 Exceptional items 0.7 Profit before tax and exceptional items 42.4 41.3 Intangible assets 106.0 107.5 Property plant and equipment 89.4 85.3 Inventories 17.3 15.6 Trade and other receivables 51.4 52.7 Current tax 2.7 3.6 Assets held for sale 1.3 Trade and other payables 52.3 37.4 Capital employed 210.4 220.1 ROCE 20.2% 18.8% Glossary continued 133
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS IMPORTANT AND REQUIRES YOUR IMMEDIATE ATTENTION.
If you are in any doubt as to any matter referred to in this report or as to the action you should take you should seek your own personal financial advice from i a stockbroker bank manager solicitor accountant or other independent professional adviser authorised under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 if you are resident in the United Kingdom or ii another appropriately authorised independent financial adviser if you are not resident in the United Kingdom.
If you have sold or otherwise transferred all of your shares in A.
BARR p. who arranged the sale or transfer so they can pass these documents to the person who now holds the shares.
Notice is hereby given that the one hundred and thirteenth annual general meeting of A.
BARR p. held at the offices of Deloitte LLP 110 Queen Street Glasgow G1 3BX on Wednesday 31 May 2017 at 11.00 a. if thought fit pass the resolutions set out below.
Resolutions 1 to 15 inclusive will be proposed as ordinary resolutions and Resolutions 16 and 17 will be proposed as special resolutions.
To receive and approve the audited accounts of the Group and the Company for the year ended 28 January 2017 together with the directors and auditors reports thereon.
To approve the directors remuneration policy set out on pages 52 to 63 of the Companys annual report and accounts for the year ended 28 January 2017.
To receive and approve the annual statement by the chairman of the remuneration committee and the Directors Remuneration Report as set out on page 51 and pages 51 to 76 of the Companys annual report and accounts for the year ended 28 January 2017.
To declare a final dividend of 10.87 pence per ordinary share of 4 16 pence for the year ended 28 January 2017.
To reelect Mr John Ross Nicolson as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr Roger Alexander White as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr Stuart Lorimer as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr Jonathan David Kemp as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr Andrew Lewis Memmott as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr William Robin Graham Barr as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr Martin Andrew Griffiths as a director of the Company.
To reelect Ms Pamela Powell as a director of the Company.
To reelect Mr David James Ritchie as a director of the Company.
To appoint Deloitte LLP as the Companys auditor to hold office until the conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid and to authorise the audit committee of the board of directors of the Company to fix their remuneration.
THAT the board of directors of the Company the Board be and it is hereby generally and unconditionally authorised pursuant to and in accordance with section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the 2006 Act to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot shares in the capital of the Company and to grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company up to an aggregate nominal amount of 1621788.50 and b up to a further aggregate nominal amount of 1621788.50 provided that i they are equity securities within the meaning of section 560 of the 2006 Act and ii they are offered by way of a rights issue in favour of the holders of shares excluding the Company in its capacity as a holder of treasury shares on the register of members of the Company on a date fixed by the Board where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interests of such Notice of Annual General Meeting 134
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 agreement as if the authority conferred hereby had not expired.
THAT subject to the passing of resolution 15 set out in the notice of the annual general meeting of the Company convened for 31 May 2017 Resolution 15 the board of directors of the Company the Board be and is hereby generally empowered pursuant to sections 570 and 573 of the Companies Act 2006 the 2006 Act to allot equity securities within the meaning of section 560 of the 2006 Act including the grant of rights to subscribe for or to convert any securities into ordinary shares of 4 16 pence each in the capital of the Company Ordinary Shares wholly for cash either pursuant to the authority conferred on them by Resolution 15 or by way of a sale of treasury shares within the meaning of section  of the 2006 Act as if section  of the 2006 Act did not apply to any such allotment or sale provided that this power shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities for cash in connection with a rights issue open offer or other preemptive offer in favour of holders of Ordinary Shares excluding the Company in its capacity as a holder of treasury shares on the register of members of the Company on a date fixed by the Board where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interests of such holders are proportionate as nearly as practicable to the respective numbers of Ordinary Shares held by them on that date subject to such exclusions or other arrangements in connection with the rights issue open offer or other offer as the Board deem necessary or expedient to deal with i equity securities representing fractional entitlements ii treasury shares or iii legal or practical problems arising in any overseas territory the requirements of any regulatory body or any stock exchange or any other matter whatsoever and the allotment otherwise than pursuant to subparagraph a above of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 243268.00.
Board may allot equity securities pursuant to such an offer or agreement as if the authority conferred hereby had not expired.
THAT the Company be and is hereby generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of section 701 of the Companies Act 2006 the 2006 Act to make one or more market purchases within the meaning of section of the 2006 Act of ordinary shares of 4 16 pence each in the capital of the Company Ordinary Shares on such terms and in such manner that the directors think fit provided that the maximum aggregate number of Ordinary Shares hereby authorised to be purchased shall be 11676877 the maximum price exclusive of expenses which may be paid for an Ordinary Share is an amount equal to the higher of i 105% of the average of the middle market quotations for an Ordinary Share as derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the five dealing days immediately preceding the day on which the Ordinary Share is purchased and ii the higher of the price of the last independent trade of an Ordinary Share and the highest current independent bid for an Ordinary Share on the trading venue where the purchase is carried out c the minimum price which may be paid for an Ordinary Share is an amount equal to its nominal value in each case exclusive of associated expenses unless previously renewed varied or revoked the authority hereby conferred shall expire on the earlier of 27 July 2018 and the conclusion of the next annual general meeting of the Company after the passing of this resolution but a contract to purchase Ordinary Shares may be made before such expiry which will or may be completed wholly or partly thereafter and a purchase of Ordinary Shares may be made in pursuance of any such contract and Notice of Annual General Meeting continued 135
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance e an Ordinary Share so purchased shall be cancelled or if the directors so determine and subject to the provisions of applicable laws or regulations of the Financial Conduct Authority held as a treasury share.
By order of the Board Julie A.
Barr
Company Secretary 27 April 2017 Registered Office
BARR p.
Westfield House 4 Mollins Road
G68 9HD Registered in Scotland SC Shareholders should also read the notes to this Notice of Annual General Meeting which are set out on pages 136 to 141 of this report.
Those notes provide further information about shareholders entitlement to attend speak and vote at the Annual General Meeting or appoint another person to do so on their behalf.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Explanatory Notes The following notes provide an explanation of the resolutions to be considered at the one hundred and thirteenth annual general meeting the AGM of A.
BARR p. the Company.
Resolutions 1 to 15 inclusive will be proposed as ordinary resolutions.
This means that for each of those resolutions to be passed more than half of the votes cast must be in favour of the resolution.
Resolutions 16 and 17 will be proposed as special resolutions.
This means that for each of those resolutions to be passed at least threequarters of the votes cast must be in favour of the resolution.
Resolution 1  Receive and approve the reports and accounts Shareholders are being asked to receive and approve the audited accounts of the Group and the Company as audited by KPMG LLP for the year ended 28 January 2017 together with the associated reports of the directors and auditor.
Resolutions 2 and 3  Directors remuneration The directors remuneration report is now divided into three parts the annual statement by the chairman of the remuneration committee the directors remuneration policy and the Directors Remuneration Report.
The annual statement by the chairman of the remuneration committee which is set out on page 51 of this report provides a summary of the directors remuneration policy and the Directors Remuneration Report.
The directors remuneration policy which is set out on pages 52 to 63 of this report sets out the Companys future policy on directors remuneration.
The Directors Remuneration Report which is set out on pages 51 to 76 of this report gives details of the payments and share awards made to the directors in connection with their and the Companys performance during the year ended 28 January 2017.
It also details how the Companys policy on directors remuneration will be operated in 2017.
Resolution 2 invites shareholders to approve the directors remuneration policy.
This is a binding policy and after it takes effect the directors will not be entitled to remuneration unless such remuneration is consistent with the approved policy or shareholders otherwise approve the remuneration.
If Resolution 2 is approved the policy will take effect from the conclusion of the AGM.
Shareholders will be given a binding vote on the directors remuneration policy at least every three years.
Resolution 3 invites shareholders to approve the annual statement by the chairman of the remuneration committee and the Directors Remuneration Report other than the directors remuneration policy for the year ended 28 January 2017.
Resolution 3 is an advisory vote and will not affect the way in which the Companys pay policy has been implemented.
Each year shareholders will be given an advisory vote on the implementation of the directors remuneration policy in relation to the payments and share awards made to directors during the year under review.
Resolution 4  Final dividend Shareholders are being asked to approve a final dividend of 10.87 pence per ordinary share of 4 16 pence for the year ended 28 January 2017.
If shareholders approve the recommended final dividend it will be paid on 9 June 2017 to all shareholders on the Companys register of members on 12 May 2017.
Resolutions 5 to 13 inclusive  Reelection of directors The board of directors of the Company the Board complies with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code whereby all directors are subject to annual reelection.
Accordingly all directors of the Company are retiring and offering themselves for reelection.
Biographical details of the directors are set out on pages 36 and 37 of this report.
The Board has confirmed that following formal performance evaluation all of the directors continue to perform effectively and demonstrate commitment to their roles.
The Board therefore unanimously recommends the proposed reelection of the directors.
Resolution 14  Appointment of auditor The Company is required to appoint an auditor at each general meeting at which accounts are presented to shareholders.
Following a competitive tender process the Board recommends that Deloitte LLP is appointed as the Companys new auditor for the financial year commencing 29 January 2017.
More information in respect of the audit tender can be found in the Audit Committee report on page 50 of this report.
In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 KPMG LLP has provided a Statement of Circumstances in connection with their resignation from office which is set out on page 142.
Notice of Annual General Meeting continued 137
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Resolution 15  Authority to allot shares The directors may not allot shares in the Company unless authorised to do so by shareholders in general meeting.
Sub paragraph a of Resolution 15 if passed will authorise the directors to allot shares having an aggregate nominal value of up to 1621788.50 representing approximately one third of the Companys issued share capital as at 26 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the publication of this report.
The directors have no present intention to exercise this authority.
In line with guidance issued by the Investment Association subparagraph b of Resolution 15 if passed will authorise the directors to allot additional shares in connection with a rights issue having an aggregate nominal value of up to 1621788.50 representing approximately one third of the Companys issued share capital as at 26 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the publication of this report.
The directors have no present intention to exercise the authority sought under subparagraph b of Resolution 15.
However if such authority is obtained it will give the Company greater flexibility to allot additional shares for the purpose of a preemptive rights issue.
This authority will be used when the directors consider it to be in the best interests of shareholders.
The authorities sought under Resolution 15 will expire on the earlier of 27 July 2018 being the latest date by which the Company must hold its annual general meeting in 2018 and the conclusion of the annual general meeting of the Company held in 2018.
Resolution 16  Disapplication of statutory preemption rights If the directors wish to allot new shares for cash the Companies Act 2006 states that the shares must be offered first to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing shareholdings.
For legal regulatory and practical reasons it might not be possible or desirable for shares allotted by means of a preemptive offer to be offered to certain shareholders particularly those resident overseas.
Furthermore it might in some circumstances be in the Companys interests for the directors to be able to allot some shares for cash without having to offer them first to existing shareholders.
To enable this to be done shareholders statutory preemption rights must be disapplied.
Accordingly Resolution 16 if passed will empower the directors to allot a limited number of new equity securities without shareholders statutory preemption rights applying to such allotment.
The authority conferred by Resolution 16 would also cover the sale of treasury shares for cash.
Subparagraph a of Resolution 16 would confer authority on the directors to make any arrangements which may be necessary to deal with any legal regulatory or practical problems arising on a rights issue an open offer or any other preemptive offer in favour of ordinary shareholders for example by excluding certain overseas shareholders from such issue or offer.
Subparagraph b of Resolution 16 would disapply shareholders statutory preemption rights by empowering the directors to allot equity securities for cash on a non preemptive basis but only new equity securities having a maximum aggregate nominal value of 243268.00 representing approximately 5% of the Companys issued share capital as at 26 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the publication of this report.
The authority sought under Resolution 16 will expire on the earlier of 27 July 2018 being the latest date by which the Company must hold an annual general meeting in 2018 and the conclusion of the annual general meeting of the Company held in 2018.
Resolution 17  Purchase of own shares The Companies Act 2006 permits a company to purchase its own shares provided the purchase has been authorised by shareholders in general meeting.
Resolution 17 if passed would give the Company the authority to purchase any of its own issued ordinary shares at a price of not less than an amount equal to the nominal value of an ordinary share and not more than the higher of i 5% above the average of the middle market quotations of the Companys ordinary shares as derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the five dealing days before any purchase is made and ii the higher of the last independent trade of an Ordinary Share and the highest current independent bid for an Ordinary Share on the trading venue where the purchase is carried out.
The authority will enable the purchase of up to a maximum of 11676877 ordinary shares representing 10% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at the date of the AGM and will expire on the earlier of 27 July 2018 being the latest date by which the Company must hold an annual general meeting in 2018 and the conclusion of the annual general meeting of the Company held in 2018.
On 28 March 2017 the Company announced that the Board has decided to return up to 30 million to shareholders via an onmarket share repurchase programme.
Accordingly the directors intend to use the authority granted by this resolution to make market purchases of the Companys ordinary shares under the repurchase programme.
The directors will only exercise the authority to purchase ordinary shares where they consider that such purchases will be in the best interests of shareholders
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 generally and will result in an increase in earnings per ordinary share.
Purchases are expected to be financed out of distributable profits and shares purchased will either be cancelled and the number of shares in issue reduced accordingly or held as treasury shares.
The Company operates two share option schemes under which awards may be satisfied by the allotment or transfer of ordinary shares to a scheme participant.
However in practice the Company has always satisfied awards to participants by the transfer of ordinary shares from the trustee of each of the schemes.
As at 1 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the publication of this report options had been granted over 1158143 ordinary shares the Option Shares representing approximately 0.99% of the Companys issued share capital at that date.
If the authority to purchase the Companys ordinary shares as described in Resolution 17 were exercised in full the Option Shares would have represented approximately 1.10% of the Companys issued share capital as at 1 April 2017.
As at 1 April 2017 the Company did not hold any treasury shares.
Notice of Annual General Meeting continued 139
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance
Attending the annual general meeting the AGM in person If you wish to attend the AGM in person you should arrive at the venue for the AGM in good time to allow your attendance to be registered.
It is advisable to have some form of identification with you as you may be asked to provide evidence of your identity to the Companys registrar Equiniti Limited the Registrar prior to being admitted to the AGM.
Appointment of proxies Members are entitled to appoint one or more proxies to exercise all or any of their rights to attend speak and vote at the AGM.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company but must attend the AGM to represent a member.
To be validly appointed a proxy must be appointed using the procedures set out in these notes and in the notes to the accompanying proxy form.
If a member wishes a proxy to speak on their behalf at the AGM the member will need to appoint their own choice of proxy not the Chairman of the AGM and give their instructions directly to them.
Such an appointment can be made using the proxy form accompanying this notice of AGM or through CREST.
Members can only appoint more than one proxy where each proxy is appointed to exercise rights attached to different shares.
Members cannot appoint more than one proxy to exercise the rights attached to the same shares.
If a member wishes to appoint more than one proxy they should contact the Registrar at Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing BN99 6DA.
A member may instruct their proxy to abstain from voting on a particular resolution to be considered at the AGM by marking the Withheld option in relation to that particular resolution when appointing their proxy.
It should be noted that an abstention is not a vote in law and will not be counted in the calculation of the proportion of votes For or Against the resolution.
The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from attending the AGM and voting in person if he or she wishes.
A person who is not a member of the Company but who has been nominated by a member to enjoy information rights does not have a right to appoint any proxies under the procedures set out in these notes and should read note 8 below.
Appointment of a proxy using a proxy form A proxy form for use in connection with the AGM is enclosed.
To be valid any proxy form or other instrument appointing a proxy together with any power of attorney or other authority under which it is signed or a certified copy thereof must be received by post or during normal business hours only by hand by the Registrar at Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing BN99 6DA at least 48 hours before the time of the AGM or any adjournment of that meeting.
If you do not have a proxy form and believe that you should have one or you require additional proxy forms please contact the Registrar at Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing BN99 6DA.
Appointment of a proxy through CREST CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies through the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so by using the procedures described in the CREST Manual and by logging on to site CREST personal members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service providers should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service providers who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
In order for a proxy appointment or instruction made using the CREST service to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST Proxy Instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with Euroclear UK and Ireland Limiteds specifications and must contain the information required for such instruction as described in the CREST Manual.
The message regardless of whether it constitutes the appointment of a proxy or is an amendment to the instruction given to a previously appointed proxy must in order to be valid be transmitted so as to be received by the Registrar ID RA19 no later than 48 hours before the time of the AGM or any adjournment of that meeting.
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the timestamp applied to the message by the CREST Application Host from which the Registrar is able to retrieve the message by enquiry to CREST in the manner prescribed by CREST.
After this time any change of instructions to proxies appointed through CREST should be communicated to the appointee through other means.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers should note that Euroclear UK and Ireland Limited does not make available special procedures in CREST for any particular message.
Normal system timings and limitations will therefore apply in relation to the input of CREST Proxy Instructions.
It is the responsibility of the CREST member concerned to take or if the CREST member is a CREST personal member or sponsored member or has appointed a voting service providers to procure that hisher CREST sponsor or voting service providers takes such action as shall be necessary to ensure that a message is transmitted by means of the CREST system by any particular time.
In this regard CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting system providers are referred to those sections of the CREST Manual concerning practical limitations of the CREST system and timings.
The Company may treat as invalid a CREST Proxy Instruction in the circumstances set out in Regulation a of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001.
Appointment of a proxy by joint holders In the case of joint holders where more than one of the joint holders purports to appoint one or more proxies only the purported appointment submitted by the most senior holder will be accepted.
Seniority is determined by the order in which the names of the joint holders appear in the Companys register of members in respect of the joint holding the first named being the most senior.
Corporate representatives Any corporation which is a member can appoint one or more corporate representatives.
Members can only appoint more than one corporate representative where each corporate representative is appointed to exercise rights attached to different shares.
Members cannot appoint more than one corporate representative to exercise the rights attached to the same shares.
Entitlement to attend and vote To be entitled to attend and vote at the AGM and for the purpose of determining the votes they may cast members must be registered in the Companys register of members at 6.30 p. on the day two days prior to the adjourned meeting.
Any changes to the Companys register of members after the relevant deadline will be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend and vote at the AGM.
Nominated persons Any person to whom this notice is sent who is a person nominated under section 146 of the Companies Act 2006 the 2006 Act to enjoy information rights a Nominated Person may under an agreement between himher and the member by whom heshe was nominated have a right to be appointed or to have someone else appointed as a proxy for the AGM.
If a Nominated Person has no such proxy appointment right or does not wish to exercise it heshe may under any such agreement have a right to give instructions to the member as to the exercise of voting rights.
Website giving information regarding the AGM Information regarding the AGM including information required by section 311A of the 2006 Act and a copy of this notice of AGM is available from site Audit concerns Members should note that it is possible that pursuant to requests made by members of the Company under section 527 of the 2006 Act the Company may be required to publish on a website a statement setting out any matter relating to a the audit of the Companys accounts including the auditors report and the conduct of the audit that are to be laid before the AGM or b any circumstance connected with an auditor of the Company ceasing to hold office since the previous meeting at which annual accounts and reports were laid in accordance with section 437 of the 2006 Act.
The Company may not require the members requesting any such website publication to pay its expenses in complying with sections 527 or 528 of the 2006 Act.
Where the Company is required to place a statement on a website under section 527 of the 2006 Act it must forward the statement to the Companys auditor not later than the time when it makes the statement available on the website.
The business which may be dealt with at the AGM includes any statement that the Company has been required under section 527 of the 2006 Act to publish on a website.
Voting rights As at 26 April 2017 being the latest practicable date prior to the publication of this notice the Companys issued share capital consisted of 116768778 ordinary shares of 4 16 pence each carrying one vote each.
As at 26 April 2017 the Company did not hold any treasury shares.
Therefore the total voting rights in the Company as at 26 April 2017 were 116768778 votes.
Notice of Annual General Meeting continued 141
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounts Strategic Report Corporate Governance Notification of shareholdings Any person holding 3% or more of the total voting rights of the Company who appoints a person other than the Chairman of the AGM as hisher proxy will need to ensure that both heshe and hisher proxy comply with their respective disclosure obligations under the UK Disclosure Rules and Transparency Rules.
Further questions and communication Under section 319A of the 2006 Act the Company must cause to be answered any question relating to the business being dealt with at the AGM put by a member attending the meeting unless answering the question would interfere unduly with the preparation for the meeting or involve the disclosure of confidential information or the answer has already been given on a website in the form of an answer to a question or it is undesirable in the interests of the Company or the good order of the meeting that the question be answered.
Members who have any general queries about the AGM should contact the Company Secretarial Department by email to email Members may not use any electronic address provided in this report or in any related documents including the accompanying proxy form to communicate with the Company for any purpose other than those expressly stated.
Documents available for inspection The following documents will be available for inspection on the day of the AGM at the offices of Deloitte LLP 110 Queen Street Glasgow G1 3BX from 9.15 a.
14.2 copies of the letters of appointment of the Companys nonexecutive directors.
A.
BARR p.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 KPMG LLP 319 St Vincent Street Glasgow G2 5AS United Kingdom Tel 44 0tel Fax 44 0tel Our ref asmmgch Private and confidential The Directors
BARR plc Westfield House 4 Mollins Road
Cumbernauld
G68 9HD 14 April 2017 Dear Directors Statement to A.
BARR plc no.
SC on ceasing to hold office as auditors pursuant to section 519 of the Companies Act 2006 The reason connected with our ceasing to hold office is the holding of a competitive tender for the audit in which we were not invited to participate.
Yours faithfully KPMG LLP Audit registration number Audit registration address 15 Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5GL Registered in England No OC Registered office 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL For full details of our professional regulation please refer to Regulatory Information under AboutAbout KPMG at site KPMG LLP a UK limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative KPMG International a Swiss entity.
Document Classification  KPMG Confidential
BARR p.
A.
BARR p.
Westeld House 4 Mollins Road
G68 9HD 0telsite Registered Oce Westeld House 4 Mollins Road
G68 9HD
Julie A.
Barr M.
Hons.
L.
Dip.
M.
Auditors
KPMG LLP 319 St Vincent Street
G2 5AS
Equiniti Ltd Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Registered Number
