Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 you can bet on Creating entertainment you can bet on Creating entertainment STRATEGIC REPORT 01 Highlights 02 At a glance 03 The business today 05 Market share 06 Vision and strategy 08 Chairmans statement 10 Chief Executives report 13 Principal risks and uncertainties
17 Chief Financial Officers review
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 22 Board of Directors 24 Statement from the Chair of the Audit Committee 26 Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee 30 Directors report FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 31 Independent auditors report 34 Consolidated statement of profit or loss 34 Consolidated statement of other comprehensive income 35 Consolidated statement of financial position 36 Consolidated statement of cash flows 37 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 39 Notes forming part of the financial statements 66 Corporate information Our portfolio of diverse brands uses a combination of proprietary and purchased software to provide a unique and compelling online gaming experience to a rapidly growing customer base.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 01
Net gaming revenue NGR 000 89923 18% 89923 2017 76430 2016 Adjusted EBITDA 20249 24% 20249 2017 16366 2016 Adjusted earnings 18508 29% 18508 2017 14332 2016 Dividend per share pence 2.7p 8% 2.7 2017 2.5 2016 Operational highlights Financial highlights Real Money Gaming acquisitions of the Tarco Assets and 8Ball delivered strong earnings with enhancing synergies current year adjusted EBITDA was up 62% and 101% respectively from prior year unaudited proforma adjusted EBITDA Launched 17 new side games and 29 casino and bingo sites Established Stride Together a new B2B product and first joint venture signed with Aspers Group Limited Postperiodend strategic controlling investment of 3.75 million in Passion Gaming a Rummyfocused online gaming business operating across India Real Money Gaming NGR from inhouse proprietary platform up 39% to 48.6 million 2016 reported 34.9 million Real Money Gaming NGR from thirdparty nonproprietary platform up 16% to 33.1 million 2016 proforma 28.6 million Strong balance sheet with gross cash at period end of 26.2 million 2016 21.1 million Social gaming NGR down 37% to 8.1 million 2016 reported 12.8 million Impairment of 9.9 million 2016 Nil recognised in the period reflecting a weaker outlook for Social Gaming The financial and operational information shown for the prior year is shown on a proforma basis to show both periods on a likeforlike basis.
That is as if the acquisitions of 8Ball Netboost Media and the Tarco Assets had taken place at the start of the twelvemonth comparative period.
A reconciliation from the prior year reported figures to the 2016 proforma figures is included in the Chief Financial Officers Review.
Adjusted earnings and adjusted EBITDA exclude income or expenses that relate to exceptional items and noncash sharebased charges.
A reconciliation between the current years reported figures and the prior years proforma figures to adjusted earnings is shown in the Chief Financial Officers Review.
Funded player means an active player who has made a deposit with his own funds within the last three months of the year.
Yield per player means the total net cash in the last three months of the year divided by the number of funded players at the end of the year.
GGR means gross gaming revenue being total bets placed by players less winnings paid to them.
STRATEGIC REPORT Yield per player 29% Funded players 10% Mobile and touch devices % of the GGR 66% 18% Deposits m 26% Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Our products Online RMG bingo is a multiplayer poolbased game which is a riskfree model Large number of casino and slot sites Social Casino which is an appbased technology Composition of revenue 2017 At a glance Stride Gamings real money offering is presently focused on the UK market where it is licensed and only operates from the regulated jurisdictions of the UK and Alderney.
The Company has an international reach in the mobile social gaming market with a focus on North America.
Leading online gaming operator The Company operates a multibranded strategy using a combination of its proprietary and nonproprietary licensed software to provide online bingo casino and slot gaming and a social gaming mobile application.
54% RMG  proprietary 37% RMG  nonproprietary 9% Social Gaming FEBRUARY 2012 Stride Gaming began operating launch of Spin and Win its first website using its proprietary software SEPTEMBER 2012 Launched online bingo brand Kitty Bingo JANUARY 2013 Launched Lucky Pants Bingo SEPTEMBER 2014 The Company acquired the business and assets associated with the Jackpot Liner Jackpot Caf and King Jackpot brands from Table Top Entertainment MAY 2015 The Company listed on AIM JULY 2015 Acquired InfiApps an internationally focused mobile social gaming company AUGUST 2016 Acquisition of two online bingo businesses 8Ball Games and Netboost Media and the Tarco Assets MAY 2017 Entered the B2B vertical with the launch of Stride Together OCTOBER 2017 Launched Aspers Casino Online through our B2B vertical our first Stride Together Joint Venture NOVEMBER 2017 Strategic controlling investment in Passion Gaming a Rummyfocused online gaming business operating across India History Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 03 The business today A snapshot of the business today 30% yearonyear RMG growth Third largest online UK bingo operator with 143 brands Realising synergies following acquisitions by increasing revenue reducing distribution costs and efficient marketing spend Expanding into B2B by launching Stride Together through which the Company can license its proprietary platform to gaming operators media partners and retailers in the UK and globally
The Company owns 143 brands including the online bingo brands Kitty Bingo Lucky Pants Bingo Bingo Extra Jackpot Caf Jackpot Liner and King Jackpot together with the online casino brands Spin and Win Magical Vegas and Big Top.
Rapidly growing online gaming operator Operate only in regulated andor legalised markets Clear growth strategy and proven model Profitable highly cash generative dividend paying Proprietary gaming platform Investment in talent Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT All text to be supplied Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 05 Market share Stride Gaming has continued to grow its market share in its core UK bingoled online gaming market.
The Group is currently the third largest online bingo operator in the UK with a 12% market share.
Stride Gaming continues to expand its multibrand strategy and today operates over 140 sites equating to approximately one in four online bingo brands in the UK.
The Groups scale technological edge and multibrand strategy mean that it is very well positioned to continue to grow and take market share despite external industry pressures.
September 2016 UKGC report shows casino market worth 2.4 billion in GGR.
2 Stride Group management estimates.
Increased market share Online gaming market overview UK remains the worlds largest real money bingo market with mobile continuing to drive growth Stride operates over 140 sites which is approximately one in four brands in the UK UK online casino market is three times larger than online bingo Multibrand strategy provides differentiated offering in slots segment both in B2C and B2B UK is a highly regulated market Increased regulation presents opportunities given Strides scale and proprietary technology advantage Stride is now the third largest online operator with a 12% share The estimated market size is 600 million.
UK online bingoled market share 12% STRATEGIC REPORT Our vision is to be a leading international online gaming company Vision and strategy Value for shareholders Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 To be a leading online game operator Investment in proprietary platform Investment in our team Compliance with regulation Focus on our core Continue to build scale and grow market share in both the UK bingo and casino markets Diversify product offering Enter into new verticals such as lotterystyle games Rummy instant wins and scratch cards
Extend brands and products to new attractive markets outside of the UK Investment in proprietary platform Innovative content
Diversification into new verticals
Entry into new markets Integrated business intelligence Highly scalable robust payment processing and back office Disaster recovery solutions Cyber security Fully compliant with regulation Investment in our team Competitive employee benefits Increased proprietary platform development team by 30% Increased retention and marketing talent on proprietary platform by 50% Appointed CTO and Heads of CRM Product Development and Business Analytics Headcount increased by 51 to 370 Continued investment in working environment Streamlined onboarding and employee communication Corporate social responsibility events Empowerment of team members Internal and external training courses such as leadership training Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 07 Focus on our core
Technology and people Unique content Multibrand strategy Business intelligence
Efficient marketing spend Launched 29 new bingo and casino sites Developed and launched 17 new proprietary slots and instant win games Entered B2B vertical via Stride Together Signed JV with Aspers Group Entry into Rummy market through strategic investment in Passion Gaming post period end Diversify product offering 2 Diversification opportunities supported by scale infrastructure and platform Appraise growing regulated markets PanEuropean focus with global opportunities New markets Current markets In process 3 Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT
Chairmans statement
On behalf of the Board I am pleased to update our stakeholders on what has been a successful year for Stride Gaming.
The Groups strong financial results for the year ended 31 August 2017 have been underpinned by further progress against our strategic objectives.
Stride Gaming has grown its market share in its core UK bingoled online gaming market continued to develop new growth opportunities through product innovation enhanced its proprietary technology platform and appraised attractive new markets for future expansion opportunities.
Results and dividend The Group delivered a strong set of financial results in the year with net gaming revenue NGR up 18% on a proforma basis to 89.9 million 2016 proforma 76.4 million and reported 47.8 million.
Likeforlike Adjusted EBITDA increased by 24% to 20.2 million 2016 proforma 16.3 million and reported 12.3 million and likeforlike Adjusted earnings rose by 29% to 18.5 million 2016 proforma 14.3 million.
In line with our progressive dividend policy the Board is pleased to recommend a final dividend of 1.5p per share subject to the approval of shareholders at the Companys Annual General Meeting to be held on 1 February 2018.
This final dividend together with the interim dividend of 1.2p per share brings the total dividend for the year ended 31 August 2017 to 2.7p per share.
Strategic progress Strides progress during the year has continued to be underpinned by the Groups firstclass proprietary technology leading business intelligence capabilities and clear focus on operating in markets where it is legal to do so.
In the fastgrowing and dynamic online gaming industry the Board believes that these are key differentiators for the Group and together they underpin the Groups strategy to develop as a leading online gaming operator.
Revenue from the Groups proprietary Real Money Gaming business increased by 39% during the year 2016 reported 31% demonstrating the success of our multibrand strategy as well as the integration of the transformational acquisitions of the 8Ball and Tarco brands which are already delivering earningsenhancing synergies.
Stride Gaming continues to innovate and appraise new products and markets where we see opportunities to leverage our expertise for further growth.
During the year we launched our B2B platform Stride Together which licences our proprietary platform to other operators thereby enabling the Group to explore new growth opportunities both in the UK and globally.
Strong financial results underpinned by further progress against strategic objectives Adjusted EBITDA up 24% to 20.2million Launched B2B platform Stride Together and signed first joint venture partner Aspers Casino launching Aspers Casino Online in October Post period end strategic investment in Passion Gaming a Rummyfocused online operator in India Interim dividend of 1.2p per share with final dividend of 1.5p per share subject to shareholder approval Continuing to build momentum Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 09 Regulation continues to play a key role in shaping the online gaming industry particularly in the UK.
Whilst the Group is facing external industry pressures such as the second Point of Consumption tax applied to free bets the introduction of GDPR legislation and potential changes to advertising regulations for gambling brands the Board is very confident that Stride Gamings scale technological edge and multibrand strategy mean that we are very well positioned to continue to grow and take market share despite these pressures.
Trading in the new financial year has started very well and the Board looks to the future with a high degree of confidence and enthusiasm.
As a fastgrowing and agile operator with leading technology and a focus on only regulated and legal markets the Board believes that the Group remains very well positioned for further progress and continued growth.
Nigel Payne
21 November 2017 Stride Together also signed its first joint venture partner Aspers Casino to launch Aspers Casino Online giving the established casino brand an online presence for the first time.
Early indications from this new venture are encouraging.
The Group is also pleased to announce that post the period end it has made a strategic investment in Passion Gaming a Rummyfocused online operator based in India.
This investment gives the Group an entry into a rapidly growing market with enormous potential for profitable growth.
Team
On behalf of the Board I would like to take this opportunity to thank each of my colleagues for their hard work during the year.
This has been a very busy year for the Group as we have integrated acquisitions launched new products and adapted to regulatory changes whilst still delivering strong organic growth.
These achievements speak volumes for the skill talent and dedication of the people throughout the Company.
Regulation and responsibility The online gaming market is fast growing and dynamic and the Groups firm focus remains on operating only in product verticals and markets where it is legal to do so.
The Board is resolutely committed to best practice in responsible gaming and providing customers with the securest and most enjoyable entertainment possible across Stride Gamings brands.
We believe that owning and developing our own proprietary technology is a key competitive advantage in such a dynamic market enabling the Group to be agile respond to market and regulatory changes effectively and successfully capture any growth opportunities that are presented.
Current trading and outlook Building on the momentum of 2017 the Group will continue to invest in its proprietary technology and people to support Stride Gamings further growth.
We remain focused on driving organic growth in our core UK real money gaming market whilst continuing to appraise acquisition opportunities and developing new products and markets.
Stride Gamings scale technological edge and multibrand strategy means that we are very well positioned to continue to grow and take market share.
Passionate
Passionate by being fierce and excited about what we deliver
Creative by being pioneers and always leading the way in our industry
Respectful by being thoughtful to those we work with and appropriate in our communications
Accountable by being responsible and having ownership for the work we do
Collaborative by being dedicated to succeed as a team
Innovative by being original in everything we do Our values Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT
Chief Executives report
I am delighted to report that during 2017 Stride Gaming continued to make excellent progress against its growth strategy.
The Group has continued to drive strong organic growth and to scale the business through the successful integration of the transformational acquisitions that were made at the end of our previous financial year.
Stride Gaming is now the third largest operator in the UK online bingoled market and we remain confident that this scale supported by our proprietary technology and back office expertise positions the business well to take advantage of further growth opportunities.
Clear growth strategy Stride Gaming has a clear growth strategy to develop as a leading online gaming operator thereby creating value for shareholders.
We aim to achieve this based on three primary pillars of growth Focus on the core by continuing to grow market share in both the UK bingo and casino markets.
Diversify the product offering by innovating the product and entering new online gaming verticals.
Appraise and enter attractive new markets outside of the UK.
We plan to execute this growth strategy by continuing to develop our proprietary gaming platform investing in our skilled and dynamic team and focusing on operating only in regulated or legal markets.
Strides technology edge Stride Gamings proprietary online gaming technology underpins the Groups clear growth strategy across products and markets.
During the year we have continued to invest in and develop our technology edge by creating more innovative and engaging gaming content including on mobile further integrating and enhancing our business intelligence capabilities ensuring full compliance with regulatory developments and increasing the platforms robustness through improved cyber security and disaster recovery solutions.
Focus on the core The key driver of the Groups success in 2017 has been the excellent performance in the core Real Money Gaming vertical which accounted for 91% of Group revenue.
In line with the Groups strategic focus Real Money Gaming NGR generated from Strides proprietary platform increased by 39% to 48.6 million accounting for 54% of Group revenue 2016 proforma of 31% to 34.9 million accounting for 45% and reported 73%.
Real Money Gaming NGR from thirdparty nonproprietary platforms also increased by 16% to 33.1 million accounting for 36% of Group revenue 2016 proforma 28.6 million accounting for 37%.
Continued strong organic growth Excellent performance with NGR from Real Money Gaming increasing by 39% Significant progress made with the integrations of 8Ball Netboost and Tarco 29% growth in yield per player reported at 147 Enter 2018 in a strengthened position to continue upward trajectory Clear growth strategy Based on H2 Gaming Commission research report showing market size of 600 million based on net gaming revenue.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 11 The Group made significant progress in the integration of 8Ball Games Limited 8Ball Netboost Media Netboost and the Tarco Assets Tarco which were acquired on 31 August 2016 for a total consideration of up to 70.2 million.
By applying the Groups core capabilities and as a result of the Groups increased scale we have already been able to grow revenues strengthen gross profit margins and significantly increase Adjusted EBITDA of the acquired businesses.
The
Tarco Assets and Netboost Media current year Adjusted EBITDA is up 62% from the prior year unaudited proforma Adjusted EBITDA whereas 8Balls current year Adjusted EBITDA has increased by 101%.
The Group will continue to appraise acquisition opportunities in the fragmented UK bingoled market to supplement and support our organic growth.
Yield per player one of the Groups KPIs increased 29% to 147 2016 proforma 114.
This strong growth has been driven by the Groups sophisticated business intelligence capabilities and analytics knowhow which underpin our customer relationship management crosssell and marketing initiatives.
Even though Real Money Gaming funded players were down 10% to 146000 2016 proforma 162000 this was as a result of our strategy to focus on lifetime value of players over volume of players and the reduction of free bonuses across the Group.
Together these support the Groups objectives of acquiring customers effectively and increasing their lifetime value through higher engagement and monetisation.
Targeted and returns driven marketing strategies are of utmost importance to us and we continually look at innovative ways to engage both new and existing customers.
We look to optimise our marketing spend across a number of online and offline channels including natural search SEO digital and social media affiliate marketing email SMS direct mails and crosssell within our portfolio.
Continuously enhancing our mobile offering is key to providing our customer base with the most convenient easy and accessible online gaming experience.
Mobile and touch revenue another KPI of the Group increased to represent 66% of gross Real Money Gaming revenue 2016 proforma 56%.
Regulation responsibility and compliance remain a major focus in the Groups core UK market.
As a result of our agility and technology we are confident that Stride is in a robust position and see a number of pending and potential changes to regulation as an opportunity to further increase market share.
Diversify the product offering The second key pillar of the Groups strategy is to grow the business by developing and diversifying Stride Gamings product offering into new related product verticals such as lotterystyle games Rummy and scratch cards.
During the year we have developed and launched 17 new proprietary slots and instant win games launched 29 new bingo and casino sites with a focus on slot games  to capture the growth opportunities available in that fastgrowing market and entered the B2B vertical with the launch of Stride Together.
Through Stride Together the Group intends to license its proprietary platform to gaming operators media partners and retailers both in the UK and globally.
This will enable partners to create an online presence for their customers and to enter the omnichannel gaming space whilst offering Stride opportunities to penetrate new product verticals and geographic markets.
We were very happy to coincide the launch of this B2B division with the announcement of our first Stride Together joint venture alongside a leading gaming operator in the UK Aspers Group Limited Aspers.
Aspers Casino Online launched in October this year which successfully provides a seamless integration between the online and offline gaming experience.
We are delighted with the launch of our new B2B vertical and are now working hard to secure further partnerships with gaming operators media partners and retailers in the UK and globally.
The Group has continued to work hard on improving the performance in Social Gaming which accounts for 9% of total Group revenues where NGR for the year was down 37% to 8.1 million in light of the changing trends and dynamics in social gaming markets.
The two principal markets in which we operate Australia and North America are reaching maturity resulting in higher acquisition costs and lower lifetime values of players LTV.
Given the changing market dynamics the Company made the decision to reduce marketing spend in this vertical and to implement significant changes in order to mitigate the expected reduction in revenues.
Throughout the year we implemented a number of changes to the pricing models and added further personalisation to our content.
At year end we are encouraged by the results of the improvement plan so far and the Board will continue to closely monitor developments in this sector of the business.
We are confident of delivering further success in the year ahead and continued progress against our growth strategy.
Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Chief Executives report continued Strides technology edge continued Enter attractive new markets The third key pillar of the Groups growth strategy is to expand into attractive new markets outside of the UK leveraging the strength of our proprietary platform and back office expertise.
The Group owns an Italian remote gaming licence and is in the process of obtaining Spanish and Danish gaming licences.
In line with our strategy we are also delighted to announce today that we have made a strategic controlling investment of 3.75 million in Passion Gaming a Rummyfocused online skill gaming company based in India which gives us entry into the countrys rapidly growing skills gaming market.
Our investment will be used to fund working capital with the Group also sharing its marketing expertise and technological knowhow to accelerate growth.
Investment in our firstclass team The Groups progress during the year would not have been possible without the commitment of our skilled and dynamic team.
I would like to thank each and every one of my colleagues for their hard work during the year.
We continue to invest in our team and working environment to ensure that we remain a highly attractive place for industryleading talent.
We have invested in internal and external training competitive employee benefits and new ways to communicate internally and increase efficiencies.
To support Strides longterm growth plans the Groups headcount increased by 16% to 370 during the period.
Outlook
We are very pleased with the performance of the Group in 2017 having demonstrated key progress and development across our strategic pillars.
Once again we have demonstrated our ability to grow both organically and through acquisitions.
Real Money Gaming revenue is currently showing doubledigit yearonyear growth in the first two months of the current financial year in line with market expectations.
This is being driven by strong deposit growth with a stable yield per player.
We enter 2018 in a strengthened position to continue on our upward trajectory.
Eitan Boyd
Chief Executive Officer
21 November 2017 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 13 Principal risks and uncertainties Risk Likelihood Issue Impact Mitigation
Gaming regulations Low The Group operates in legalised markets.
Online gambling is prohibited or restricted in some countries and legalised in others.
The Group is currently licensed in the UK and Alderney Baldo is licensed in Italy and QSB Gaming in Spain.
As a Group we should only be accepting players from regulated and legalised markets and this is one of our main principles.
If we accept players from nonregulated jurisdictions we run a risk of breaching legislation in that particular market.
High The Group procures legal and professional advice with regard to its activities in its principal countries of operation including any changes in legislation and monitors updates on any potential future jurisdiction where it may start accepting customers.
The latter is important as the Groups growth rate strategy and future revenue streams are to a certain extent affected by the regulation of new markets and the subsequent growth of end user interest and acceptance in such newly regulated markets.
Our Group is exposed to a number of risks that can have a financial operational and reputational impact.
A proactive approach to the management of risk is therefore critical to the Groups success.
The principal risks within our business model reflect the Groups view that risks by their very nature also bring the potential for reward.
Our risk management process involves a twostep approach  firstly to assess the likelihood of the risk occurring and then the impact it will have on the Group.
This assessment enables the Group to then put the most appropriate measures in place to either avoid the risk altogether or mitigate the risk to an acceptable level.
The risks outlined below are those principal risks and uncertainties that are material to the Group.
They do not include all the risks associated with Group activities and are not set out in any order of priority.
Impact on Group Likelihood of occurrence Risk assessment Risk levels Low Medium High Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Principal risks and uncertainties continued Risk Likelihood Issue Impact Mitigation Regulations continued General taxation Medium The Group currently operates across different jurisdictions in a tax environment which is constantly evolving.
It is therefore important that the Group remains up to date with all changes affecting its tax position.
Adverse changes to tax rules may increase the Groups underlying effective tax rate and reduce profits available for distribution.
Specifically the UK government has enforced further changes on the calculation of Point of Consumption Tax POC with an effective date of 1 August 2017.
Some uncertainty remains regarding how these calculation changes will be implemented in practice by the industry but they will increase the cost of sales in the Groups new financial year which in turn will reduce Adjusted EBITDA.
Low The Group is constantly monitoring its tax position in each country it is a tax resident in.
More importantly we are in constant communication with external tax advisors and financial management ensures they remain up to date with any expected changes.
In general changes in tax rules and practices are carefully considered in advance of being passed as law to assess their financial implications and ensure that changes are made to the Groups operations in time for the change.
On POC the Group has engaged the services of tax advisors to better understand the general expectation of the industry.
The Group has a strong operating team which is working to update all systems including its reporting tools to comply with the new POC tax regulation and Group budgets have been updated to include the anticipated monetary impact on the Groups results.
The
Group has also reviewed its bonus system to mitigate the impact of the inclusion of bonus funds in the calculation of POC tax without disrupting customer experience.
Customer Data protection Medium The Group as part of its business processes deals with a large quantity of personal customer data including sensitive data such as name address customer age bank details and gaming betting history.
The Group must ensure that its data handling policies are in line with the data protection regulations in the countries in which it operates to prevent any breaches from happening since this may result in substantial fines which will have a negative commercial and reputational impact.
High The Group has a number of robust control processes in place to ensure the security of customer data and engages external consultants to test and verify these processes.
In respect of the forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation GDPR the Group has engaged the services of a consultancy firm to provide professional advice and guidance on GDPR in order to fully assess the implications for the Group.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 15 Risk Likelihood Issue Impact Mitigation Fraud and audit Money laundering and being associated with crime and disorder Medium The Group handles a high volume of online transactions from multiple consumers and through a number of payment service providers.
If the Group inadvertently handles any proceeds of crime it may be committing money laundering offences under the UK Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and similar legislation in other jurisdictions in which the group operates.
This would have a lasting and damaging effect on the Groups reputation which can subsequently affect relationships with service providers in particular the payment processing providers which could refuse our business going forward.
Furthermore a weak antimoney laundering framework may also lead to sanctions from regulatory authorities which could impose substantial fines or suspend our regulatory licence.
In the latter case the Group might be unable to operate in certain jurisdictions.
High Our internal software is setup with various triggers to be able to detect customer transactions that may be considered to carry higher risk.
For example the system is designed to flag up immediately any unusual transactions such as high value and number of deposits in a day deposits made in accounts which already have a significant balance and types of methods used for withdrawals especially where these differ from the deposit method.
Any transactions picked up by the software will lead to due diligence or enhanced due diligence where customers have to provide identity documents.
As a Group we have a dedicated fraud and compliance team which carries out all necessary checks for new players as well as unusual transactions with existing players.
Furthermore our payment service providers are regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority.
All business partners which primarily comprises suppliers and employees are subject to strict background and documentation checks.
As part of our ongoing commitment to keep crime out of the business the Group has engaged the services of a consulting firm to conduct an independent assessment of its antimoney laundering policies.
Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Principal risks and uncertainties continued Risk Likelihood Issue Impact Mitigation Information technology
Low The Groups business is at risk from disruption of key systems and assets on which it depends.
The functioning of the IT systems within the Groups businesses or those of third parties on which it relies could be disrupted for reasons either within or beyond their control including but not limited to accidental damage disruption to the supply of utilities or services including the internet infrastructure security breaches and general systems failure.
Any substantial disruptions could impact the Groups ability to generate revenue and offer services to customers which in turn could affect the Groups reputation performance and financial position.
High As part of its periodic review of key business controls the Group carried out a systemwide upgrade of its disaster recovery system during the year.
The new disaster recovery system can now enable a much faster recovery should there be disruptions in the business.
The Group will continue to invest in its IT systems and technology to ensure that the network infrastructure meets and continues to enhance the performance and reliability criteria of the Group.
Distributed denial of service DDoS malicious viruses and other cybercrime attacks Low IT systems may be impacted by unauthorised access cyberattacks DDoS Distributed Denial of Service attacks malicious viruses theft or misuse of data by internal or external parties.
Cyberattacks hacking and in general cybercrime is becoming increasingly common and may expose the Group to blackmail demands and the need to devote additional resources in recovering any physical or reputational damage that may result from an attack.
In addition substantial fines are being considered for breaches of the new data protection laws such as the proposed fines of up to 17 million or 4% of global turnover.
High IT policies especially around security are constantly monitored and reviewed to ensure compliance.
Training is a significant part of our framework and we ensure that all employees are aware of the risks of cyberattacks and can spot the signs.
To ensure that the Group is compliant with the industry guidelines and EU legislation it has engaged the services of a consulting firm to conduct a cyber security review and any recommendations will be taken under advisement.
Operational
Dependence on thirdparty service providers Low The Group engages with many providers of nonproprietary thirdparty games and payment processing services as well as other important service providers.
If there is any interruption to the products or services provided by third parties or if there are problems in supplying the products or if one or more ceased to be provided or was provided on onerous terms to the Group this could have an adverse effect on the Groups business and performance.
High To mitigate this risk the Group uses reliable industry suppliers and ensures that contractual agreements with key partners are adequate to offer protection to the Group.
The Group now contracts with two card payment service providers to mitigate any risk associated with relying on one card payment service provider and to avoid bad user experience.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 17
Chief Financial Officers review
The financial information shown for the prior year is on a proforma basis so as to show both periods on a likeforlike basis that is as if the acquisitions of 8Ball Netboost Media and Tarco Assets on 31 August 2016 had taken place at the start of the twelvemonth comparative period.
Stride Gaming continued to deliver strong organic growth for the year driven by its Real Money Gaming vertical with Group proforma NGR growth of 18% to 89.9 million 2016 proforma 76.4 million and reported 47.8 million.
Organic growth driven by successful execution of the Groups multibrand strategy was enhanced by the acquisitions of 8Ball Netboost Media and the Tarco Assets in August 2016.
Significant improvements in player engagement and monetisation across the Groups brands helped deliver a strong overall performance.
Adjusted EBITDA increased on a proforma basis by 24% to 20.2 million 2016 proforma 16.4 million and reported 12.3 million whilst the Adjusted EBITDA margin expanded by 2% to 23% 2016 proforma 21%.
We anticipate some further margin improvement once acquisition earnout periods conclude in the new financial year.
Stride Gaming remains highly cash generative with net cash generated from operational activities at 12.9 million 2016 reported 13.7 million which includes the year one InfiApps earnout payment of 3.9 million and a high cash conversion from Adjusted EBITDA.
During the year the Group completed the refinancing of an existing 8.0 million shareholder loan facility with Barclays PLC without any impact to our cash position.
Stride Gaming has a strong balance sheet with cash and cash equivalents of 26.2 million 31 August 2016 21.1 million which includes customer liabilities of 2.5 million 31 August 2016 1.8 million.
Proforma NGR growth of 18% to 89.9million 2016 proforma 76.4 million and reported 47.8 million Adjusted EBITDA increased 24% to 20.2 million on a proforma basis 2016 proforma 16.4 million and reported 12.3 million Strong balance sheet with cash and cash equivalents of 26.2 million 2016 21.1 million Strong organic growth Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Significant improvements in player engagement and monetisation across the Groups brands helped deliver a strong overall performance.
Revenue
NGR from Real Money Gaming which represents 91% of Group NGR 2016 proforma 83% was up 29% to 81.8 million 2016 proforma 63.6 million and reported 34.9 million.
This strong growth and operational momentum was reflected across all key performance indicators and demonstrates the benefits of our proprietary platform along with the quality of our diversified brands business intelligence expertise and customer engagement.
Total deposits in the real money vertical were up 25.6% to 147 million 2016 proforma 117 million demonstrating the Groups strength in the bingoled market driven by our multibrand strategy.
Yield per player from Real Money Gaming was up 29% to 147 2016 proforma 114 a result of successful player engagement and improvement in monetisation.
Real
Money Gaming funded players were down 10% to 146000 2016 proforma 162000 as a result of our strategy to focus on lifetime value players over volume of players and the reduction of free bonuses across the Group.
The increased use of mobile and touch devices by our players across the brands also contributed to our growth with GGR up by 17.9% and now represents 66% 2016 proforma 56% of the total Group Real Money Gaming GGR.
The Group continued to invest in and develop our new content and business intelligence capabilities during the period which supported our organic growth and places us in a strong position for the next financial year.
Revenues from the Social Gaming vertical which represent 9% of Group NGR 2016 proforma 17% and reported 27% were down 37% on a constant currency basis down 44% to 8.1 million 2016 reported 12.8 million.
The Group continued to invest in product development and enhancing the player experience to mitigate the challenges in player acquisition in the social gaming market.
As a result of the market decline we are reviewing our Social Gaming strategy and have reallocated some marketing resources to our RMG vertical.
Cost of sales Cost of sales totalled 11.6 million 2016 proforma 9.0 million and reported 5.3 million and represent solely the UK Point of Consumption POC Tax on the Real Money Gaming vertical.
In August 2017 the new POC tax on free bets was introduced but there was no material impact on the cost of sale in the year.
Distribution costs Distribution costs of 38.6 million 2016 proforma 34.3 million and reported 18.7 million which include licensing processing royalties thirdparty games and platforms hosting social gaming and marketing reduced to 43% 2016 proforma 45% as a proportion of Group NGR.
This significant reduction reflects the benefits of scale on processing costs as we leverage our proprietary software and content across our brands thereby reducing thirdparty royalty payments.
We have also continued to invest in marketing to support our online brands in the Real Money Gaming vertical.
Total marketing expenses across both verticals increased by 29% to 22.6 million 2016 proforma 17.6 million which represented 25% of NGR 2016 proforma 23%.
Administration costs The Group maintained a tight control on administration costs which totalled 19.4 million 2016 proforma 16.7 million and reported 11.4 million.
This was stable year on year at 22% of NGR 2016 proforma 22% despite the Groups continued investment in talent software development business intelligence and products in line with our vision to build a leading online gaming business.
Proprietary software development Capitalised costs totalled 1.3 million 2016 reported 1.0 million across the Real Money Gaming and Social Gaming verticals.
During the period the Group continued to invest in its proprietary software to support its mobile offering unique content and compliance in line with regulatory requirements.
Amortisation of capitalised development costs during the year was 0.6 million 2016 reported 0.2 million.
Adjusted EBITDA and margin Adjusted EBITDA on a proforma basis is up 24% to 20.2 million 2016 proforma 16.4 million and reported 12.3 million reflecting the strength of the RMG vertical and control over costs with an improved Adjusted EBITDA margin of 23% 2016 proforma 21%.
The Adjusted EBITDA for the Real Money Gaming vertical in the period increased by 60% along with an increase in EBITDA margins to 24.1% 2016 proforma 19.3%.
As we conclude the earnout period for the acquisitions of Netboost Media and Tarco Assets both December 2017 together with the 8Ball acquisition that concluded in August 2017 we expect further margin improvement to come from synergies and cost savings.
The Adjusted EBITDA for the Social Gaming vertical decreased by 85% to 0.6 million 2016 reported 4.1 million as a direct result of the decline in revenue arising from a reduced marketing spend together with the increase in our product development and administration costs in this vertical.
Chief Financial Officers review continued Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 19 Exceptional costs Impairment of intangible On 28 February 2017 an impairment review was undertaken in respect of the Social Gaming cash generating unit CGU to determine if the carrying value of assets was supported by the net present value of future cash flows expected to be derived from those assets.
As a result of the review the Board approved an impairment of 9.9 million 2016 reported Nil charged against the goodwill and acquired intangibles reflecting the more challenging and competitive social gaming market.
As of 31 August 2017 the Board undertook an additional review on this CGUs business models and financial projections and concluded that no further impairment was required.
Contingent remuneration The contingent remuneration charge for the period relates to the earnout payments for the acquisitions of 8Ball and InfiApps linked to the employment of the sellers within the Group and therefore has been charged to the profit or loss account in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs.
The total remuneration payable for the 8Ball acquisition was 4.0 million in cash and 10.1 million in sharebased payments with the remainder of 0.9 million relating to the InfiApps second year earnout payment.
Both earnouts were settled post year end in September 2017.
Contingent consideration The contingent consideration charge for the period relates to the liability for the Tarco earnout liability.
The liability increased during the period as a result of better than expected adjusted EBITDA performance to date and management expectations for the remaining earnout period to 31 December 2017.
During the year the Group successfully increased net gaming revenue by applying better operational knowhow and realising cost synergies with the wider Group resources resulting in lower distribution and administration costs.
The fair value of the contingent consideration liability at the year end is 17.4 million 2016 5.6 million with the increase of 10.8 million and unwinding of interest of 1.0 million being recognised in the profit or loss account.
The contingent liability will be payable in a mix of cash and shares 51.44% and 48.56% respectively.
At the time of acquisition an amount of 3.0 million was placed in an escrow account with a further 1.0 million during the current year with the intention to cover part of the earnout payment within three months from the end of the earnout period.
Finance expenses and tax Finance expenses for the period totalled 1.5 million 2016 reported 0.7 million and principally relate to the unwinding of the discounted contingent consideration that arose on the Tarco Asset acquisition of 1.0 million 2016 reported Nil.
Also included is the finance cost of the 8.0 million facility provided by Barclays PLC during the period at an annual rate of 3.6% plus LIBOR annual floating rate basis.
The credit to taxation in the period was 1.1 million 2016 reported expense of 0.5 million.
An adjustment was made for the deferred tax credits relating to the impairment of the social gaming CGU and acquired intangibles.
The underlying current taxation charge in the period is 0.6 million 2016 expense of 1.1 million.
Cash flow and balance sheet Stride Gaming continues to be highly cash generative delivering another period of strong operating performance with net cash flow from operating activities totalling 12.9 million 2016 13.7 million.
Cash outflow mainly related to the InfiApps first year earnout payment of 3.9 million 2016 Nil as well as the payment of an interim dividend of 0.8 million 2016 0.5 million and a final dividend for the prior year of 0.9 million 2016 Nil.
As at 31 August 2017 the Group has a strong balance sheet with cash and cash equivalents amounting to 26.2 million 31 August 2016 21.1 million which includes ringfenced customer liability balances of 2.5 million 31 August 2016 1.8 million.
Contingent remuneration included within current liabilities of 5.0 million 31 August 2016 4.6 million primarily relates to the 8Ball and InfiApps earnout payment of 4.0 million 2016 Nil and 0.9 million 2016 3.8 million respectively.
Both of these amounts were settled post year end and therefore represent agreed balances.
The contingent consideration liability of 17.4 million 31 August 2016 5.6 million included in current liabilities relates to the acquisition of the Tarco Assets.
As at 31 August 2017 the fair value of the Groups 24.2% availableforsale investment in QSB Gaming Limited an operator of online casino and bingo gaming sites in the Spanish market has been increased from 810000 to 1595000.
As the security held is unquoted the fair value has been assessed in the current year based on expected cash flows discounted using a rate of 50% 2016 35% based on the market interest rate and the risk premium specific to the investment.
Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT
Chief Financial Officers review continued
Adjusted earnings EPS and dividend Basic loss per share was 38.1p 2016 proforma loss per share of 0.8p and reported loss per share of 0.75p.
Adjusted basic earnings per share was up 29% to 27.5p 2016 proforma 21.3p.
The Board believes that Adjusted basic earnings per share excluding exceptional items such as impairment contingent remuneration and consideration acquisition costs amortisation of intangible assets excluding those arising from internal development sharebased payments and associated taxes enables a better understanding of the underlying business performance.
Audited year ended 31 August 2017
31 August 2016 Loss after tax 25623 538 Amortisation of intangible assets 7 788 8124 Depreciation 261 137 Acquisition and listing costs  1090 Contingent remuneration 14295 3987 Contingent consideration 10797 Sharebased payments including associated taxes 1758 1912 Unwinding of Tarco contingent consideration discount 1000 Impairment net of movement in deferred taxation 9987 Movement in deferred taxes related to acquisitions 1755 380 Adjusted earnings 18508 14332 Adjusted earnings per share 27 .5 21.3 Adjusted diluted earnings per share 26.2 20.3 Basic loss per share 38.1 0.8 Excluding amortisation of internally generated development costs.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share is calculated using the effect of share options and contingent share consideration on business combination and acquisition of intangible assets.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 21 Below is the reconciliation from the reported 2016 financial statements to the proforma information included in this report that is what the results would have been in the year ended 31 August 2016 if the acquisitions of 8Ball Games Limited Netboost Media Limited and the Tarco Assets were made at the start of the comparative period.
Reported results 31 August 2016
Proforma results 31 August 2016 Net gaming revenue  Social Gaming 12825  12825 Net gaming revenue  Real Money Gaming 34974 28631 63605 Cost of sales 5387 3667 9054 Gross profit 42412 24964 67376 Distribution costs 18667 15651 34318 Administrative expenses 11427 5265 16692 Adjusted EBITDA 12318 4048 16366 Sharebased payments 1912  1912 Acquisition costs 1090  1090 Contingent remuneration 3987  3987 Amortisation of intangible assets 4389 3985 8374 Depreciation 137  137 Operating profit 803 63 866 Finance income 25  25 Finance expense 697  697 Profit before tax 131 63 194 Tax expense 517 215 732 Loss after tax 386 152 538 In line with the Groups stated objective of adopting a progressive dividend policy in August 2017 the Group paid an interim dividend of 1.2p per share.
Considering the Groups strong performance the Board has recommended a final dividend of 1.5p per share subject to shareholder approval at the AGM in February 2018 which takes the total dividend for the full year to 2.7p per share.
The dividend timetable Exdividend date 4 January 2018 Record date for dividend 5 January 2018 Payment date 1 February 2018 Ronen Kannor Chief Financial Officer 21 November 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 22 Board of Directors Nigel Terrence Payne NonExecutive Chairman Member of Audit and Remuneration Committees Nigel has over 25 years of experience as a director of both publicly listed and private companies.
He has extensive experience of listing companies and fundraising notably in his current role as nonexecutive chairman of Gateley plc nonexecutive chairman of ECSC plc nonexecutive director of Getbusy plc and until recently nonexecutive chairman of EG solutions plc.
Nigel is also the former CEO of Sportingbet Plc.
Sportingbet was one of the worlds largest internet gambling companies and made a number of acquisitions whilst listed on the London Stock Exchange both FTSE listed and AIM quoted.
Nigel holds an Executive MBA from the IMD Business School Lausanne Switzerland and a degree in economics and accounting from the University of Bristol.
Stuart Eitan Boyd
Chief Executive Officer
Eitan has over 17 years of experience in the online gaming sector.
He was a founder of the GlobalCom bingo network now the Dragonfish platform one of the largest bingo networks worldwide which was sold to 888 Holdings plc for 42 million in 2007.
He was responsible for building the Wink Bingo network until it was sold to 888 Holdings plc for 60 million in 2010.
Eitan is a highly experienced gaming operator with a proven record in creating value for shareholders.
Eitan is a graduate of the Accelerated Development Program at Chicago Booth Business School London England and holds a BA Honours degree in economics from Tel Aviv University.
He has been awarded the Small Business Person of the Week by The Independent in 2015 and participates in the LSE ELITE programme.
Chairmans introduction to corporate governance There are no specific corporate governance guidelines which apply generally to companies incorporated in Jersey.
However the Directors are subject to various general fiduciary duties and duties of skill and diligence under Jersey company laws and statute.
Furthermore although companies traded on AIM are not required to provide corporate governance disclosure or follow guidelines in the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council FRC the Directors recognise the value and importance of high standards of corporate governance.
The Directors support high standards of corporate governance and confirm that they comply with the recommendations on corporate governance made by the Quoted Companies Alliance as far as is practicable taking into account the Companys size and stage of development.
The Board is responsible for formulating reviewing and approving the Companys strategy budgets and corporate actions.
To this end the Board holds regular Board meetings and has established Remuneration and Audit
Details on the composition of the Board and reports from the Chairs of the Remuneration and Audit Committees follow
this Corporate Governance Statement.
Nigel Payne NonExecutive Chairman Key to Committees A R Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Chairman Remuneration Committee Audit Committee Chairman A R Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 23 John Le Poidevin NonExecutive Director John is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and a former audit partner in a major accounting firm where as head of consumer markets he developed an extensive breadth of experience and knowledge across the online gaming leisure and retail sectors in the UK and overseas.
John is now a nonexecutive on a number of listed company boards primarily of consumer real estate or online technologyrelated businesses and he therefore brings a wealth of relevant experience both to the sector in which the Group operates and in terms of corporate governance audit risk and financial reporting.
Ronen Kannor Chief Financial Officer Ronen joined Stride Gaming at the end of October 2014 and has over 14 years experience in financial management roles within the real estate and business intelligence sectors.
He has wideranging CFO experience in all aspects of financial and operational management in a number of companies including KC Development Inc Publicis Group and Ernst and Young Israel branch.
Ronen holds an MBA in accounting and finance from the Tel Aviv College of Management is a Certified Public Accountant The Institute of Certified Public Accountants Israel and holds a BBA in accounting and finance from the Tel Aviv College of Management.
Adam David Batty NonExecutive Director Adam is the founder and chief executive of a new fast casual premium chicken concept that is being rolled out in major cities across the UK.
A corporate lawyer by training Adam worked in private practice at Norton Rose Fulbright and in an investment bank before joining Mitchells and Butlers PLC in 2002 where he spent five years as legal director and latterly risk and compliance director before joining Dominos Pizza Group plc in 2007 where he spent five years as general counsel and company secretary which involved being a member of its operating boards in the UK Germany and Switzerland.
From early 2013 until autumn 2017 Adam was the general counsel and company secretary at Selfridges Group where he had a very broad legal governance and commercial role.
Darren Brett Sims Chief Operating Officer Darren has over eleven years experience in the gambling sector.
He was instrumental in the sale of GlobalCom Limited to 888 Holdings Plc.
As vice president of bingo within 888site bingo vertical and was part of the team that established the Dragonfish Technology  the B2B arm of 888 Holdings Plc.
Upon completion of his contract with 888 Holdings Plc he returned to Spacebar Media where he rejoined Eitan Boyd just prior to the sale of Wink Bingo to 888 Holdings Plc.
He holds a Bachelor of Commerce Honours degree from the University of Witwatersrand South Africa.
A A R R Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 24 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Statement from the Chair of the Audit Committee for the year ended 31 August 2017 This is the third report of the Audit Committee following the Companys flotation on AIM in May 2015.
The Committee has responsibility for amongst other things the planning of reviewing and reporting to the Board on financial reporting internal financial control and risk management and the involvement of the Companys auditor in that process.
The
Committee focuses in particular on compliance with corporate governance accounting standards and legal requirements together with maintaining an effective system of internal financial control.
The Committee advises the Board on the statement by the Directors that the annual report when read as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
The ultimate responsibility for reviewing and approving the annual report and the halfyearly report remains with the Board as a whole.
The Committee also has responsibility for the consideration of the requirement for and scope of internal audit and for reviewing the performance independence and effectiveness of the external auditor.
Our focus in the current year has been to work closely with management and the external auditor to plan for and monitor the integrity of the annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 August 2017 and the audit thereof.
We also carried out a review of the financial risks and subsequently the internal control framework to manage these risks.
Although we did not consider that there was a need for the provision of an internal audit function in the current year we will continue to assess this going forward.
Our programme for the 2018 financial year will include a continued focus on the integrity of the annual report and financial statements and ensuring that the Companys internal controls continue to evolve to cover any changes in the financial risks of the Company following the growth of the Companys activities including any changes arising from the integration of the businesses that were acquired at the end of the prior financial year.
Introduction
All three NonExecutive Directors are members of the Audit
The Committee met three times in the year ended 31 August 2017 with all Committee members attending every meeting.
The Committees terms of reference are available for public inspection on the Companys website at site John Le Poidevin as a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and former audit partner and chair of other public company audit committees is considered to have recent and relevant financial experience.
Both Nigel Payne and Adam Batty have many years of relevant financial and audit committee experience and Nigel is also a Chartered Accountant.
By invitation of the Audit Committee Chair Ronen Kannor the Chief Financial Officer has attended all Committee meetings held to date as did representatives of BDO LLP the external auditor.
Other Executive Directors have been invited to attend Committee meetings where relevant for them to do so.
The
Audit Committee also meets with the external auditor without any Executive Directors present and the Audit Committee Chair met with BDO LLP separately on several occasions to discuss matters including the audit process.
Key activities during the period The focus of the Audit Committees activities during the year has been centred around the effective planning implementation and review of our financial reporting processes.
During the period we have reviewed and monitored the integrity of the published financial information including the halfyearly report the preliminary announcement and the annual report and financial statements considered the independence and objectivity of the external auditor planned for the Companys year end and reviewed the audit plan assessed the key risks which could have a material impact on the financial statements and reviewed significant issues and areas of judgement applied in the preparation of the financial statements.
Financial reporting and significant financial judgements Set out below are the significant issues considered by the Audit Committee and discussed with the external auditor in relation to the financial statements and how these were then subsequently addressed.
Revenue recognition Revenue recognition gives rise to a risk over completeness existence accuracy and presentation in the statement of comprehensive income of net gaming revenue and also involves judgements as to estimates and treatment of certain customer bonuses and the liability required in respect of progressive jackpots.
Furthermore net gaming revenue generated from Real Money Gaming is reliant on complex IT systems and has therefore been considered as a specific risk.
The Committee reviewed the internal control procedures in respect of revenue recognition and discussed with management and the external auditor the accounting policies adopted and judgements made in respect of revenue recognition for both the Real Money and Social Gaming revenue streams and confirmed that they are appropriate and in line with relevant accounting standards and industry practice.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 25 Financial reporting and significant financial judgements continued Goodwill and other intangibles The Group undertook a number of acquisitions in the prior year which gave rise to goodwill and other intangibles within the Group financial statements and the requirement to carry out impairment reviews for each subsequent reporting period.
The Committee discussed with management the discounted cash flow models and assumptions estimates and judgements made for each separately identifiable cash generating unit in order to consider the carrying value of goodwill and other intangibles.
Key assumptions reviewed included discount rates perpetuity rates operating margins and growth rates as well as the periods covered by the projections and the sensitivity analysis applied.
The Committee discussed these with the auditor and confirmed how these assumptions compared with industry standards and were supported by historical trends within the businesses acquired.
Other issues In addition to the above items other areas considered by the Committee in relation to the financial statements included the adequacy of tax provisions and disclosures the capitalisation of software development costs the completeness of related party disclosures the carrying value of the Groups availableforsale investments the fair value of contingent consideration and the accounting treatments relating to the fair value of share options and LTIP awards granted in the period.
Internal control and risk review process Whilst the Committee is responsible for reviewing the financial risks and internal controls to mitigate these the Board as a whole is responsible for reviewing the overall business risks and risk management procedures.
The Groups principal risks and uncertainties together with mitigating actions and the internal controls and risk management procedures are set out in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section of the annual report.
External auditor and independence During the year the Committee conducted its annual review of the effectiveness of the auditor and satisfied itself that the auditor is delivering the necessary level of service scrupulousness and robust challenge in its work together with a formal assessment of the external auditors independence.
The external auditor carried out other services during the year amounting to fees of 33800 including reviews of the interim financial statements and other accounting information together with a transfer pricing review carried out by a BDO overseas office.
The analysis of audit auditrelated and nonaudit fees is provided in note 3 to the financial statements.
The Group has engaged a number of other accounting firms to carry out such work during the financial year including Grant Thornton UK LLP which is engaged as the Companys principal tax advisor and the Committee satisfied itself that where the external auditor carried out nonaudit work it undertook its standard independence procedures in relation to those engagements and that they were selected by the Company on the basis of specific expertise or familiarity with the areas under review.
The Committee required the external auditor to confirm in writing that it remained independent in its scrutiny of the financial statements and had sufficient policies and procedures in place including the use of separate teams and different engagement partners for any nonaudit work.
The
Committee was satisfied that the external auditors independence and objectivity were not compromised by the nonaudit work undertaken in the financial period.
John Le Poidevin Chairman of the Audit Committee 21 November 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 26 Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee for the year ended 31 August 2017 Below is set out the annual report of the Remuneration Committee the Committee.
The report comprises a description of how the Committee operates and a brief overview of the remuneration policy and how we intend to implement it in 201718 together with details of compensation paid to the Board of Directors within the financial year.
The previous review of the remuneration policy took place in August 2015.
The Committee therefore undertook a further review of Executive remuneration during the year under review in order to establish whether the remuneration levels set were competitive sufficiently recognised the skills and experience of the Executive Directors and reflected the Companys size and status on AIM.
The Committee further reviewed the operation of variable incentive plans to ensure they have the correct link between performance and reward.
As a result of this review the Committee decided that its previous policy was still in the main appropriate for the 201718 financial year and for the foreseeable future.
This policy can be summarised as follows base salaries in line with equivalent roles at companies with similar characteristics and sector comparators recognising the capabilities and strong performance to date and reflecting responsibility levels and complexity of the roles an appropriate pension contribution to provide market competitive yet cost effective retirement benefits annual bonus maximum quantum set by reference to each individuals salary with performance assessed against a combination of financial and operational goals linked to the Companys strategy and an annual award of performance shares subject to a combination of performance conditions measured over a threeyear performance period aligned to the main strategic objectives of delivering sustained profitable growth and increasing the Companys share price over the medium term.
Against the backdrop of another successful year for the Company the Committee is satisfied that the remuneration policy adopted for the 201718 financial year operates in such a way as to incentivise Company growth and development and reward for strong performance offering an appropriate balance between fixed and performancerelated immediate and deferred remuneration but without overpaying or creating the risk of rewards for failure.
Remuneration Committee report
The Committee is appointed by the Board and is formed of NonExecutive Directors.
In the year the Committee was chaired by Adam Batty the other members of the Committee were Nigel Payne and John Le Poidevin.
The Committee met three times during the year and all Committee members attended every meeting.
The Committees terms of reference are available for public inspection on the Companys website at site Other members of the Board of Directors are invited to attend meetings when appropriate but no Director is present when his remuneration is discussed.
New Bridge Street NBS a part of Aon Hewitt Limited provided advice to the Committee during the current and prior years.
NBS is a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Group code of conduct and has no other connection with the Company other than in the provision of advice on remuneration from time to time.
The Committees principal duties remain as follows to review and make recommendations in relation to the Companys Senior Executive remuneration policy to apply these recommendations when setting the specific remuneration packages for each Executive Director the Company Chairman and other selected members of senior management and to include annual bonuses the eligibility requirements for longterm incentive schemes pension rights contracts of employment and any compensation payments to ensure that the remuneration policy is aligned with the short and longterm strategy of the Company to manage performance measurements and make awards under the Companys annual bonus and longterm incentive plans to consult with key shareholders with regards to remuneration where appropriate and take their views into account and to manage reporting and disclosure requirements relating to Executive remuneration.
Pay policy The remuneration policy is designed to provide an appropriate level of compensation to senior management such that they are sufficiently incentivised and rewarded for their strong performance their levels of responsibility and complexity of their role and to reflect their skills and experience over time.
Using appropriate measures of financial and personal performance as well as equitybased rewards helps to align the interests of the Directors with those of the Companys shareholders.
The Committee has taken into account market data when setting remuneration levels positioning Executives pay at a broadly midmarket level relative to similarly sized AIMlisted companies as well as those from the gaming sector.
This provides a package which is both fair and competitive within the market.
Base salary Base salaries are reviewed on an annual basis and any increases become effective from the start of the financial year.
As a result of the salary benchmarking exercise undertaken in the 201617 financial year and reflecting the strong performance of the Company and Directors during the year with effect from 1 September 2017 Eitan Boyd and Darren Sims are entitled to a base salary of 290000 following an increase of 14% over the previous financial year.
Ronen Kannor is entitled to a base salary of 185000 following an increase of 13% over the previous financial year.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 27 Pension and benefits The Executive Directors are entitled to a pension contribution of up to 10% of salary in the form of a defined contribution to a pension plan andor as a cash supplement.
Additionally the Executive Directors are entitled to benefits in kind including the provision of life assurance group income protection and private medical and dental insurance.
Annual bonus The remuneration policy allows the Committee at its discretion to make annual cash bonus awards to the Executive Directors which will normally be limited to a bonus opportunity of 100% of salary per annum.
Stretching performance targets are determined by the Committee at the start of the financial year which are fully aligned with the Companys strategy and objectives.
These targets a majority of the bonus are financial in nature e.
Adjusted EBITDA with a minority of the bonus payable for the achievement of qualitative strategic and personal performance targets set by the Chief Executive Officer and agreed by the Chairman.
For the financial targets a sliding scale target range is used with no bonus payable for this element unless a threshold level of performance is achieved.
Clawback provisions do apply.
The Committee retains the discretion to increase the annual bonus opportunity to 125% of salary in exceptional circumstances where actual performance significantly exceeds targets set at the start of the financial year.
It is intended that this flexibility will only be used in limited scenarios reflecting the dynamic nature of the market.
For the financial year ended 31 August 2017 in light of the exceptional performance by the Executive team in exceeding the financial targets set for the year the Committee exercised its discretion to increase the annual bonus opportunity to 115% of salary.
Longterm incentives During the financial year under review the Company made its first annual longterm incentive LTIP award as announced on 6 June 2017.
The awards will be satisfied in the form of ordinary shares with a face value of up to 100% of each Executive Directors salary for the relevant financial year on a threeyear vesting period.
As disclosed in the Remuneration Report in respect of the financial year ending 31 August 2016 due to transaction activity during the previous financial year and then close periods it was not possible to grant the planned awards therefore the award made in the year comprised both the 201617 award and the award carried over from 201516.
As highlighted in last years Remuneration Report the Committee has retained a discretion to shorten the standard vesting periods to take account of the delayed award cycles.
The awards are subject to challenging performance conditions set at the time of grant which includes metrics based on the Companys financial performance which is in line with the Companys stated growth strategy.
The vested LTIP awards will be exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the grant date subject to the individuals ongoing employment.
The awards are structured as forfeitable share awards whereby the beneficial interest in the ordinary shares will be transferred to the participants if the conditions set out in the Companys LTIP have been met and after consulting with the Remuneration Committee.
Dividends which accrue may be paid on vested shares.
Clawback provisions apply.
The combined award is summarised below Number of ordinary shares which LTIP awards were granted for Number of ordinary shares which LTIP awards were granted for Executive Directors Stuart Eitan Boyd 111111 113333 Darren Brett Sims 111111 113333 Ronen Kannor 66667 77778 Total 288889 304444 Date of vesting 31082018 31082019 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 28 NonExecutive Director fees Fees for NonExecutive Directors are set with reference to market data time commitment responsibilities and chairmanship of Board Committees.
Fees are normally reviewed biennially.
During the year as part of the wider review of remuneration policy the fees payable to the NonExecutive Directors were reviewed in the case of the Chairman of the Board by the Committee and in the case of the NonExecutive Directors by the Board and as a result from 1 September 2017 the Chairman Nigel Payne will receive a fee of 60000 per annum an increase of 25% from the previous year.
The two other NonExecutive Directors Adam Batty and John Le Poidevin will receive annual fees of 47000 representing a 12% increase from the prior year.
Other than their annual fee as well as appropriate travel expenses to and from Board meetings no additional compensation is payable.
Pay and conditions elsewhere in the Company The remuneration policy described above provides an overview of the structure that operates for the most Senior Executives in the Company with a significant element of remuneration dependent on Company and individual performances.
A lower aggregate level of incentive payment applies below Executive Director level.
The vast majority of the Companys employees participate in an annual bonus plan with the limits and performance conditions varying according to job grade.
The Committee believes in broadbased employee share ownership being a key element in retention and motivation in the wider workforce so many employees are provided with longerterm incentives through discretionary share schemes.
The Committee takes into account remuneration packages within the Company as a whole when determining Executive pay levels.
Service agreements The Executive Directors service agreements provide that their employment with the Company is on a rolling basis subject to written notice being served by either party of not less than six months.
The current service contracts and letters of appointment include the following terms Date of contract Notice period Executive Directors Stuart Eitan Boyd 11 May 2015 Six months Darren Brett Sims 11 May 2015 Six months Ronen Kannor 11 May 2015 Six months NonExecutive Directors Adam David Batty 19 May 2015 Three months Nigel Terrence Payne 8 May 2015 Three months John Le Poidevin 19 May 2015 Three months Under these service contracts the Company may terminate an Executive Directors employment immediately by making a payment in lieu of base salary benefits and statutory entitlements and any bonus or commission payments prorated for the duration of the notice period.
No bonus would be payable in the event of an Executive Directors resignation.
Directors Remuneration Report
The Directors received the following remuneration for the financial year ended 31 August 2017
Benefits in kind
Annual bonus
Executive Directors Stuart Eitan Boyd 255 16 2tel838 Darren Brett Sims 255 7 2tel835 Ronen Kannor 175 6 1tel515 NonExecutive Directors Adam David Batty 42     42 42 Nigel Terrence Payne 48     48 57 John Le Poidevin 42     42 50 Aggregate emoluments  2358 2337 1 Including the provision of life assurance group income protection and private medical and dental insurance.
2 Represents the annual bonus payable in December 2017 for performance up to the end of the 201617 financial year.
3 Including the cost of awarded LTIPs during the year.
4 Extra fees in relation to assistance provided with the two acquisitions in the prior year.
Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 29 Outstanding sharebased awards The following sharebased payment awards were outstanding during the year
Effective date of grant
Granted in year Lapsed in year Vested in year Not vested at year end
Exercise price Stuart Eitan Boyd Share options 18 May 2015 750000   500000 250000 1.32 1.32 LTIP 1 Sep 2015 111111    111111 3.02 0.00 LTIP 1 Sep 2016 113333 113333   113333 2.45 0.00 Darren Brett Sims Share options 18 May 2015 750000   500000 250000 1.32 1.32 LTIP 1 Sep 2015 111111    111111 3.02 0.00 LTIP 1 Sep 2016 113333 113333   113333 2.45 0.00 Ronen Kannor Share options 18 May 2015 500000   333334 166666 1.32 1.32 LTIP 1 Sep 2015 66667    66667 3.02 0.00 LTIP 1 Sep 2016 77778 77778   77778 2.45 0.00 On the IPO date in May 2015 the Executive Directors received an award of share options which vest in equal tranches on the first second and third anniversaries of listing.
As detailed above the Company made the first and second longterm incentive awards under a new longterm incentive plan.
The awards are in the form of performance shares with a threeyear vesting period subject to stretching performance conditions set at the time of grant and which include metrics based on financial performance in line with our key objectives of delivering returns to our shareholders through achievement of our growth strategy and continued service.
Statement of Directors interests The table below sets out the beneficial interests in shares and the fully vested share options of all Directors holding office as at 31 August 2017 Ordinary shares Unexercised share options Total interests
31 August
31 August
31 August
31 August
31 August
31 August Stuart Eitan Boyd 2425213 2425213 474444 250000 2899657 2675213 Darren Brett Sims 1083510 1083510 474444 250000 1557 954 1335510 Ronen Kannor   311111 166666 311111 166666 Adam David Batty 22727 22727   22727 22727 Nigel Terrence Payne 13889 13889   13889 13889 John Le Poidevin 44546 44546   44546 44546 Adam David Batty Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 21 November 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 30 Directors report for the year ended 31 August 2017 The Directors present their report and consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 August 2017.
Principal activities and review of the business The Groups principal activities during the year continued to be that of an online real money bingoled operator as well as social gaming.
The Group completed three further acquisitions on 31 August 2016 which further enhanced its real money offering during the year.
A review of the business and a description of the principal risks and uncertainties are set out in the Chairmans Statement and the Chief Executives Statement.
Results and dividends The loss for the year after taxation and exceptional items amounted to 25623000 2016 loss of 386000.
An interim dividend of 808000 1.2p per share was declared and paid in the year ended 31 August 2017 2016 interim dividend of 564000.
The Board is recommending a final dividend of 1.5p per share subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting 2016 final dividend of 1.4p per share paid following shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting.
Further details of the results for the year are included in the Chairmans Chief Executives and Chief Financial Officers Statements.
Future developments Future developments are discussed in the Chairmans Statement and Chief Executives Statement.
Directors interests and remuneration Details of the Directors interests and remuneration are included in the Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee.
Political and charitable donations During the year the Group made charitable contributions totalling 39336 2016 38383.
Disclosures to auditor The Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors Report confirm that so far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and each Director has taken steps that ought to have been taken as a Director to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
BDO LLP has expressed its willingness to continue in office and a resolution to reappoint it will be proposed for the Annual General Meeting.
Financial instruments Details of the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies are included in note 21 to the financial statements.
Events after reporting date For significant events after the reporting period please refer to note 25 of the financial statements.
Going concern The Board is satisfied that the Group has adequate financial resources to continue to operate for the foreseeable future and is financially sound.
For this reason the going concern basis is considered appropriate for the preparation of financial statements.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the Group financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Companies Jersey Law 1991 requires the Directors to prepare accounts for each financial period.
Under that law and as required by the AIM Rules for Companies the Directors have elected to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to retain accounting records that are sufficient to show at any time the financial position of the Group give a true and fair view of the Group financial position financial performance and cash flows select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information make judgements that are reasonable provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs as adopted by the EU is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups financial position and financial performance and state whether the Group financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements.
Website publication The Directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the financial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the Companys website in accordance with legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the Companys website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the financial statements contained therein.
Ronen Kannor Chief Financial Officer 21 November 2017 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 31 Independent auditors report to the members of Stride Gaming plc Opinion on consolidated financial statements We have audited the consolidated financial statements of Stride Gaming plc for the year ended 31 August 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of profit or loss consolidated statement of other comprehensive income the consolidated statement of financial position the consolidated statement of changes in equity and the consolidated statement of cash flows and related notes.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
In our opinion the consolidated financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 31 August 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the Directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements is not appropriate or the Directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the consolidated financial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the consolidated financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identified including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Matter How we addressed the matter in our audit Revenue recognition Refer to note 1 to the financial statements for the accounting policy for revenue recognition.
The Group has a number of revenue streams across its online games.
Revenue is predominantly derived from gambling operations arising from high volume typically low value transactions and is dependent on the overall volume and quantum of amounts wagered.
The accuracy and completeness of revenue recognised and the related player liabilities is dependent on the effectiveness of the systematic and manual financial controls in relation to player liabilities calculation of bonuses jackpots and prizes granted to players cash and bank reconciliations.
Due to the complexity of the processes there is a risk that revenue or player liability errors could go undetected or are not detected on a timely basis.
We evaluated and tested relevant IT general controls over the key revenue and financial information systems.
We involved IT specialists for this purpose.
The key automated and manual general application controls over the completeness and accuracy of the Groups main gaming systems have been documented and tested including conducting test bets.
We have completed a full extraction of all gaming data from the two proprietary platforms and reconciled the opening to closing client liability balances and the resulting gaming revenue for the year taking into account bonuses jackpots and prizes granted to players during the year.
We have tested a sample of social gaming revenues and revenue generated from third party platforms to invoice and subsequent bank receipt.
We noted no deficiencies in the operating effectiveness of the controls and no material errors in the substantive procedures performed in our audit of revenue in the financial statements for the year ended 31 August 2017.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 32 Independent auditors report continued to the members of Stride Gaming Plc Matter How we addressed the matter in our audit Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets At 31 August 2017 goodwill and other intangible assets amounted to 57.7 million.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the Group performed an impairment assessment for all cash generating units as identified by management.
As a result of this review management determined that the weaker than expected social gaming market had an adverse effect on the projected value in use of that social gaming cash generating unit and consequently these intangible assets have been written down to their assessed value in use.
As disclosed in note 12 this resulted in an impairment of 6.1 million charged against goodwill and 3.9 million against acquired intangibles.
We agreed the forecasts used in the impairment calculations to the latest Board approved plans.
We evaluated the assumptions in these forecasts and plans and considered the evidence in support of them principally in relation to historical trends and actual performance in 2017.
We reviewed the net present values calculated by management against the overall net assets of the cash generating units.
We reviewed the basis and reasonableness of the discount rate used.
We performed a sensitivity analysis in respect of the key assumptions used in the impairment calculations.
We have utilised a valuations specialist to review the models and certain assumptions used by management including the discount rate applied.
Based on the substantive procedures performed the impairment assessment and impairment charge appears reasonable.
Our application of materiality We determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole to be 907k 2016 615k which represents approximately 4.5% of adjusted EBITDA.
We agreed with the audit committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 18k 2016 12k.
We used adjusted EBITDA as a benchmark given the importance of EBITDA as a measure for shareholders in assessing the underlying performance of the Group.
Individual component audits were carried out using component materialities of between 6075% of overall financial statement materiality.
An overview of the scope of our audit We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the geographical structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which the Group operates.
All work was undertaken by the Group engagement team with the exception of components in Israel and Mauritius where we engaged with component auditors.
Where work was performed by component auditors we determined the level of involvement we needed at those reporting units to conclude whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the consolidated financial statements as a whole.
We discussed the planned procedures ahead of the audit with the component auditors and also discussed the results of their procedures during the completion of the audit procedures.
Other information The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the consolidated financial statements and our Auditors Report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the consolidated financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Key audit matters continued Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 33 Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Jersey Law 1991 requires us to report to you if in our opinion proper accounting records have not been kept or proper returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the consolidated financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of Directors As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the consolidated financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Article 113A of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our Auditors Report.
Kieran Storan senior statutory auditor For and on behalf of BDO LLP statutory auditor
United Kingdom 21 November 2017 BDO LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number OC.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 34 Consolidated statement of other comprehensive income for the year ended 31 August 2017
Loss after tax 25623 386 Other comprehensive income Items that will or may be reclassified to profit or loss Change in fair value of availableforsale investment 6 785 810 Exchange gains arising on translation of foreign operations 480 2565 Total comprehensive expenseincome for the period attributable to the equity holders of the parent entity 24358 2989 The notes on pages 39 to 65 form part of these financial statements.
Consolidated statement of profit or loss for the year ended 31 August 2017
Net gaming revenue 1 89923 47799 Cost of sales 1 11621 5387 Gross profit 78302 42412 Distribution costs 3 38607 18667 Administrative expenses 3 19446 11427 Adjusted EBITDA 20249 12318 Sharebased payments 3 1758 1912 Acquisition costs 3  1090 Contingent remuneration 3 14295 3987 Contingent consideration adjustment 3 10797 Impairment 3 9987 Amortisation of intangible assets 3 8375 4389 Depreciation 3 261 137 Operating lossprofit 25224 803 Finance income 25 25 Finance expense 5 1550 697 Lossprofit before tax 26749 131 Tax creditexpense 8 1126 517 Loss after tax 25623 386 Loss per share p 9 Diluted 38.08 0.750 The notes on pages 39 to 65 form part of these financial statements.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 35
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 11 661 662 Intangible assets 12 57756 73566 Other receivables 14 353 3416 Deferred tax asset 18 745 217 Availableforsale investments 6 1595 810 61110 78671 Current assets Trade and other receivables 14 9891 5827 Income tax receivable 453 168 Cash and cash equivalents 16 26175 21080 36519 27075 Total assets 97 629 105746
Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 15 80 6772 Loans and borrowings 17 4443 Deferred tax liability 18 2539 3708 7062 10480 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 15 33377 17352 Income tax payable 300 728 Loans and borrowings 17 1975 8000 35652 26080 Total liabilities 42714 36560 Net assets 54915 69186 Issued capital and reserves attributable to owners of the parent Share capital 19 680 666 Share premium 40641 38975 Merger reserve  11253 Shares to be issued 25  1674 Availableforsale reserve 6 1595 810 Capital contribution  13707 Share option reserve  1911 Foreign currency translation reserve 3052 2572 Retained earnings 8947 2382 Total equity 54915 69186 The notes on pages 39 to 65 form part of these financial statements.
Approved by the Board on 21 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Ronen Kannor Stuart Eitan Boyd
Director
Company Number Consolidated statement of financial position at 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 36 Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 August 2017
Cash flows from operating activities Loss for the year 25623 386 Adjustments for Depreciation of property plant and equipment 11 261 137 Amortisation of intangible assets 12 8375 4389 Impairment 12 9987 Finance expense 5 1550 697 Finance income 25 25 Sharebased payment expense 1758 1645 Sharebased payment expense on contingent remuneration 23 10088 Contingent consideration adjustment 10797 Income tax creditexpense 8 1126 517 16042 6974 Decrease in trade and other receivables 627 655 DecreaseIncrease in trade and other payables 2414 6783 Cash generated from operations 14255 14412 Income taxes paid 1404 680 Net cash flows from operating activities 12851 13732 Investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 23  19186 Cash held in escrow 14 1929 3000 Finance income 25 25 Purchases of property plant and equipment 11 190 472 Purchase of intangibles 12 489 377 Capitalised development costs 12 1355 1028 Net cash used in investing activities 3938 24038 Financing activities Issue of ordinary shares net of issue costs  25890 Interest paid 590 580 Repayment of related party borrowings 17 8000 1083 Proceeds from bank borrowings net of bank fees 7 905 Repayment of bank borrowings 1500 Dividends paid 10 1752 564 Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities 3937 23663 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 4976 13357 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 21080 7388 Exchange gains on cash and cash equivalents 119 335 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 16 26175 21080 A description of the significant noncash movements is given in note 26.
The notes on pages 39 to 65 form part of these financial statements.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 37
Share premium
Shares to be issued reserve
Capital contribution reserve
Foreign currency translation reserve
Total equity At 1 September 2015 502 10608 3013 4132  14271 266 7 1996 30803 Loss for the year         386 386 Other comprehensive income     810   2565  3375 Total comprehensive income for the year     810   2565 386 2989 Contributions by and distributions to owners Dividends      564    564 Acquisition of business through issue of shares 33  8240       8273 Acquisition of intangible assets for shares 11 2447  2458 Capital contribution Sharebased payment       1645   1645 Issue of shares net of share issue costs 120 25920        26040 At 31 August 2016 666 38975 11253 1674 810 13707 1911 2572 2382 69186 Loss for the year         25623 25623 Other comprehensive income     785   480  1265 Total comprehensive income for the year     785   480 25623 24358 Contributions by and distributions to owners Dividends         1752 1752 Acquisition of intangible assets for shares 8 1666  1674 Sharebased payment       1751   1751 Sharebased payment on contingent remuneration       10088   10088 Issue of shares placed in trust note 22 6        6 Reserves transfer   11253   13707 13750  38710 At 31 August 2017 680 40641   1595   3052 8497 54915 The notes on pages 39 to 65 form part of these financial statements.
Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 38 Consolidated statement of changes in equity continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 The following describes the nature and purpose of each reserve within equity Share premium Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value.
Merger reserve Represents the difference between the nominal value of shares acquired by the Company in the shareforshare exchange with Daub Alderney Limited and the nominal value of shares issued to acquire them as well as the satisfaction of the initial consideration in respect of the acquisition of the trade and assets of Table Top Entertainment Limited and Tarco Limited.
Shares to be issued Represents the shares to be issued in respect of the acquisition of certain intangible assets.
The shares have now been issued in full.
Refer to note 12.
Availableforsale reserve Gainslosses arising on fair value movement of financial assets classified as available for sale.
Capital contribution Represents the release of the Groups obligation to repay borrowings of 6999000 the contribution by a shareholder of the entire share capital of Baldo Line SRL the cash contribution by a shareholder to acquire Spacebar Media Limited and the 8454786 payment made in the form of shares by the shareholders to settle obligations following the acquisition of Table Top Entertainment Limited in September 2014.
Share options Represents the fair value of awards made under the Groups share option schemes refer to note 22.
Foreign currency Gainslosses arising on retranslating the net assets of overseas operations into Sterling translation reserve as well as intercompany loan balances treated as investment in subsidiaries that the Directors believe will not be repaid for the foreseeable future.
Retained earnings The account includes cumulative profits and losses less any distributions made to shareholders and the nominal value of shares gifted to the employee benefit trust.
In addition during the year ended 31 August 2017 the total balances in the merger share option and capital contribution reserves were transferred to this account and are available for distribution under the Companies Jersey Law 1991 subject to meeting other Companies Act requirements.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 39 1 Accounting policies Legal status Stride Gaming plc which includes its subsidiaries and together forms the Group is a public limited company incorporated in
Stride Gaming plc was incorporated under the Companies Jersey Law 1991 on 25 February 2015.
The address of its registered office is 12 Castle Street St Helier Jersey JE2 3RT.
Stride Gaming plc shares are listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM of the London Stock Exchange.
The Company is not required to present parent company information.
Basis of preparation The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are set out below and have been prepared on a historical cost basis.
The policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling which is also the parents functional currency and amounts are rounded to the nearest thousand unless otherwise stated.
These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards International Accounting Standards and Interpretations collectively IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the requirements of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
The preparation of financial statements in compliance with EU adopted IFRSs requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires Group management to exercise judgement in applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas where significant judgements and estimates have been made in preparing the financial statements are disclosed below.
Changes in accounting policies a New standards interpretations and amendments effective from 1 September 2016 Where relevant new standards and amendments to existing IFRSs that have been published and are mandatory for the first time for the financial year beginning 1 September 2016 have been adopted but had no significant impact to the Group accounts.
New standards amendments to standards and interpretations that have been issued but are not yet effective and in some cases have not yet been adopted by the EU have not been early adopted.
This includes the following IFRS 9 Financial Instruments This standard becomes effective for the first time for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
It contains new requirements which cover classification and measurement impairment and hedge accounting.
The recognition and derecognition requirements for financial assets and financial liabilities are unchanged from IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement which is the standard it is replacing.
Main changes are Classification and measurement of financial assets IFRS 9 replaces the rulesbased model in IAS 39 with an approach which bases classification and measurement on the business model of an entity and on the cash flows associated with each financial asset the solely payments of principal and interest SPPI test.
This has resulted in a revision of the boundary between fair value and amortised cost.
Some key changes include elimination of the held to maturity and available for sale categories elimination of the requirement to separately account for i. elimination of the limited exemption to measure unquoted equity investments at cost rather than at fair value.
Classification and measurement of financial liabilities The requirements for the classification and measurement of financial liabilities are largely unchanged from IAS 39.
However for financial liabilities designated as at fair value through profit or loss IFRS 9 requires that changes in the fair value which relate to changes in own credit risk should generally be recognised directly in other comprehensive income.
Unlike financial assets the concept of embedded derivatives has been retained for financial liabilities.
Impairment
IFRS 9 sets out a new forwardlooking expected credit loss ECL model which replaces the incurred loss model in IAS 39 and applies to financial assets measured at amortised cost debt investments measured at fair value through other comprehensive income trade receivables contract assets and lease receivables and certain loan commitments and financial guaranteed contracts.
The new requirements will lead to the earlier recognition of larger credit losses.
Unlike IAS 39 entities will be required to consider forwardlooking information when measuring ECL.
Therefore a credit event or impairment trigger no longer has to occur before credit losses are recognised.
An entity will now always recognise at a minimum twelvemonth ECL.
Lifetime ECL will be recognised on assets for which there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition.
While most trade receivables will be subject to a simplified approach to ECL entities will still need to consider forwardlooking information.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 40 Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 1 Accounting policies continued Changes in accounting policies continued b New standards interpretations and amendments not yet effective continued IFRS 9 Financial Instruments continued The Directors do not expect that the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group in future periods.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers This standard becomes effective for the first time for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
It is intended to clarify the principles of revenue recognition and establish a single framework for revenue recognition.
IFRS 15 supersedes the following IAS 11 Construction Contracts IAS 18 Revenue IFRIC 13 Customer Loyalty Programmes IFRIC 15 Agreements for the Construction of Real Estate IFRIC 18 Transfers of Assets from Customers and SIC31 Revenue  Barter Transactions Involving Advertising Services.
The core principle is that an entity should recognise revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
The core principle of IFRS 15 is applied through a fivestep approach
Identify the contracts with the customer.
II.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
III.
Determine the transaction price.
IV.
Allocate the transaction price.
V.
Recognise revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
Additionally the new requirements add specific guidance for multipleelement arrangements contract costs and disclosures.
The Directors do not expect that the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group in future periods.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases for both parties to a contract i. the customer lessee and the supplier lessor.
All leases result in a company the lessee obtaining the right to use an asset at the start of the lease and if lease payments are made over time also obtaining financing.
Accordingly IFRS 16 eliminates the classification of leases as either operating leases or finance leases as is required by IAS 17 and instead introduces a single lessee accounting model.
Applying that model a lessee is required to recognise a assets and liabilities for all leases with a term of more than 12 months unless the underlying asset is of low value and b depreciation of lease assets separately from interest on lease liabilities in the income statement.
IFRS 16 substantially carries forward the lessor accounting requirements in IAS 17.
Accordingly a lessor continues to classify its leases as operating leases or finance leases and to account for those two types of leases differently.
IFRS 16 is effective from 1 January 2019.
A company can choose to apply IFRS 16 before that date but only if it also applies IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
IFRS 16 replaces the previous leases standard IAS 17 Leases and related interpretations.
The amendments are not yet endorsed for use in the EU.
The Directors are currently assessing the impact of this standard when it is adopted for the first time.
Basis of consolidation Acquisition of subsidiaries A subsidiary is an entity controlled directly or indirectly by the Company.
Control is achieved if all three of the following elements are present power over the investee exposure to variable returns from the investee and the ability of the investor to use its power to affect those variable returns.
Control is reassessed whenever facts and circumstances indicate that there may be a change in any of these elements of control.
The cost of the acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Acquisitionrelated costs are recognised in the income statement as incurred.
The acquirees identifiable assets and liabilities are recognised at their fair values at the acquisition date.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the period are included in the consolidated statement of profit or loss from the date that control was obtained to the date that control was lost as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies into line with those used by the Group.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 41 1 Accounting policies continued Basis of consolidation continued Acquisition of subsidiaries continued Uniform accounting policies have been adopted across the Group.
All intragroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Foreign currencies Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the rate of exchange ruling at the financial reporting date.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities are translated using exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transactions.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the profit or loss account.
On consolidation the results of foreign operations are translated into Sterling at rates ruling when the transaction took place.
All assets and liabilities of foreign operations including goodwill arising on the acquisition of those operations are translated at the rate ruling at the reporting date.
Exchange differences arising on translating intergroup loans considered to be investment in subsidiaries that the Directors do not expect to be repaid for the foreseeable future as well as the opening net assets at the opening rate and the results of foreign operations at the actual rate are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the foreign currency translation reserve.
On disposal of a foreign operation the cumulative exchange differences recognised in the foreign currency translation reserve relating to that operation up to the date of disposal are transferred to the consolidated statement of profit or loss and included in the computation of the profit or loss on disposal.
Revenue recognition Net gaming revenue NGR is derived from online gambling operations and is defined as the difference between the amounts of bets placed by the players less the amount won by players.
It is stated after deduction of certain bonuses jackpots and prizes granted to players.
Revenue is recognised in the accounting periods in which the transactions occur.
Social Gaming revenue is derived from the purchase of credits and awards on the social gaming sites as well as inapp advertising revenue.
Social Gaming revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured and where there are no further obligations.
Revenue is recognised in the accounting periods in which the transactions occur.
Cost of sales Cost of sales consists primarily of gaming duties.
Distribution costs Distribution costs represent the costs of delivering the service to the customer and primarily consist of processing and royalty fees promotional and advertising costs together with gaming and other regulatory costs all of which are recognised on an accruals basis.
For the first time in the current financial year distribution costs also include royalties payable to thirdparty platform suppliers following the acquisition of 8Ball Games Limited and the Tarco Assets.
Administrative expenses Administrative expenses consist primarily of staff costs and corporate and professional expenses all of which are recognised on an accruals basis.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of a business combination over the total acquisition date fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired.
Cost comprises the fair value of assets given liabilities assumed and equity instruments issued plus the amount attributable of any noncontrolling interests in the acquisition and dependent on the terms of the sale and purchase agreement deferred and contingent consideration.
Goodwill is capitalised as an intangible asset with any impairment in carrying value being charged to the profit or loss account.
Costs incurred in respect of the acquisition are expensed in full in the period of acquisition.
Contingent consideration When contingent consideration arising on a business combination requires no ongoing employment from the former owners in order to receive payment the fair value of contingent consideration is included within cost at acquisition date.
Contingent consideration is reviewed at the end of each accounting period as the consideration payable and any subsequent adjustments are recognised in profit or loss account.
When the former owners of an acquired subsidiary are required to remain in employment at each of the deferred or contingent consideration payment dates the fair value of contingent consideration is built up over the period of service to the date of payment with a corresponding charge to the profit or loss account.
When future service is required this is described in the financial statements as contingent remuneration.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 42 Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 1 Accounting policies continued Externally acquired intangible assets Externally acquired intangible assets including intellectual property rights developed software applications and licences are initially recognised at cost and subsequently amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic lives which is typically over a period of 35 years or over the length of the licence.
Intangible assets are recognised on business combinations if they are separable from the acquired entity or give rise to other contractual or legal rights.
The amounts ascribed to such intangibles are arrived at using appropriate valuation techniques see section related to critical estimates and judgements below.
The significant intangibles recognised by the Group their useful economic lives and methods used to determine the cost at initial recognition of intangibles acquired in a business combination are as follows Intangible asset Useful economic life Valuation method Brands 410 years Discounted cash flows Developed software 310 years Relief from royalty Customer relationships 414 years Discounted cash flows Contractual relationships 310 years Discounted cash flows Amortisation is charged to the profit or loss during the financial period to which it relates.
Internally generated intangible assets development costs Expenditure on internally developed products is capitalised if it can be demonstrated that it is technically feasible to develop the product for it to be sold adequate resources are available to complete the development there is an intention to complete and sell the product the Group is able to sell the product sale of the product will generate future economic benefits and expenditure on the project can be measured reliably.
Capitalised development costs are amortised over the periods the Group expects to benefit from the assets generated being three years.
Development expenditure not satisfying the above criteria is recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss as incurred.
Property plant and equipment All property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Depreciation is calculated to write off the cost of fixed assets on a straightline basis over the expected useful lives of the assets concerned.
The principal annual rates used for this purpose are Fixtures fittings and equipment  1033% straight line Computer equipment  3366% straight line Motor vehicles  25% straight line Subsequent expenditures are included in the carrying amount of an asset or recognised as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
All repairs and maintenance are charged to profit or loss during the financial period in which they are incurred.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing proceeds with the carrying amount and are included in the profit or loss.
Impairment of property plant and equipment and internally generated assets Impairment tests on goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite useful economic lives are undertaken annually at the financial year end or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may be impaired and hence not recoverable.
Where the carrying value of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount i. fair value less costs to sell the asset is written down to its recoverable amount.
Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset the impairment test is carried out on the smallest group of assets to which it belongs for which there are separately identifiable cash flows its cash generating unit CGU.
Goodwill is allocated on initial recognition to each of the Groups CGUs that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination giving rise to the goodwill.
Impairment charges are included in the profit or loss account an impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 43 1 Accounting policies continued Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised on the Groups statement of financial position when the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are derecognised when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire or when the contractual rights to those assets are transferred.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the obligation specified in the contract is discharged cancelled or expired.
Financial assets are either categorised as loans or receivables or available for sale.
There are no assets classified as held to maturity or fair value through profit or loss.
All financial liabilities are classified as amortised cost with the exception of contingent consideration which is at fair value through profit or loss.
Financial assets Trade receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Appropriate provisions for estimated irrecoverable amounts are recognised in the profit or loss account when there is objective evidence that the assets are impaired.
Interest income is recognised by applying the effective interest rate except for shortterm receivables when the recognition of interest would be immaterial.
Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as significant financial difficulties on the part of the counterparty or default or significant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect all of the amounts due under the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash flows associated with the impaired receivable.
For trade receivables which are reported net such provisions are recorded in a separate allowance account with the loss being recognised within administrative expenses in the statement of comprehensive income.
On confirmation that the trade receivable will not be collectable the gross carrying value of the asset is written off against the associated provision.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash held at bank demand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments that have maturities of three months or less from inception are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Available for sale Nonderivative financial assets not included in the above categories are classified as available for sale and comprise principally the Groups strategic investments in entities not qualifying as subsidiaries associates or jointly controlled entities.
They are carried at fair value with changes in fair value other than those arising due to exchange rate fluctuations and interest calculated using the effective interest rate recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the availableforsale reserve.
Exchange differences on investments denominated in a foreign currency and interest calculated using the effective interest rate method are recognised in the profit or loss statement.
Where there is a significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of an availableforsale financial asset which constitutes objective evidence of impairment the full amount of the impairment including any amount previously recognised in other comprehensive income is recognised in profit or loss.
On sale the cumulative gain or loss recognised in other comprehensive income is reclassified from the availableforsale reserve to profit or loss.
Financial liabilities Trade and other payables Trade payables are initially measured at their fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method this method allocates interest expense over the relevant period by applying the effective interest rate to the carrying amount of the liability.
Player liabilities are the amounts that customers place in their accounts along with any bonuses and progressive jackpots.
These liabilities are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost.
Loans and borrowings Loans and borrowings are initially recognised at fair value net of any transaction costs directly attributable to the issue of the instrument.
Such interestbearing liabilities are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method which ensures that any interest expense over the period to repayment is at a constant rate on the balance of the liability carried in the consolidated statement of financial position.
Current and deferred tax Taxation represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
Current tax The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from net profit reported in the consolidated statement of profit or loss because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 44 1 Accounting policies continued Current and deferred tax continued Deferred tax Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based upon tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax is charged or credited to profit or loss except when it relates to items credited or charged directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity through other comprehensive income.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial information and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each consolidated statement of profit or loss date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is measured using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the consolidated statement of financial position date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset or liability is realised or settled.
Operating leases Where substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership are not transferred to the Group these are classified as operating leases.
The total rentals payable under the lease are charged to profit or loss on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Pension costs The Group operates a defined contribution scheme.
The amount charged to the profit or loss account in respect of pension costs and other postretirement benefits is the contributions payable in the period.
Differences between contributions payable in the period and contributions actually paid are shown as either other liabilities or prepayments in the consolidated statement of financial position.
Share capital Financial instruments issued by the Group are classified as equity only to the extent that they do not meet the definition of a financial liability or financial asset.
Sharebased payments Where equitysettled share options including under the longterm incentive plan  LTIP are awarded to employees refer to note 22 the fair value of the options at the date of grant is charged to the profit or loss account over the vesting period.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of equity instruments expected to vest at each reporting date so that ultimately the cumulative amount recognised over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest.
Nonvesting conditions and market vesting conditions are factored into the fair value of the options granted.
As long as all other vesting conditions are satisfied a charge is made irrespective of whether the market vesting conditions are satisfied.
The cumulative expense is not adjusted for failure to achieve a market vesting condition or where a nonvesting condition is not satisfied.
Where equity instruments are granted to persons other than employees the profit or loss account is charged with the fair value of goods and services received or in the case of an asset recorded within the appropriate classification.
UK National Insurance is payable on gains made by some employees on exercise of share options granted to them.
The eventual liability to National Insurance is dependent on the market price of the Companys shares at the date of exercise the number of options that will be exercised and the prevailing rate of National Insurance at the date of exercise.
At each period end the potential liability is recorded as an expense within the profit or loss account and a corresponding provision recorded.
In relation to the LTIPs the maximum number of shares expected to vest on the date of the award are gifted to an employee benefit trust.
The Group has the power to instruct the trust on when to release the shares to the individuals in the LTIP subject to certain performance conditions being met and the options having vested and being capable of exercise.
The cost of gifting these shares to the trust has been included in retained earnings.
These shares are excluded from the calculation of the weighted average number of shares used in the basic earnings per share.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised when they become legally payable.
In the case of interim dividends this is when paid and in the case of final dividends this is when approved by the shareholders at the AGM.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 45 1 Accounting policies continued Adjusted EBITDA The Group defines Adjusted EBITDA as the operating result before depreciation amortisation finance costs and income or expenses that relate to exceptional items such as contingent consideration contingent remuneration and acquisition costs as well as noncash charges relating to sharebased payments including employers National Insurance.
The Directors believe that Adjusted EBITDA represents more closely the underlying trading performance of the business.
Critical accounting estimates The preparation of the consolidated financial statements under IFRS requires the Group to make estimates and judgements that affect the application of policies and reported amounts.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Reference is made in this note to accounting policies which cover areas that the Directors consider require estimates and assumptions which have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets and liabilities within the next financial year.
Impairment
In accordance with IAS 36 Impairment of Assets the Group regularly monitors the carrying value of its intangible assets.
A detailed review was undertaken at 31 August 2017 to assess whether the carrying value of assets was supported by the net present value of future cash flows derived from those assets.
The recoverable amounts of the Groups CGUs have been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections from formally approved budgets and longterm forecasts.
These budgets and forecasts assume the underlying business models will continue to operate on a comparable basis under the current regulatory and taxation regimes adjusted for any known changes.
Specifically this review was undertaken for the Social Gaming CGU at 28 February 2017 to assess whether any potential indicators were apparent and following this review a detailed impairment review was then completed.
As a result the Group determined that the weaker than expected social gaming market had an adverse effect on the projected value in use and consequently the intangible assets have been written down to their value in use.
An impairment of 6056000 has been charged against goodwill and 3931000 against acquired intangibles refer to note 12.
As of 31 August 2017 the Group undertook an additional review on this CGUs business models and financial projections and concluded that no further impairment was required.
Availableforsale investment The Group holds 24.25% 2016 24.25% in the equity share capital of QSB Gaming Limited a company incorporated in Alderney and an operator of online casino and bingo gaming sites in the Spanish market.
Despite holding greater than 20% of the voting equity instruments in QSB Gaming Limited the Directors do not believe that they exercise significant influence over the investee.
This is on the basis that the Group has no representation on the board and no participation in decisions over operating and financial policies.
The Group has therefore recorded the asset as an availableforsale investment at fair value of 1595000 2016 810000.
As the security held is unquoted the fair value has been assessed in the current year based on the Group share of expected cash flows discounted using a riskadjusted interest rate specific to the investment of 50%.
Acquisition accounting and fair value of acquired assets and liabilities including contingent consideration Identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities including earnouts that meet the conditions for recognition under IFRS 3 are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date.
The identified intangibles are capitalised if they are separable from the acquired entity or arise from other contractual or legal rights.
The amounts ascribed to these assets are arrived at by using appropriate valuation techniques to determine the fair value.
Capitalised intangible assets are amortised over the useful economic life of the assets.
This has ranged between three to five years for acquisitions to date.
The fair value of contingent consideration including earnouts is based on the probability of expected cash flow outcomes and the assessment of present values using appropriate discount rates.
Further details in relation to key estimates and judgements are set out in note 23.
Capitalisation and amortisation of development costs The identification of development costs that meet the criteria for capitalisation is dependent on managements judgement and knowledge of the work done.
Development costs of gaming software platforms are separately identified.
Judgements are based on the information available at each period end.
Economic success of any development is assessed on a reasonable basis but remains uncertain at the time of recognition.
Capitalised development costs are subject to amortisation over its useful life and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
The Group amortises the assets over the life of the product.
The estimated useful life of these assets at period end is three years.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 46 2 Segment information For management purposes and for transacting with customers the Groups operations can be segmented into the following reporting segments Real Money Gaming which is its UKfocused bingoled online operation using its proprietary and purchased software to provide online bingo and related gaming activities to players.
This segment only operates in regulated markets principally the UK and Social Gaming which internationally provides players with entertaining applications and games.
Each of these operating segments generates independent revenues and the risks and rewards associated with generating these revenues are considered to be different to each other.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decision maker.
The chief operating decision maker has been identified as the management team including the Chief Executive Officer the Chief Operating Officer and the Chief Financial Officer.
Real
Money Gaming
Gaming
Total
Total revenue from external customers 81815 8108 89923 Adjusted EBITDA 19670 579 20249 Depreciation 229 32 261 Impairment  9987 9987 Amortisation 6704 1671 8375 Contingent consideration adjustment 10797  10797 Contingent remuneration 14124 171 14295 Finance income Sharebased payments including National Insurance Finance expense Group loss before tax
Money Gaming
Gaming
Total
Total revenue from external customers 34974 12825 47799 Adjusted EBITDA 8213 4105 12318 Depreciation 92 45 137 Amortisation 2902 1487 4389 Acquisition costs Finance income Sharebased payments including National Insurance Finance expense Contingent remuneration Group profit before tax External revenue by location of customers Noncurrent assets by location of assets United Kingdom 80140 34493 18046 19290 Alderney   32554 36420 Israel   7 464 18120 USA 5183 8298 Other 4600 5008 354 398 89923 47799 58418 74228 Other revenue predominantly relates to the social gaming sector.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 47 3 Operating lossprofit All items presented below Adjusted EBITDA and before operating lossprofit in the consolidated statement of profit or loss are administrative expenses.
Total administrative expenses including those presented below Adjusted EBITDA for the year were 62919000 2016 22942000.
Operating lossprofit is stated after charging the following Operating lease expenses 728 378 Employee benefit expenses note 4 13725 8145 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 261 137 Amortisation of intangible assets 8375 4389 Auditors remuneration  audit services 169 118 Auditors remuneration  other assurance services 38 42 Auditors remuneration  tax advisory services  17 Auditors remuneration  corporate finance services  135 Contingent consideration adjustment Acquisition costs Sharebased payments 1758 1912 Contingent remuneration 14295 3987
Contingent consideration adjustment relates to the increase in the earnout payable for the acquisition of the Tarco Assets completed in the year ended 31 August 2016.
Refer to note 23 for further details.
In the prior year costs related to the acquisition of the entire share capital of 8Ball Games Limited Netboost Media Limited and assets of Tarco Limited as well as other aborted acquisition costs.
Refer to note 23 for further information.
During the year the Company issued further share options to certain employees and consultants of the Group.
The charge for the year includes National Insurance.
Refer to note 22 for further information.
Under the terms of the InfiApps Ltd and 8Ball Games Limited acquisitions in the years ended 31 August 2015 and 31 August 2016 respectively the contingent remuneration payable was linked to future employment and therefore has been charged to the profit or loss account.
The total remuneration payable for the 8Ball Games acquisition was 4036000 in cash and 10088000 in sharebased payments refer to note 23 with the remainder relating to the InfiApps year two earnout.
Both were settled post year end. e During the year the value of the InfiApps cash generating unit was assessed and subsequently impaired.
Refer to note 12 for further details.
4 Employee benefit expenses Employee benefit expenses excluding Directors and key management personnel Wages and salaries 9471 4839 Pension costs 362 175 Sharebased payment expense note 22 696 563 Social security contributions and similar taxes 714 384 11243 5961 Benefit expenses of Directors and key management personnel Wages and salaries 2778 2446 Pension costs 143 87 Sharebased payment expense note 22 1055 1082 Social security contributions and similar taxes 264 481 4240 4096 Total employee benefit expense including Directors and key management personnel 15483 10057 Key management personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Group including the Directors of the Company listed in note 7 as well as certain directors of subsidiary companies.
The total employment benefit expense excludes the amounts referred to as contingent remuneration in note 3.
From the total of 14295000 14124000 is payable to key management personnel of the Group.
This is split between 4036000 cash remuneration and 10088000 payable in shares.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 48 5 Finance expense Recognised in consolidated statement of profit or loss Loan interest note 17 551 697 Unwinding of discount on Table Top Entertainment Limited contingent consideration note 23 999 Total finance expense 1550 697 6 Availableforsale investment The Group holds a 24.2% investment in QSB Gaming Limited an operator of online casino and bingo gaming sites in the Spanish market and registered in Alderney.
Despite holding greater than 20% of the voting equity instruments in QSB Gaming Limited the Directors do not believe that they exercise significant influence over the investee.
This is on the basis that the Group has no representation on the board and no participation in decisions over operating and financial policies.
The Group has therefore recorded the asset as an availableforsale investment.
At 31 August 2017 the fair value has been increased from 810000 to 1595000.
As the security held is unquoted the fair value has been assessed in the current year based on the Groups share of expected cash flows discounted using a riskadjusted interest rate specific to the investment of 50%.
A reduction in interest rate of 10% would increase the fair value of the availableforsale investment by approximately 460000.
7 Directors interests and remuneration The Directors who served during the year and their interests in the share capital of the Company were as follows 0.01 ordinary shares at 31 August 2017 0.01 ordinary shares at 31 August 2016
Percentage holding
Percentage holding Nigel Terrence Payne 13889 0.02% 13889 0.02% Stuart Eitan Boyd 2425213 3.57% 2425213 3.65% Darren Brett Sims 1083510 1.59% 1083510 1.63% Ronen Kannor John Le Poidevin 44546 0.07% 44546 0.07% Adam David Batty 22727 0.02% 22727 0.03% Shares held via trusts.
The following Directors held share options as at 31 August 2017 Award type Number of options at 31 August 2017 Date of grant
Vesting period of options Stuart Eitan Boyd Share options 750000 18 May 2015 1.32 13 years LTIP 111111 1 Sep 2015 0.00 3 years LTIP 113333 1 Sep 2016 0.00 3 years Darren Brett Sims Share options 750000 18 May 2015 1.32 13 years LTIP 111111 1 Sep 2015 0.00 3 years LTIP 113333 1 Sep 2016 0.00 3 years Ronen Kannor Share options 500000 18 May 2015 1.32 13 years LTIP 66667 1 Sep 2015 0.00 3 years LTIP 77778 1 Sep 2016 0.00 3 years The following Directors held share options as at 31 August 2016 Number of options at 31 August 2016 Date of grant
Vesting period of options Stuart Eitan Boyd 750000 18 May 2015 1.32 13 years Darren Brett Sims 750000 18 May 2015 1.32 13 years Ronen Kannor 500000 1 May 2015 1.32 13 years Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 49 7 Directors interests and remuneration continued As announced in the 2015 annual report the Company committed to make the first longterm incentive award under a new longterm incentive plan in the 201516 financial year.
However due to the transaction activity during the prior year it was not possible to grant the planned awards during 201516.
The awards for 201516 were therefore made in the current year with an effective date of 1 September 2015.
The following table presents the Directors remuneration of the Company for the year ended 31 August 2017
Benefits
Pension
Bonus
Share options
Total
Nigel Terrence Payne 48     48 57 Stuart Eitan Boyd 255 16 2tel838 Darren Brett Sims 255 7 2tel835 Ronen Kannor 175 6 1tel515 John Le Poidevin 42     42 50 Adam David Batty 42     42 42 Total  2358 2337 8 Taxation Current tax expense Current tax on profits for the year 725 671 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 97 Total current tax 628 671 Deferred tax expense Origination and reversal of temporary differences note 18 1756 154 Effect of increased tax rate on opening balance 2 Total deferred tax 1754 154 Total tax creditexpense 1126 517 The reasons for the difference between the actual tax charge for the year and the standard rate of corporation tax in the United Kingdom applied to the lossprofit for the year are as follows Lossprofit for the year 26749 131 Tax using the Companys domestic tax rate of 19.58% 2016 20.0% 5238 26 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 5638 1640 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 97 Other temporary differences 42 182 Different tax rates applied in overseas jurisdictions 1387 1331 Total tax creditexpense 1126 517 The Group has not recognised deferred tax assets of 355000 2016 401000 in respect of losses amounting to 2110000 2016 2004000 that can be carried forward against future taxable income.
As of 31 August 2017 the Israeli Tax Authorities initiated a review on the tax liabilities of Netboost Media Limited for the years ended 31 December 20122015.
The company is registered in Israel and was acquired as part of the Tarco Assets and Netboost Media acquisition in 31 August 2016 refer to note 23.
As of the date of this report the review is still ongoing and there is no indication of the financial effects that may result from this review.
As part of the sale purchase agreement the sellers have provided tax guaranties to cover certain tax liabilities.
As there is currently no indication of any liability arising no liability or corresponding asset for the indemnity has been recorded.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 50 9 Earnings per share
Loss used in EPS and diluted EPS 25623 386 Denominator 000 000 Weighted average number of shares used in basic EPS 67 286 51457 Basic loss per ordinary share p 38.08 0.750 Effects of Employee share options 2297 1588 Contingent share consideration on business combinations 1045 Contingent share consideration on acquisition of intangible  641 Weighted average number of shares used in diluted EPS 70628 53686 Diluted loss per ordinary share p 38.08 0.750 The weighted average number of shares used in the calculation of the basic EPS does not include the weighted average of the shares placed in trust as part of the LTIPs.
Refer to note 19.
Where the result of the Group is a loss for the year there is no dilutive impact.
At 31 August 2017 there are a number of shares that are contingently issued which will have a further dilutive effect refer to note 23.
10 Dividends An interim dividend of 808000 1.2p per share was declared and paid in the year ended 31 August 2017 2016 564000.
The
Board is recommending a final dividend of 1.5p per share subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting which has not been accrued at 31 August 2017 2016 final dividend of 1.4p per share approved and paid representing a total of 943000.
11 Property plant and equipment Fixtures fittings and equipment
Motor vehicles
Cost or valuation At 1 September 2015 77 204  281 Acquired through business combination Additions 209 263  472 Foreign exchange movements 5 7  12 At 1 September tel18 853 Additions 99 157  256 Disposals  17  17 Foreign exchange movements 1 4  5 At 31 August tel18 1097 Accumulated depreciation At 1 September 2015 5 42  47 Charge for the year 18 119  137 Foreign exchange movements 2 5  7 At 1 September 2016 25 166  191 Charge for the year Disposals  17  17 Foreign exchange movements  1  1 At 31 August Net book value At 31 August 2015 72 162  234 At 31 August tel18 662 At 31 August tel8 661 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 51 12 Intangible assets Software and licences
Brand names
Customer and contractual relationships
Cost
At 1 September 2015 13585 246 2265 14866 7925 38887 Acquired through business combinations 282  5855 20446 10730 37313 Additions 377     377 Internally generated development costs  1028    1028 Foreign exchange rate movements 1464  206 926 452 3048 At 1 September 2016 15708 1274 8326 36238 19107 80653 Acquired through business combinations    180  180 Additions 489     489 Internally generated development costs  1355    1355 Foreign exchange rate movements At 31 August 2017 16368 2638 8349 36521 19157 83033 Accumulated amortisation At 1 September 2015 1051 18 317  1134 2520 Charge for the year 2129 224 521  1515 4389 Foreign exchange rate movements 97 6 27  48 178 At 1 September 2016 3277 248 865  2697 7087 Charge for the year 2226 588 1744  3817 8375 Impairment 2332  266 6056 1333 9987 Foreign exchange rate movements 38 3 4 106 21 172 At 31 August 2017 7797 833 2871 5950 7 826 25277 Net book value At 1 September 2015 12534 228 1948 14866 6791 36367 At 1 September 2016 12431 1026 7461 36238 16410 73566 At 31 August 2017 8571 1805 5478 30571 11331 57756 The 180000 represents an increase in the value of the 8Ball Games goodwill following the finalisation of the acquisition accounting and in particular the change in the working capital adjustment from the provision made at 31 August 2016.
Software and licences Included within costs of software and licences is the acquired software and related programs from NextTec Software Inc fair valued at 4132000 in respect of the underlying gaming platform and software used by Table Top Entertainment.
Based on the agreement the contingent consideration payable on the first second and third anniversaries is based on a percentage of net gaming revenue generated from the use of the software up to a maximum of 5325000.
On 30 September 2015 and 6 October 2016 1149071 and 846701 shares were issued respectively.
The maximum earnout was reached by the second anniversary and therefore the full earnout has now all been settled in shares.
Goodwill
Goodwill is allocated to the following cash generating units Spacebar Media 5936 5936 Table Top Entertainment 4008 4008 8Ball Games 6653 6473 Tarco Assets 13973 13973 Social Gaming  5848 30570 36238 Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 52 12 Intangible assets continued Impairment review In accordance with IAS 36 Impairment of Assets the Group regularly monitors the carrying value of its intangible assets.
A detailed review was undertaken at 31 August 2017 to assess whether the carrying value of assets was supported by the net present value of future cash flows derived from those assets.
The recoverable amounts of all the above CGUs have been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections from formally approved budgets and longterm forecasts.
These budgets and forecasts assume the underlying business models will continue to operate on a comparable basis under the current regulatory and taxation regimes adjusted for any known changes.
Table Top Entertainment and Spacebar Media CGUs The recoverable amounts of Table Top Entertainment and Spacebar Media have been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections covering the following fiveyear period and a calculation into perpetuity which exceeds the total values of each CGUs assets.
The cash flows for 2018 and 2019 are based on Boardapproved budgets with a longterm growth rate of 2% 2016 2% and a discount rate of 13.9% 2016 13.9%.
These assumptions were based upon managements experience past performance and drawing on industry data where relevant.
The Directors have concluded that there are no reasonably possible changes in the key assumptions which would cause the carrying value of goodwill and other intangibles to exceed their value in use.
8Ball Games CGU The goodwill and related assets included within this CGU resulted from the acquisition of the entire share capital of 8Ball Games which completed on 31 August 2016 refer to note 23.
The recoverable amount has been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections covering the following fiveyear period and a calculation into perpetuity.
The cash flows for 2018 and 2019 are based on Boardapproved budgets with a longterm growth rate of 2% 2016 2% and a discount rate of 17.1% 2016 17.1%.
These assumptions were based upon managements experience past performance and drawing on industry data where relevant.
The Directors have concluded that there are no reasonably possible changes in the key assumptions which would cause the carrying value of goodwill and other intangibles to exceed their value in use.
Tarco CGU The goodwill and related assets included within this CGU resulted from the acquisition of certain trading assets of Tarco and the entire share capital of Netboost Media Limited which completed on 31 August 2016 refer to note 23.
The recoverable amount of 27.6 million which exceeds the total value of the CGUs assets by 2.9 million has been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections covering the following fiveyear period and a calculation into perpetuity.
Operating margins have been based on past experience of the acquired entity and future expectations in light of anticipated economic and market conditions.
Discount rates are based on the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted to reflect the specific risks of the CGU.
The table below shows what the effect of changes in the key assumptions would have on the recoverable amount Key assumptions used in projections
Operating
Terminal growth rate Key assumptions used in the projections 17.30% 19.75% 2.00% Change in assumptions required to equal carrying value 19.33% 19.70% 1.75% Effect of 1% increase in assumption  000 1481 1516 101 Effect of 1% decrease in assumption  000 1685 1516 887 The table below shows what the effect of changes in the key assumptions would have on the recoverable amount in the prior year Key assumptions used in projections
Operating
Terminal growth rate Key assumptions used in the projections 17.30% 18.88% 2.00% Change in assumptions required to equal carrying value 18.38% 18.15% 0.16% Effect of 1% increase in assumption  000 1512 705 1064 Effect of 1% decrease in assumption  000 1733 1988 934 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 53 12 Intangible assets continued Social Gaming CGU The goodwill and related assets included within this CGU resulted from the acquisition of InfiApps Ltd which completed in the year ended 31 August 2015.
A review for indicators of impairment was undertaken as part of the halfyear results at 28 February 2017 to assess whether any potential indicators were apparent and following this review a detailed impairment review was completed in respect of the Social Gaming cash generating unit to determine if the carrying value of assets was supported by the net present value of future cash flows derived from those assets.
The recoverable amount has been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections from formally approved budgets and longterm forecasts.
These budgets and forecasts assume the underlying business models will continue to operate on a comparable basis under the current regulatory and taxation regimes adjusted for any known changes.
As a result of this review the Group determined that the weaker than expected social gaming market had an adverse effect on the projected value in use and consequently the intangible assets have been written down to their value in use.
An impairment of 6056000 has been charged against goodwill and 3931000 against acquired intangibles.
A further impairment review was carried out at 31 August 2017 and identified no further impairment.
This has been determined from value in use calculations based on cash flow projections covering the following fiveyear period and a calculation into perpetuity.
The cash flows for 2018 and 2019 are based on Boardapproved budgets as well as on past experience of the acquired entity.
The key assumption in reaching the conclusion that no further impairment is required is a 34% increase in revenue forecast for the year ending 31 August 2019.
Discount rates are based on the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted to reflect the specific risks of the CGU.
The table below shows what the effect of changes in the key assumptions would have on the recoverable amount as at 31 August 2017 Key assumptions used in projections
Operating
Terminal growth rate Key assumptions used in the projections 18.00% 18.24% 2.00% Change in assumptions required to equal carrying value 20.09% 17.90% 1.75% Effect of 1% increase in assumption  000 426 658 293 Effect of 1% decrease in assumption  000 483 658 258 The table below shows what the effect of changes in the key assumptions would have on the recoverable amount in the prior year Key assumptions used in projections
Operating
Terminal growth rate Key assumptions used in the projections 18.00% 26.53% 2.00% Change in assumptions required to equal carrying value 18.71% 26.25% 0.78% Effect of 1% increase in assumption  000 973 163 661 Effect of 1% decrease in assumption  000 1103 350 584 Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 54 13 Subsidiaries The subsidiaries of Stride Gaming plc all of which have been included in these consolidated financial statements are as follows Name Country of incorporation Proportion of ownership interest at 31 August 2017 2016 Spacebar Media Limited United Kingdom 100% 100% SRG Services Limited Mauritius 100% 100% Shifttech Pty Limited South Africa 100% 100% Daub Alderney Limited Alderney 100% 100%
Financials Ltd Israel 100% 100% 8Ball Games Limited United Kingdom 100% 100% Netboost Media Limited Israel 100% 100% InfiApps Ltd Israel 100% 100% Madabout Media  Limited United Kingdom 100% 100% Think Beyond Media Ltd United Kingdom 100% Stride Together Ltd United Kingdom 100% Baldo Line SRL Italy 100% 100% Investment held indirectly.
14 Trade and other receivables
Trade receivables 3782 4352 Other receivables 524 950 Funds held in escrow 4929 Amounts due from related parties 2 Prepayments 654 525 9891 5827
Funds held in escrow  3000 Other receivables 353 416 353 3416 In the prior year as part of the acquisition of the Tarco Assets which completed on 31 August 2016 refer to note 23 an amount of 3000000 was transferred by the Group to an escrow account with an intention to cover part of the earnout payment which will be made to the sellers within three months of 31 December 2017 following the end of the earnout period.
A further 1000000 was also transferred to the same escrow account in the current year in accordance with the terms of the purchase agreement.
Furthermore in June 2017 929000 was transferred to an escrow account which related to the second year earnout of the InfiApps acquisition.
This was settled post year end.
The carrying value of trade and other receivables classified as loans and receivables approximates fair value.
All amounts shown in shortterm trade and other receivables fall due for payment within one year.
All noncurrent receivables are due within three years of 31 August 2017.
As at 31 August 2017 there were no trade receivables 2016 Nil which were past due and fully impaired.
There is currently no provision for impairment for any of the outstanding trade and other receivables 2016 Nil with no bad debt expense being recognised in the year 2016 Nil.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 55 15 Trade and other payables
Trade payables 2927 2857 Other payables 321 2482 Other taxation and social security 1456 1941 Client liabilities and progressive prize pools 2489 1828 Contingent remuneration 4968 3805 Contingent consideration 17 417 Amounts due to related parties 442 783 Accruals and deferred income 3357 3656 33377 17352
Contingent remuneration  820 Contingent consideration  5620 Other payables 80 332 80 6772 The carrying value of trade and other payables classified as financial liabilities measured at amortised cost approximates fair value.
The contingent remuneration arose as a result of the 8Ball Games Limited acquisition in the prior year and the InfiApps acquisition in the year ended 31 August 2015 of 4036000 and 932000 respectively.
Both of these amounts were determined at 31 August 2017 and settled post year end.
The contingent consideration has arisen from the acquisition of certain trading assets of Tarco Limited on 31 August 2016 and as reassessed at 31 August 2017 refer to note 23.
16 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 26175 21080 Cash held on behalf of players and progressive jackpots are held in separate unrestricted bank accounts.
17 Loans and borrowings The book value and fair value of loans and borrowings are as follows Unsecured borrowings Related party borrowings  8000 Current bank borrowings 1975 1975 8000 Unsecured borrowings Noncurrent bank borrowings 4443 During the year ended 31 August 2017 8.0 million of related party borrowings were repaid note 24.
In November 2016 the Group entered into a loan facility with Barclays PLC for 8.0 million.
This facility matures four years from the date of the initial drawdown on a 3.6% plus LIBOR annual floating rate basis payable quarterly with the principal sum outstanding amortising on a quarterly basis over the term of the facility.
Daub Alderney Limited Spacebar Media Limited S.
Financials Ltd and InfiApps Ltd all 100% subsidiaries of the Group have provided unlimited guarantee on the borrowings.
The effective interest rate of the bank borrowings is 5.74% and the book value of the bank borrowings is not materially different to its fair value.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 56 18 Deferred tax Deferred tax is calculated in full on temporary differences under the liability method using a tax rate based on the different jurisdictions it arises.
The movement on the deferred tax accounts is as shown below Deferred tax asset Deferred tax liability At 1 September 2015 231 2133 Recognised in profit and loss 67 221 Foreign exchange movements 11 378 Arising on business combination 42 1418 At 31 August 2016 217 3708 Recognised in profit and loss 524 1231 Foreign exchange movements 4 62 At 31 August 2017 745 2539 Deferred tax assets have been recognised in respect of other temporary differences where the Directors believe it is probable that these assets will be recovered.
Included in the above movement in deferred tax liability is a release of 749000 of the deferred tax liability arising on the acquisition of InfiApps as a result of the impairment of certain intangible assets in the year.
Refer to note 12.
The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities prior to the offsetting of balances within the same jurisdiction as permitted by IAS 12 during the period are shown below 31 August 2017
Liability
Net
Charged credited to profit or loss
Share options 614  614 455 Other temporary and deductible differences 131 26 105 53 4 Business combinations  2513 2513 1247 62 Net tax assetsliabilities 745 2539 1794 1755 58 The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities prior to the offsetting of balances within the same jurisdiction as permitted by IAS 12 in the prior year are shown below.
31 August 2016
Liability
Net
Charged credited to profit or loss
Share options 159  159 55 Other temporary and deductible differences 17 11 6 182 5 Business combinations 41 3697 3656 281 372 Net tax assetsliabilities 217 3708 3491 154 367 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 57 19 Share capital
Number
Number
Total ordinary shares of 1p each 250000000 2500 250000000 2500 Issued and fully paid
Number
Ordinary shares of 1p each At 1 September 66519885 666 50151315 502 Issued on acquisition of business note 23   3219499 33 Issued on acquisition of intangible 846701 8 1149071 11 Issued on capital raising   12000000 120 Longterm incentive plans note 7 593333 6 At 31 August 67 959919 680 66519885 666 During the year 846701 shares were issued relating to the acquisition of NextTec Software Inc held as shares to be issued.
Furthermore
593333 ordinary shares were issued to a trust controlled by the Company which relate to the longterm incentive plan awards that were granted for 201516 and 201617.
The effect of the issue of shares to the trust was to increase the issued share capital of the Group with a corresponding entry in retained earnings.
As and when LTIP conditions are met the Company will instruct the trust to release shares to each of the Directors involved in the LTIP.
Refer to note 7 for further details.
20 Leases Operating leases  lessee The total future value of minimum lease payments in respect of leased properties is as follows Not later than one year 652 624 Later than one year and not later than five years 1180 1371 Later than five years  10 1832 2005 The total future value of minimum lease payments in respect of leased motor vehicles is as follows Not later than one year 48 77 Later than one year and not later than five years Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 58 21 Financial instruments  risk management The Group is exposed through its operations to the following financial risks market risk credit risk liquidity risk and foreign exchange risk.
The Group is exposed to risks that arise from its use of financial instruments.
This note describes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them.
Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented below.
There have been no substantive changes in the Groups exposure to financial instrument risks its objectives policies and processes for managing those risks or the methods used to measure them from previous periods unless otherwise stated in this note.
Principal financial instruments The principal financial instruments used by the Group from which financial instrument risk arises are as follows trade and other receivables investment in availableforsale financial instruments cash and cash equivalents trade and other payables contingent consideration and remuneration and loans and borrowings.
Financial instruments by category Financial assets Available for sale Loans and receivables Availableforsale investment 1595 810 Cash and cash equivalents   26175 21080 Trade and other receivables   9589 8718 At 31 August 1595 810 35764 29798 The reconciliation of the opening and closing fair value balance of level 3 financial assets is as follows
At 1 September 2015 Gain in other comprehensive income 810 At 1 September 2016 810 Gain in other comprehensive income 785 At 31 August 2017 1595 The investment which is within level 3 of the financial reporting hierarchy represents a 24.2% holding in QSB Gaming Limited refer to note 6.
As the security held is unquoted the fair value has been assessed in the current year based on the Groups share of expected cash flows discounted using a riskadjusted interest rate specific to the investment of 50%.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 59 21 Financial instruments  risk management continued Principal financial instruments continued Financial instruments by category continued Financial liabilities Fair value through profit and loss Financial liabilities at amortised cost Contingent remuneration   4969 4625 Contingent consideration 17 417 5620 Trade and other payables   9535 11938 Loans and borrowings   6418 8000 At 31 August 17 417 5620 20922 24563 The reconciliation of the opening and closing fair value balance of level 3 financial liabilities is as follows
At 1 September 2015 New consideration arrangement  Tarco Assets note 23 5620 At 1 September 2016 5620 Tarco unwinding of discount of contingent consideration note 23 1000 Increase in Tarco contingent consideration 10797 At 31 August 2017 17 417 For details of the valuation techniques and significant unobservable inputs related to determining the fair value of the contingent consideration which is classified in level 3 of the fair value hierarchy refer to note 23.
Financial instruments not measured at fair value The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents trade and other receivables trade and other payables and loans and borrowings approximates their fair value.
General objectives policies and processes The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Groups risk management objectives and policies and whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them it has delegated the authority for designing and operating processes that ensure the effective implementation of the objectives and policies to the Groups finance function.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly affecting the Groups competitiveness and flexibility.
Further details regarding these policies are set out below.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The Groups operational credit risk is primarily attributable to receivables from payment service providers PSPs from customers who dispute their deposits made after playing on the Groups websites and from B2B platform providers following the acquisitions of 8Ball and Tarco Assets see note 23 and also stemming from social gaming.
Senior management monitors PSP balances on a weekly basis including aged debtor analysis and promptly takes corrective action if preagreed limits are exceeded.
Similarly they monitor the B2B platform providers for any potential issues and take prompt action if preagreed limits are exceeded.
Credit risk also arises from cash and cash equivalents and deposits with banks and financial institutions.
For banks and financial institutions only independently rated parties with high ratings are accepted.
Further disclosures regarding trade and other receivables which are neither past due nor impaired are provided in note 14.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 60 21 Financial instruments  risk management continued General objectives policies and processes continued Foreign exchange risk The Group is exposed to translation and transaction foreign exchange risk.
The Groups policy in this case is to allow the subsidiary to settle liabilities denominated in their functional currency with the cash generated from their own operations in that currency.
The majority of the remainder of the Groups transactions are denominated in Sterling therefore the Directors deem the Groups exposure to all other exchange rate fluctuations to be minimal.
Foreign currencydenominated financial assets and liabilities translated into Sterling at the closing rate are as follows At 31 August 2017
US Dollar Israeli Shekel
Total
Financial assets 7 588 1196 760 45 9589 Financial liabilities 35930 1092 1026 291 38339 Total net exposure 28342 104 266 246 28750 At 31 August 2016
US Dollar Israeli Shekel
Total
Financial assets 6689 1338 359 332 8718 Financial liabilities 22978 5204 1584 417 30183 Total net exposure 16289 3866 1225 85 21465 The effect of a 10% strengthening of the US Dollar against Sterling at the reporting date on the US Dollardenominated financial instruments carried at that date would all other variables held constant have resulted in an increase in posttax profit for the year and an increase in net assets of 12000 2016 decrease of 430000.
A 10% weakening in the exchange rate would on the same basis have decreased posttax profit and decreased net assets by 9000 2016 increase of 351000.
The effect of a 10% strengthening of the Israeli Shekel against Sterling at the reporting date on the Israeli Shekeldenominated financial instruments carried at that date would all other variables held constant have resulted in a decrease in posttax profit for the year and decrease of net assets of 30000 2016 decrease of 136000.
A 10% weakening in the exchange rate would on the same basis have increased posttax profit and increased net assets by 24000 2016 increase of 111000.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital and the finance charges and principal repayments on its shortterm borrowings.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Groups policy is to ensure that it will always have sufficient cash to allow it to meet its liabilities when they become due and as at the end of the financial year projections indicate that the Group expects to have sufficient liquid resources to meet its obligations under all reasonably expected circumstances.
The following table sets out the contractual maturities representing undiscounted contractual cash flows of financial liabilities At 31 August 2017 Up to 3 months
3 and 12 months
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years Trade and other payables 12585 17 260 13 62 Loans and borrowings 559 1642 2121 2541 Total 13144 18902 2134 2603 At 31 August 2016 Up to 3 months
3 and 12 months
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years Trade and other payables 13255 1934 6989 Loans and borrowings 150 8400 Total 13405 10334 6989  Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 61 22 Sharebased payment The Company has an equitysettled share option scheme for its employees and nonemployees which includes the following Enterprise Management Incentive share options EMI Options which qualify for favourable tax treatment under the provisions of Schedule 5 to ITEPA.
Holders of EMI options have up to ten years from the date of grant to exercise these options.
The number of options and vesting dates are in accordance with each individual agreement.
Nonqualifying options made available to employees and Executive Directors of the Group also have up to ten years from the date of grant to exercise the options.
The exact numbers and vesting dates will depend on each contract agreement but all options will vest and will therefore be exercisable in no more than three years from the date of grant.
Nonemployee options are available to NonExecutives and individuals providing services to the Company who are nonemployees.
The vesting and exercise conditions are the same as nonqualifying options.
Longterm incentive plans LTIPs are available to the three Executive Directors of the Group.
Every year a certain number of shares depending on gross salaries and share price on the date of the award will be placed in a trust.
The vesting date of each share award will be three years from the date of the award and the number of shares to vest will depend on specific earnings per share targets.
The exercise price is Nil.
The LTIPs are discussed further in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Weighted average exercise price
Outstanding at 1 September 2015 1.32 3000 Granted during the year 1.18 2150 Forfeited during the year 1.32 63 Outstanding at 31 August 2016 5087 Granted during the year 0.54 539 Forfeited during the year 1.32 116 Outstanding at 31 August 2017 5510 The weighted average exercise price of options outstanding at 31 August 2017 was 1.19 2016 1.26 and their weighted average contractual life was 3.13 years 2016 3.14 years.
Of the total share options outstanding at 31 August 2017 2000000 had vested 2016 1000000 although not exercised.
All other outstanding shares at year end are therefore not exercisable.
The weighted average fair value of each option granted during the period was 2.15 2016 1.85.
Included in the outstanding number of options above are 1055000 2016 1601000 options issued to nonemployees under the appropriate terms of the share option scheme.
Also included in the outstanding number of options above are 593333 options issued under the LTIP.
The following information is relevant in the determination of the fair value of options granted during the period under the equitysettled sharebased remuneration schemes operated by the Group.
2017 2016 Option pricing model used BlackScholes BlackScholes Weighted average share price at grant date  2.47 2.89 Weighted average exercise price  0.54 1.18 Weighted average contractual life in years 3.00 3.34 Weighted average expected volatility 58.22% 55.19% Expected dividend growth rate 0.50% 0.50% Weighted average riskfree interest rate 0.39% 0.81% The volatility assumption measured at the standard deviation of expected share price returns is based on a statistical analysis of daily share prices of comparable companies over the last three years.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 62 22 Sharebased payment continued The sharebased remuneration expense comprises Equitysettled schemes expense 1751 1645 National Insurance 7 267 Equitysettled schemes including National Insurance 1758 1912 The Company also settled the acquisition of 8Ball Games Ltd through the issue of shares and as this was linked to remuneration it constitutes a sharebased payment under IFRS 2.
The total expense in the year ended 31 August 2017 was 10088000 2016 Nil and is included in the contingent remuneration in the profit or loss account refer to note 23 for further details and number of shares issued.
The fair value of the shares was calculated on the date of the acquisition as 2.45 which was based on the share price at that date of 2.45 and an exercise price of Nil.
23 Business combinations Prior year acquisitions The acquisition of Tarco Limited assets as well as the acquisition of the entire share capital of Netboost Media Limited and 8Ball Games Limited all completed on 31 August 2016.
On completion the Groups market share and brand offering increased.
These acquisitions continue to bring significant scale to the Groups business together with the continuous opportunity for meaningful operational leverage.
For both acquisitions the main factors leading to the recognition of goodwill which is not deductible for tax purposes are the opportunities we now have for significant further improvement through leveraging off the Groups leading software and marketing expertise together with delivering synergies through crossmarketing lowering of cost per acquisition increasing customer value and reducing player churn.
These factors do not qualify for separate recognition.
Each acquisition is detailed below.
Acquisition of 8Ball Games Limited On 31 August 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the voting equity instruments of 8Ball Games Limited 8Ball a company registered in the UK.
The company is an online bingo operator with a 2% market share of the UK online bingo market.
It has over 60000 active players and 74 sites including Booty Bingo and WeWantBingo.
The 8Ball acquisition brings scale and an efficient crossmarketing business intelligence platform utilised to reduce churn and increase lifetime value.
The initial consideration was 11.3 million in cash which was paid on completion of the transaction as well as 1.2 million of assumed debt.
Details of the fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities acquired purchase consideration and goodwill are as follows Fair value Property plant and equipment 49 Cash 439 Trade and other receivables 1798 Trade and other payables 1826 Brands 2702 Developed software 160 Customer relationships 3865 Deferred tax liability 1418 Total net assets 5769 Fair value of consideration paid Cash 11281 Assumed debt 1220 Working capital receivable in cash 79 Total consideration 12422 Goodwill note 12 6653 Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 63 23 Business combinations continued Prior year acquisitions continued Acquisition of 8Ball Games Limited continued The purchase agreement also included a oneyear earnout payable to the sellers as contingent consideration if they remain with the acquired company for twelve months postacquisition.
This element of the consideration is accounted for as remuneration rather than part of the consideration paid to acquire 8Ball in accordance with International Accounting Standards.
The earnout could not exceed 18 million and is calculated as a six times multiple of Adjusted EBITDA for the twelvemonth period following completion less the initial consideration.
The total consideration was finalised as at 31 August 2017 and consisted of 4036000 payable in cash and a sharebased payment expense of 10088000.
The overall earnout liability including the share element was settled in September 2017 as follows The first 3000000 was satisfied by the issue of 1333333 earnout shares calculated by reference to the August 2016 placing price of 225p.
The remaining consideration was split 40% in cash and 60% in shares.
This represented 2784149 earnout shares calculated as the first 1000000 to be satisfied at 225p being the placing price of the August 2016 placing and the remainder by reference to the average closing price of the ordinary shares for the 90day period ending on 31 August 2017 of 216p.
The cash value which was paid on 29 September 2017 was 4036800.
Total acquisition costs amounted to 543000 and these have been recognised in the profit or loss account in the year ended 31 August 2016.
In the prior year had the acquisition been made on 1 September 2015 Group revenue would have been 10.8 million higher with an increase in profit after tax of 1.0 million.
Acquisition of Tarco Limited assets and Netboost Media Limited On 31 August 2016 the Group acquired certain assets the Tarco Assets of Tarco Limited Tarco a company registered in Belize and the entire issued share capital of Netboost Media Limited Netboost Media a company registered in Israel a marketing business which provides execution marketing services to Tarco Assets.
On this basis the purchase price allocation has been completed on a combined basis.
At the time of the acquisition Tarco was an online bingo operator with a 3% market share of the UK online bingo market and had over 63000 active players.
It had 22 B2C bingo brands and four B2B brands including Moon Bingo and Robin Hood Bingo.
The Tarco acquisition brought scale and a number of leading bingo brands to Stride Gaming.
The total consideration which cannot exceed 40.2 million for the Tarco Assets and Netboost Media was made up as follows Tarco Assets Initial consideration of 16.2 million on a debtfree cashfree basis paid on completion of which 7.9 million was paid in cash before any working capital adjustments and the balance of 8.3 million satisfied by the issue of 3219500 new ordinary shares and reflected in the merger reserve.
Contingent consideration of up to 22.0 million equal to a multiple of Adjusted EBITDA for the twelvemonth period ending 31 December 2017 less the initial consideration which will be payable in a mix of cash and shares as follows 51.44% in cash and ii 48.56% by the issue and allotment of further shares based on the Average Earnout Share Price.
The Average Earnout Share Price is the average closing share price of the shares of Stride in the 90day period ending on the last day of the earnout period provided that the Average Earnout Share Price shall not be higher than by 20% Upper Earnout Limit or lower than by 20% Lower Earnout Limit of the initial share price of 2.57.
In the event that the Average Earnout Share Price is higher than the Upper Earnout Limit the Upper Earnout Limit shall be used.
In the event that the Average Earnout Share Price is lower than the Lower Earnout Limit the Lower Earnout Limit shall be used.
Netboost Media Total consideration of 2.2 million before any working capital adjustments which was paid in cash on the date of completion.
Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 64 23 Business combinations continued Prior year acquisitions continued Acquisition of Tarco Limited assets and Netboost Media Limited continued Details of the fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities acquired purchase consideration and goodwill are as follows Fair value Property plant and equipment 38 Cash 1764 Noncurrent receivables 82 Trade and other receivables 1414 Deferred tax asset 41 Trade and other payables 3430 Brands 3153 Developed software 122 Customer and contractual relationships 6865 Total net assets 10049 Fair value of consideration paid Cash consideration 10108 Share consideration 8273 Current contingent consideration net of discounting finance cost 5620 Working capital payable in cash 21 Total consideration 24022 Goodwill note 12 13973 The contingent consideration was recorded as a liability at 31 August 2016 based on the estimated fair value at acquisition date and discounted from this date until the consideration is paid.
It was calculated based on the Groups expectation of what it will pay in accordance with the sale and purchase agreement at the time.
The earnout targets are based on a multiple of Adjusted EBITDA for the year ending 31 December 2017.
On 31 August 2017 the expected Adjusted EBITDA of the earnout period was reassessed at approximately 4.5 million which led to an increase in the fair value of the contingent earnout of 10797197 which has been recognised in the profit or loss account and will be payable in cash and shares as noted above.
During the period the Group successfully managed to increase net gaming revenue by applying better operational knowhow and cost synergies utilising the wider Group resources which resulted in lower distribution and administration costs.
A change in the actual Adjusted EBITDA achieved in the year ending 31 December 2017 of 100000 would increasedecrease the fair value of contingent consideration by 750000.
Total acquisition costs amounted to 302000 and these have been recognised in the profit or loss account in the year ended 31 August 2016.
In the prior year had the acquisition been made on 1 September 2015 Group revenue would have been 17.5 million higher with an increase in profit after tax of 1.7 million.
24 Related party transactions Significant shareholders identified below are shareholders with more than 10% of shareholding either individually or as part of the concert party they belong to.
There are no individuals or concert party shareholders who have control over the Group.
The transactions with significant shareholders have been disclosed below as per prior periods.
Annual report and financial statements 2017 Stride Gaming plc 65 24 Related party transactions continued In the prior year the Group received payment processing services from a company related by common significant shareholders.
Fees charged during the year ended 31 August 2016 totalled 538000.
Also in the prior year the Group incurred a fee of 300000 following the termination of the business relationship between the parties on 1 May 2016.
The amount that was due from the payment processing provider to the Group at 31 August 2016 was 228000.
This was fully repaid in the year ended 31 August 2017 with no impairment being recognised in respect of this amount.
There were no further transactions with this related party since the agreement was terminated in the prior year.
The acquisitions of the Tarco assets and Netboost Media on 31 August 2016 constituted a related party transaction due to the acquired businesses being under common control of significant shareholders see note 23 as well as certain shareholders being key management personnel of the Group.
As at 31 August 2017 the total contingent consideration liability was 17417000 2016 5620000.
A total of 10797000 was expensed in the profit or loss account during the year 2016 Nil with the remainder of the movement in liability being the unwinding of the discount on the consideration of 1000000 2016 Nil included in finance expense.
A total of 170000 was due to a company under control of common significant shareholders at 31 August 2017 and 31 August 2016.
The amount due is interest free and there were no transactions with this related party in the current or prior year.
The Group entered into related party transactions with certain other companies under control of significant shareholders or KMP for the provision of software platform marketing office rental and other back office services.
The total purchases in the year ended 31 August 2017 were 5285000 2016 3572000.
From this total 4132000 2016 2890000 related to direct marketing costs placed by the related party as well as a marketing fee for providing this service.
Total amounts due by the Group at 31 August 2017 were 272000 2016 383000 and the total amounts receivable by the Group at 31 August 2017 were 2000 2016 Nil.
On 30 July 2015 the Group entered into a loan agreement with a significant shareholder for a total amount of 8000000.
The amount which was due for full repayment in July 2017 was incurring interest of 7.5% per annum paid monthly in arrears.
The full amount of 8000000 plus one month of accrued interest of 51000 was outstanding as at 31 August 2016.
On 9 December 2016 the loan was repaid in full following the refinancing agreed with Barclays in November 2016.
Total interest expense in the year ended 31 August 2017 was 158000 2016 602000 plus an early termination fee of 100000 in line with the original agreement.
During the year a total expense of 14124000 was recognised in the profit or loss account 2016 Nil in relation to the contingent remuneration following the acquisition of 8Ball Games Ltd.
This was split between a cash payable amount of 4036000 and a sharebased payment expense of 10088000 which was due to the previous owners of 8Ball Games Ltd who are considered KMP.
The liability was settled post year end through the payment of cash and the issue of shares.
Refer to notes 23 and 25 for further information.
25 Events after the reporting date In September 2017 the 8Ball contingent remuneration was settled in full refer to note 23.
Also settled post year end was the second and final InfiApps contingent remuneration for a total of 929000.
Following the establishment of its first business to business joint venture in May 2017 with a leading gaming operator in the UK Aspers Group Limited the online business officially launched in October 2017.
Post year end the Group made a strategic investment of up to 3 million for the controlling rights in Passion Gaming a Rummyfocused online gaming business operating throughout India.
Due to the recent acquisition of this business the acquisition accounting is currently incomplete.
26 Noncash movements in cash flow statement The following transactions were significant noncash movements in the prior year From the total initial consideration payable to acquire the Tarco Assets and the share capital of Netboost Media 8274000 was in the form of issuing shares.
From the total initial consideration payable to acquire the entire share capital of 8Ball 1220000 was in the form of assumed debt.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Stride Gaming plc Annual report and financial statements 2017 66 Corporate information Country of incorporation of parent company Stride Gaming plc 12 Castle Street St Helier
JE2 3RT Legal form Public limited company
Nigel Terrence Payne NonExecutive Chairman Stuart Eitan Boyd Darren Brett Sims Ronen Kannor John Le Poidevin NonExecutive Adam David Batty NonExecutive Secretary and registered office Ronen Kannor 12 Castle Street St Helier
JE2 3RT Company number
BDO LLP 55 Baker Street
W1U 7EU Legal advisors Berwin Leighton Paisner LLP Adelaide House London Bridge
EC4R 9HA Financial advisor nominated advisor and joint broker Shore Capital Stockbrokers Limited Bond Street House 14 Clifford Street
W1S 4JU Joint broker Canaccord Genuity Limited 88 Wood Street
EC2V 7QR Stride Gaming plc 12 Castle Street
Helier
Jersey
