RDI REIT P. formerly Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 Investing in opportunity Annual Report 2017 Formerly Redefine International P.
Redefine International is a diversified FTSE 250 UKREIT committed to becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT.
Our incomeled business model and strategic priorities are designed to offer shareholders superior  sustainable and growing income returns.
Redefine International holds a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange and a secondary listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and is included within the FTSE 250 EPRA and GPR indices.
Welcome to the Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 A FTSE 250
SchlossStrassen Center Berlin Front cover City Point Leeds Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 01 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Financial statements 95 Statement of Directors responsibilities 96 Independent auditors report 99 Income statements Statements of comprehensive income 101 Balance sheets 102 Statements of changes in equity
Notes to the financial statements Other information 148 EPRA property analysis 151 Fiveyear record 152 Glossary Directors report
60 Chairmans statement 62 Board of Directors 66 Leadership structure 67 Board composition 68 Board operations 70 Nominations Committee
73 Investor relations 74 Audit and Risk Committee
78 Directors remuneration 79 Remuneration at a glance 83 Policy report on remuneration 86 Annual report on remuneration 92 Additional disclosures Strategic report 02 At a glance
Chief Executives report
07 Investment proposition
10 Market context 12 Income led business model Strategic priorities 16 Principal risks
24 Business segments 26 UK Retail 30 UK Commercial 34 UK Hotels 38 Europe
45 EPRA disclosures Corporate social responsibility On 1 December 2017 Redefine International P. name to RDI REIT P.
Although you may see some changes in branding this Annual Report is dated 26 October 2017 before our change in name became effective.
The Companys name referenced throughout therefore remains Redefine International P.
Our new brand short for Real Estate Diversified Income REIT provides a solid platform for the delivery of superior sustainable and growing income for our shareholders.
The move is synonymous with our intention to become the UKs leading income focused REIT.
More than just a change of name the RDI REIT brand is a demonstration of our unique approach to real estate investment.
Through our relentlessly inquisitive nature tenacity and creativity we realise and add value that others miss.
Real estate redefined.
Redefine International is a diversified FTSE 250 UKREIT committed to becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT.
Our incomeled business model and strategic priorities are designed to offer shareholders superior  sustainable and growing income returns.
Redefine International holds a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange and a secondary listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and is included within the FTSE 250 EPRA and GPR indices.
Welcome to the Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 A FTSE 250
SchlossStrassen Center Berlin Front cover City Point Leeds Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 01 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Financial statements 95 Statement of Directors responsibilities 96 Independent auditors report 99 Income statements Statements of comprehensive income 101 Balance sheets 102 Statements of changes in equity Statements of cash flows Notes to the financial statements Other information 148 EPRA property analysis 151 Fiveyear record 152 Glossary Directors report
60 Chairmans statement 62 Board of Directors 66 Leadership structure 67 Board composition 68 Board operations 70 Nominations Committee
73 Investor relations 74 Audit and Risk Committee
78 Directors remuneration 79 Remuneration at a glance 83 Policy report on remuneration 86 Annual report on remuneration 92 Additional disclosures Strategic report 02 At a glance Where we operate
Chief Executives report
07 Investment proposition The year in review 10 Market context 12 Income led business model Strategic priorities 16 Principal risks
Operating review
24 Business segments 26 UK Retail 30 UK Commercial 34 UK Hotels 38 Europe
Financial review
45 EPRA disclosures Corporate social responsibility The year in review page 08
Chief Executives report
Corporate social responsibility page 46 Our corporate social responsibility CSR strategy is to deliver lasting value to our stakeholders.
CSR is integral to our business strategy and governance.
For more information visit sitecsr Committed to becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 02
At a glance Disciplined approach delivers sectorleading dividend yield.
Underlying earnings 7.6% 3.5% Dividend per share 6.3% 50.0% Improved gearing Weighted average cost of debt 3.4% 3.1%
53.4% 50.0% EPRA NAV per share Portfolio valuation 1529m 1539m 3.0%
3.1% 30bps St Georges Shopping Centre Harrow Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 03 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Where we operate Our diversified portfolio is located in Europes two strongest economies namely the United Kingdom and Germany.
Our top 20 assets by value
Germany
Manchester
Leeds
Edinburgh
Berlin
Hamburg
London
Bristol
UK
Germany
Manchester
Leeds
Edinburgh
Berlin
Hamburg
London
Bristol
United Kingdom 1.1bn
0.4bn
Retail
33%
Hotels
16%
27% Market value
Commercial
24% 1.5bn 27% 73% Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 04 Strategic report 2017 has been a year of heightened global and political uncertainty and prospects of continued volatility across markets.
In a world where change is happening at an everincreasing pace our strategy to be the UKs leading income focused REIT is well placed.
I am therefore pleased to report another solid set of results with underlying earnings per share at 2.75 pence in line with recent guidance and EPRA NAV per share up 3.5 per cent to 41.4 pence.
Results and dividend Underlying earnings increased by 7.6 per cent to 49.8 million 2016 46.3 million.
Underlying earnings per share are in line with guidance at 2.75 pence and form the base from which we will grow income in line with our mediumterm growth target of 3.0 to 5.0 per cent per annum.
EPRA NAV increased by 3.5 per cent to 41.4 pence per share 2016 40.0 pence per share supported by a 3.0 per cent likeforlike increase in the value of the Groups portfolio.
The Board has declared a second interim dividend of 1.3 pence per share taking dividends declared for the full year to 2.6 pence per share.
The full year dividend reflects a payout ratio of 94.5 per cent of underlying earnings delivering on our strategic priority of distributing superior income returns which are fully covered by underlying earnings and aligned with operating cash flow.
The total dividend for the year of 2.6 pence per share reflects a 6.3 per cent yield on EPRA NAV over 50 per cent higher than the UKREIT average of 4.1 per cent.
Strategic priorities In February 2017 we held an inaugural Capital Markets Day and set out the Companys strategic priorities which have the goal of delivering superior sustainable and growing income returns.
Following a period of significant growth and transactional activity these priorities underline our ongoing ambition to become the UKs leading income focused REIT.
Our initial earnings target of 2.7 to 2.8 pence per share has been achieved and in only six months we have made material progress in improving the quality of the portfolio so as to deliver longterm sustainable income returns and enhanced growth prospects.
Scalable business There are a number of longterm benefits associated with greater scale including greater access to capital markets and liquidity a lower cost of capital overhead efficiencies and operational flexibility.
However these benefits will remain secondary to securing the right income focused investment opportunities for our shareholders.
The acquisition of a further 32.8 per cent stake in International Hotel Properties Limited IHL by way of a scheme of arrangement as announced in August 2017 will result in the issuance of approximately 45.9 million new Redefine International shares.
In addition the Company will reach agreement later today to acquire a further 5.0 million shares representing an 8.9 per cent stake in IHL from Redefine Properties on the same terms as the scheme of arrangement.
12.5 million new Redefine International shares will be Chief Executives report Mike Watters
Chief Executive Officer
We remain committed to becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT and to delivering upper quartile income returns relative to other UKREITs.
Highlights
Superior income 6.3% dividend yield on NAV UKREIT average 4.1% Sustainable income Diverse portfolio with WAULT of 7.4 years to first break and 7.3 years weighted debt maturity Growing income Improved portfolio quality with 39% indexed income and high yielding incomeled development initiatives 6.3% 7.4yrs 39% Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 05 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information issued in consideration representing 0.7 per cent of the current issued share capital.
The completion of these two transactions will result in the Groups overall interest in IHL increasing to 58.9 per cent.
IHL will be delisted and the portfolio will be managed as part of the Groups existing hotel portfolio.
Last valued at 104.4 million the assets include the Hampton By Hilton at Gatwick Airport the Holiday Inn Express Edinburgh and four Travelodge hotels providing long dated uncapped CPI linked income.
The acquisition is expected to provide a yield on equity of over 10 per cent which will be earnings enhancing and provide exposure to assets demonstrating strong trading performance.
This acquisition clearly demonstrates our ambition to increase scale through investing in the right earnings enhancing opportunities.
Income focused portfolio Our strategic priority to improve our portfolios exposure to more resilient property fundamentals supports our target to deliver secure sustainable and growing income.
Our investment philosophy is simple we look to invest in and extract value from assets which can deliver consistent and growing income returns.
Equally we look to recycle capital from assets providing limited further rental andor capital growth expectations where business plans have been successfully executed and value creation maximised.
It has been a productive year in terms of both investment and disposal activity.
Over
148 million was generated from asset sales at a premium of 12.2 per cent to book value with a further 11.0 million sold post year end.
The disposals completed during the year are testament to our strategy as set out above.
These actions combined with disciplined reinvestment are continuously improving the quality of the portfolio and its ability to deliver longterm sustainable and growing income returns.
The Company is at advanced stages of negotiation on the sale of a portfolio of German retail assets for approximately 200 million.
The sale would include the repayment of associated debt facilities.
This opportunistic disposal capitalises on an exceptionally strong investment market and an approximate 17 per cent increase in the value of the Euro relative to Sterling over the investment period.
The Company intends to recycle the disposal proceeds into new investments which are in line with the Companys strategy of enhancing the quality of the portfolio and its growth prospects.
A number of investment opportunities have been identified which are at various stages of due diligence.
In particular the Company is currently in exclusive negotiations to acquire a portfolio of high quality assets in the UK which if acquired would utilise the majority of the disposal proceeds.
The income yield is expected to be commensurate with the yield achieved on the disposal and likely to be accretive to investors over the medium term.
However there can be no guarantee that such acquisition will proceed to completion and a further announcement will be made by the Company as appropriate in due course.
Our relentless focus on maximising income delivered from the portfolio is evidenced by the continued high level of occupancy achieved at 97.7 per cent 2016 97.7 per cent.
235 leasing events were completed during the year reflecting a 3.9 per cent 0.6 million increase on passing rent and a 0.7 per cent increase on ERV.
Excluding temporary leases gross annualised rental income increased by 5.0 per cent and 4.9 per cent on passing rent and ERV respectively.
The redevelopment and expansion of existing assets remains an important part of our strategy to enhance the quality of the portfolio and deliver attractive income returns on marginal investment.
Capital expenditure during the year totalled 19.6 million with current capital projects anticipated to provide a 7.6 per cent yield on cost.
Efficient capital structure We are focused on further strengthening the balance sheet by mitigating refinancing risk and efficiently reducing leverage whilst also limiting the impact on income.
The Groups loan to value ratio of 50.0 per cent reflecting transactions post year end is at the top end of our medium term target of 45 to 50 per cent.
The acquisition of a further 44.0 per cent interest in the Leopard portfolio during the second half of the year raised leverage temporarily above 50 per cent but this has been largely addressed through successful disposals and the acquisition of the controlling interest in the IHL hotel portfolio post year end.
Our investment philosophy is simple we look to invest in and extract value from assets which can deliver consistent and growing income returns.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 06 Strategic report Chief Executives report continued The Groups weighted average cost of debt stands at 3.1 per cent 2016 3.4 per cent below our mediumterm target of 3.2 to 3.4 per cent.
The reduction in our interest costs has provided enhanced interest cover at a Group level of 3.2 times 2016 2.7 times.
The long term debt secured against four of our UK Shopping Centres was successfully restructured in the second half of the year to reduce leverage and interest costs.
The aggregate facility of 167.8 million was reduced to 146.1 million extended to April 2042 and included the termination of the historic profit share arrangement on Grand Arcade Wigan.
The aggregate prepayment and restructuring costs of 27.6 million provided a marginal return of approximately 10 per cent resulting in an efficient reduction in leverage.
Financial discipline In February 2017 we aligned underlying earnings to the EPRA measure adjusted for limited Company specific noncash adjustments.
Utilising this industry standard metric will provide a closer alignment of earnings to operating cash flow.
Our dividend for the year was fully covered with the payout ratio of 94.5 per cent within our target of 90 to 95 per cent.
Progress against our mediumterm financial targets has been positive with key metrics largely on target or moving in the right direction.
Growing our business sustainably On the Corporate and Social Responsibility front the Group has been proactive in ensuring compliance with forthcoming Energy Performance Certificate EPC regulations.
Over 500 EPCs have been reviewed or renewed eliminating compliance risk in advance of the 2018 deadline.
On Green initiatives we have improved our GRESB rating for the second year running and we have conducted tenant surveys at our UK Shopping centres to help us develop better experiences for occupiers and customers alike.
For certain centres this has resulted in the implementation of electric vehicle charging bays provided free of charge to customers.
2016 marked ten years since the Groups listing and to celebrate we have been paying it back with community projects called Ten 4 Ten.
Each centre has invested ten days during the year towards initiatives designed to support the communities in which we operate.
Outlook
The income return from direct real estate in the UK has contributed approximately 75 per cent of total direct real estate returns over the longterm and our income focused portfolio is well placed to capitalise on this trend in the future.
With growing global appetite for predictable income returns we believe our incomeled strategy to deliver market leading shareholder distributions remains extremely attractive.
The expectation of rising interest rates in the UK in the near term appears increasingly likely.
Despite this interest rates remain exceptionally low by historic standards and the outlook for longerterm rates remains benign suggesting that the search for yield is likely to endure as a key investment theme.
Our income focused and diversified portfolio provides limited exposure to any single sector or occupier with the opportunity to allocate capital to assets and sectors where we identify the best opportunities.
We are increasingly looking to invest in locations and sectors with longterm structural support driven by occupier demand infrastructure investment and strong demographics.
Significant progress has been made in strengthening our balance sheet and we will continue to target a lower leverage structure over time.
Notwithstanding this objective the Groups average debt maturity is already in excess of seven years and with material covenant headroom and interest cover over three times this has resulted in limited refinancing risk and strong cash flow cover.
All our mediumterm targets remain in place.
Our growth target of 3.0 to 5.0 per cent per annum in underlying earnings per share reflects the confidence we have that our business will continue to deliver superior sustainable and growing income.
Earnings growth is driven with focus on all aspects of our income statement.
The continuous improvement in the quality of our portfolio is supporting rental growth expectations.
We are seeing strong occupier demand for our logistics hotels and retail park assets 47 per cent of the UK portfolio supported by 38.9 per cent of the overall portfolio being subject to inflationlinked and fixed rental increases.
In addition we have a number of incomeled asset management initiatives planned and underway to support our growth targets.
Weighted average cost of debt has reduced to 3.1 per cent which combined with improvements in our EPRA cost ratio is providing positive operating leverage.
We remain committed to becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT and to delivering upper quartile income returns relative to other
Mike Watters
Chief Executive Officer
26 October 2017 31 August Key metrics Mediumterm target HY1 HY2 2017 Underlying EPS guidance 2.7  2.8 p na na 2.75 Payout ratio % Rental income growth likeforlike % LTV % Interest cover times Cost of debt % EPRA cost ratio excluding direct vacancy costs % 17.2 per cent when adjusted for nonrecurring items.
All our mediumterm targets remain in place.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 07 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Our incomeled business model and strategic priorities are designed to deliver superior sustainable and growing shareholder distributions.
An attractive business model focused on income driven total returns in an environment where sustainable income is increasingly important.
Investment
Committed to becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT.
Superior income Committed to deliver upper quartile dividend yield on NAV when compared to other UKREITs Sustainable income Strong visibility on income supported by a diversified portfolio and tenant base with WAUL T of 7.4 years to first break and average debt maturity of 7.3 years Growing income Mediumterm target to grow underlying EPS between 3% and 5% per annum Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 08 Strategic report
Disposal of VBG oce portfolio Germany Disposal of oce building at Deansgate Manchester
Company enters into scheme of arrangement with minority shareholders to acquire 50% interest in International Hotel Properties Limited
Contracts exchanged for the disposal of German Retail portfolio for 205m representing a 10.8% premium to book value
Company hosts Capital Markets Day in both UK and South Africa
Company acquires controlling interest in German Retail portfolio previously held in joint venture
Disposal of Sytner BMW Showroom High Wycombe
Former 40000 sqft BHS unit at Grand Arcade Wigan let to Poundland
Agreement reached to acquire controlling interest in International Hotel Properties Limited
Disposal of Woodlands
October
Disposal of Exchange House
March
Disposal of The Observatory
February
Disposal of Parliament Square Edinburgh Disposal of Delta 900
May
Development begins at Albion Street Derby to create new 22000 sqft unit for TK Maxx October November February April March May August July June January The year in review Recycling capital to improve the portfolios resilience and longerterm income security.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 09 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
Disposal of VBG oce portfolio Germany Disposal of oce building at Deansgate Manchester
Company enters into scheme of arrangement with minority shareholders to acquire 50% interest in International Hotel Properties Limited
Contracts exchanged for the disposal of German Retail portfolio for 205m representing a 10.8% premium to book value
Company hosts Capital Markets Day in both UK and South Africa
Company acquires controlling interest in German Retail portfolio previously held in joint venture
Disposal of Sytner BMW Showroom High Wycombe
Former 40000 sqft BHS unit at Grand Arcade Wigan let to Poundland
Agreement reached to acquire controlling interest in International Hotel Properties Limited
Disposal of Woodlands
October
Disposal of Exchange House
March
Disposal of The Observatory
February
Disposal of Parliament Square Edinburgh Disposal of Delta 900
May
Development begins at Albion Street Derby to create new 22000 sqft unit for TK Maxx October November February April March May August July June January Strategic report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 10
Economic and political uncertainty have become commonplace.
In many respects the UK has faired well post the EU referendum.
Unemployment remains at very low levels and GDP growth forecasts remain positive albeit below 2.0 per cent.
Germany has benefited from low unemployment solid economic growth and a broad based European economic recovery.
The UK will likely experience its first rise in interest rates in ten years with the base rate expected to increase over the coming months.
Despite this likely increase in short term rates the outlook for longer term rates remains low with UK ten year gilts below 1.5 per cent immediately after the increase in the base rate.
Likewise interest rates in Germany remain exceptionally low by historic standards.
While interest rates remain at such depressed levels the premium between real estate yields and interest rates remains well above historic averages.
Economic uncertainty generally results in businesses and consumers delaying investment decisions.
Despite these near term challenges our strategy of investing in Europes two largest and most liquid real estate markets is expected to provide long term sustainable income returns.
The UK occupational market has been resilient and performed better in a post Brexit climate than generally expected.
Performance has however been varied with distribution and industrial benefiting strongly from the structural change in retailing while certain parts of the retail market have come under pressure from changing consumer habits and the corresponding change in retailers sales and delivery network.
Retailers embracing these changes remain successful however the traditional sales channels and store networks have and will continue to change.
Our largely food discount and convenience shopping centres reflect a more resilient part of the market evidenced by the portfolios continued high occupancy rate of 96.7 per cent.
Engagement with retailers customers and local communities all form an integral part of our asset management process.
We are actively investing in our assets to ensure they remain relevant and attractive to both retailers and customers.
The London hotel market has benefited from a stronger than anticipated economy and weaker Sterling with London centric limited service hotels demonstrating positive trading.
Regional office markets have seen limited new development and robust occupier demand.
However we have taken the opportunity to sell regional office assets where we believe values have been maximised.
Occupier demand from London offices has been resilient and future speculative supply has reduced.
Our exposure to areas of London benefiting from large scale transport and infrastructure investment is well placed.
Market context We anticipate income returns to remain the focus for UKREITs which aligns well to our strategy.
Our focus on Europes two largest real estate markets provides liquidity and transparency.
Income and income quality is as important as ever.
As investors seek out acceptable yields our ability to deliver sustainable asset backed income returns is compelling.
Occupational market Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 11 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Investment market activity was strong across most sectors both in the UK and Germany.
Capital and liquidity for real investment remains strong but is selective with depth of demand significantly stronger for good quality assets.
One area of significant growth has been the alternative sectors including student accommodation self storage and the private rented sector.
As occupier and customer needs evolve flexibility and service levels are becoming an increasingly important consideration.
Capital values in most markets have performed well driven by both lower investment yields and rental growth.
With investment yields now broadly at levels previously seen in 2007 investment demand has become increasingly focused on sectors with rental growth expectations.
Shopping centres particularly in the UK have been the exception and have seen a sharp reduction in investment demand and transactional volume.
Market concerns reflect a lack of real growth in retail sales volumes and the impact of online retailing and changing consumer habits on physical retail outlets.
At 20 per cent by market value UK Shopping centres reflect a decreasing part of our portfolio.
Investment and disposal activity continues to focus on allocating capital to assets in locations and sectors with longterm structural support and occupier demand.
Our experience of managing a diversified portfolio of assets provides clear evidence of greater levels of occupational and investment activity in major cities and key economic areas.
The increased weighting of the Groups portfolio to London the Big six UK cities and the South East as well as key German cities including Berlin and Hamburg provides greater confidence in future growth and sustainability.
Real estate continues to be defined by technological and social disruption and businesses continue to respond with newtech initiatives to match customer behaviour.
The ondemand culture created by the entertainment sector has filtered through to all aspects of daily life.
Consumers demand to be where its happening whether that be at work at leisure or at home.
The retail sector is responding to consumer demands by focusing on space as a service bringing together physical space and location with technology to create ultimate engagement and experience.
Augmented reality beacons and voice recognition technology are just some of the tools being employed in physical shopping locations to challenge online shopping.
Smartphones and social media remain the enabler for shopping centres utilising apps to deliver greater convenience.
An example of this is app driven ticketless cashless parking solutions which are becoming commonplace as retail destinations strive to become customer driven and outcome focused.
The growing use of data analytics is also impacting the retail environment.
Knowing the customer is certainly not a new concept but with technology advances retailers and retail environments are able to gain an indepth knowledge of their shoppers and target audiences like never before.
It goes beyond age and demographic profiling enabling brands to create personal tailor made marketing activity resulting in brand immersion and engagement.
In addition to a robust traditional research programme our Retail Portfolio utilises our consumer websites apps and social media functionality to understand and respond to customer needs and wants.
Technology
Investment and capital markets We see clear evidence of greater levels of occupational and investment activity in major cities and key economic areas.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 12 Strategic report Superior income Sustainable income Growing income
In February 2017 we held an inaugural Capital Markets Day and set out our strategic priorities in support of our commitment to become the UKs leading income focused REIT.
Scalable business
Income
Financial discipline Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 13 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Strategic priorities Designed to deliver superior sustainable and growing income.
Income focused portfolio Continuously improving our diversified portfolios exposure to more resilient property fundamentals supporting security of income with clearly identified opportunities to drive income growth.
Efficient capital structure Focused on further strengthening the balance sheet by mitigating refinancing risk and efficiently reducing leverage.
Support of operational flexibility with a competitive cost of capital.
Financial discipline Improved accountability with clear and measurable mediumterm targets across all items of the income statement.
Efficient conversion of rental income into profits with headroom on dividend.
Scalable business Greater scale will result in longerterm benefits including greater access to capital markets and liquidity whilst limiting volatility.
Capital recycling to ensure we secure the right earning enhancing opportunities for our shareholders.
Demonstrating our commitment to deliver on strategic priorities Transformational 2016 acquisition delivering significant value and income returns  see page 33 Clear and measurable medium term targets  see page 14 A stronger balance sheet with improvement in all key metrics see page 15 Earnings and NAV accretive IHL acquisition completed post year end see page 37 Strategic report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 14 Targets Risks Key performance indicators Link to remuneration
Income focused portfolio High quality portfolio Limited volatility through cycle Invest in opportunities across sectors Sufficient scale Cost efficient portfolio Competition for investments Decline in market conditions Failure to anticipate changes in property cycle Development and construction risk Weaker occupier demand Low inflation environment
Occupancy by ERV %
Earnings total property return
Earnings NAV
Earnings total property return Greater than 39 per cent of portfolio subject to indexlinked rents Occupancy steady at 97.7 per cent Office vacancy reduced 235 lease events concluded at 3.9 per cent above previous passing rent Efficient capital structure Strong balance sheet Operational flexibility Competitive cost of capital Reduced availability of financing and refinancing at acceptable cost Increased cost of finance Adverse movements in share price Changes in regulatory requirement General market dislocation Weighted average cost of debt yrs Weighted average debt maturity yrs
STIP
Cash flow personal objectives Weighted average cost of debt reduced to 3.1 per cent Weighted average debt maturity improved to 7.3 years LTV reduced to 50.0 per cent
Rental income growth of 25 per cent like for like p.
Efficient conversion of rental income to profit EPRA cost ratio 15 per cent Covered dividend with 9095 per cent payout ratio Interest cover ratio 3 times Underlying EPS growth of 3 5 per cent p.
LTV of 45 50 per cent Adverse interest rate movements Tenant default Deterioration in LTV Declining valuations leading to covenant breaches Adverse foreign currency movements
Underlying earnings per share EPRA cost ratio %
Earnings total property return total shareholder return
Earnings total property return total shareholder return
Earnings cash flow
Fully covered dividend with 94.5 per cent pay out ratio Cost of debt reduced to 3.1 per cent Interest cover 3.2 times One of the lowest EPRA cost ratios in the sector LTV at 50.0 per cent
1 billion market capitalisation Improved liquidity Recycling capital Limit volatility Multiple sources of capital Changes in regulatory requirements Competition for investments Significant external political or financial event Rental income growth LfL % EPRA NAV per share
Earnings total property return
Earnings cash flow
Earnings total property return Portfolio WAULT of 8.5 years 7.4 years to first break Mature asset disposals generating 148.2 million 3.5 per cent growth in EPRA NAV Expansion of Hotels exposure through increased investment in IHL Principal risks their potential impact and mitigating factors are set out on pages 16 and 17.
Executive Performance is linked to strategy as outlined on page 81.
LTIP
Part of Executive Directors longterm incentive plan arrangements.
STIP
Part of Executive Directors shortterm incentive plan annual bonus.
ELTI
Part of Employees long term incentive arrangements.
Strategic priorities Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 15 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Targets Risks Key performance indicators Link to remuneration
Income focused portfolio High quality portfolio Limited volatility through cycle Invest in opportunities across sectors Sufficient scale Cost efficient portfolio Competition for investments Decline in market conditions Failure to anticipate changes in property cycle Development and construction risk Weaker occupier demand Low inflation environment
Occupancy by ERV %
Earnings total property return
Earnings NAV
Earnings total property return Greater than 39 per cent of portfolio subject to index linked rents Occupancy steady at 97.7 per cent Office vacancy reduced 235 lease events concluded at 3.9 per cent above previous passing rent Efficient capital structure Strong balance sheet Operational flexibility Competitive cost of capital Reduced availability of financing and refinancing at acceptable cost Increased cost of finance Adverse movements in share price Changes in regulatory requirement General market dislocation Weighted average cost of debt yrs Weighted average debt maturity yrs
STIP
Cash flow personal objectives Weighted average cost of debt reduced to 3.1 per cent Weighted average debt maturity improved to 7.3 years LTV reduced to 50.0 per cent
Rental income growth of 25 per cent likeforlike p.
Efficient conversion of rental income to profit EPRA cost ratio 15 per cent Covered dividend with 9095 per cent payout ratio Interest cover ratio 3 times Underlying EPS growth of 35 per cent p.
LTV of 4550 per cent Adverse interest rate movements Tenant default Deterioration in LTV Declining valuations leading to covenant breaches Adverse foreign currency movements
Underlying earnings per share EPRA cost ratio %
Earnings total property return total shareholder return
Earnings total property return total shareholder return
Earnings cash flow
Fully covered dividend with 94.5 per cent pay out ratio Cost of debt reduced to 3.1 per cent Interest cover 3.2 times One of the lowest EPRA cost ratios in the sector LTV at 50.0 per cent
1 billion market capitalisation Improved liquidity Recycling capital Limit volatility Multiple sources of capital Changes in regulatory requirements Competition for investments Significant external political or financial event Rental income growth LfL % EPRA NAV per share
Earnings total property return
Earnings cash flow
Earnings total property return Portfolio WAULT of 8.5 years 7.4 years to first break Mature asset disposals generating 148.2 million 3.5 per cent growth in EPRA NAV Expansion of Hotels exposure through increased investment in IHL Principal risks their potential impact and mitigating factors are set out on pages 16 and 17.
Executive Performance is linked to strategy as outlined on page 81.
LTIP
Part of Executive Directors long term incentive plan arrangements.
STIP
Part of Executive Directors short term incentive plan annual bonus.
ELTI
Part of Employees long term incentive arrangements.
6.9 Strategic report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 16
The Group seeks to minimise control and monitor the impact of risks to profitability whilst maximising the opportunities they present.
Redefine International acknowledges that it faces a number of risks which could impact the achievement of its strategy.
While it is not possible to identify or anticipate every risk due to the changing business environment the Group has an established risk management process to manage and mitigate risk.
The Groups process for identifying and managing risk is set by the Board.
The Board has delegated the oversight of risk to the Audit and Risk Committee.
Risks are assessed bottom up throughout the business both gross and net of mitigating controls.
The Audit and Risk Committee reviews the risk management plan biannually with the design implementation and monitoring being the responsibility of management on a daytoday basis.
Risks are considered in terms of their impact and likelihood from both a financial and reputational perspective.
Although not exhaustive the principal risks facing the Group are categorised into four broad risk types Strategic Financial Operational and Legal and regulatory.
The potential impact of these risks and the mitigating controls in place to manage their impact are as follows Strategic risks Change Risk Impact potential Link to strategy Mitigation factors Failure to execute appropriate property investment strategies and take advantage of opportunities in the current economic climate Declining net asset value total property return income and capital or shareholder returns dividend and share price growth Annual review of investment strategy Defined asset appraisal process Investment Committee reviews all opportunities against pre determined criteria Monitoring of macroeconomic and property market trends Flexible and agile decision making Uncertain political or economic climate for example negotiations on the UK exit from the European Union results in increased uncertainty over future policy and legislation General market dislocation leading to increased volatility with potential impact on property valuations andor share price Constrained access to debt or capital markets impacting ability to address liquidity or covenant concerns Good relationships with key shareholders and lenders Monitoring loan covenants and required cash cures in event of severe but plausible scenarios Monitoring proposals and emerging policy and legislation Balance sheet structure provides flexibility Significant business interruption or terrorist event Inability to access or operate properties Operational interruption and disruption Significant reduction in footfall Injury or loss of life of occupier customer employee or contractor Loss of key employee or supplier Adequate insurance cover Geographic diversity of portfolio Disaster recovery planning including frequent replication of data and offsite storage Robust security including CCTV and access controls Major incident planning and monitoring of NaCTSO security advice Succession planning performance evaluation and long term incentive rewards Change in investment strategy of significant shareholder Adverse movement in share price Perceived loss of confidence Close relationships maintained with key shareholders Dedicated investor relations resource Income focused total return strategy maintaining upper quartile performance Financial risks Change Risk Impact potential Link to strategy Mitigation factors Decline in market conditions and structural changes in retail consumer behaviour Reduced availability of financing and refinancing at acceptable cost Inability to fund property investments Increased cost of finance Declining valuations leading to covenant breaches Mix of lenders and maturities of facilities Detailed capital planning and forecasting.
Sufficient liquidity maintained to meet commitments Early refinancing of debt Regular assessment of market conditions including bi annual external valuations and monitoring of covenants Portfolio diversified across sectors and geography Income focused portfolio Efficient capital structure Financial discipline Scalable business Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 17 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Financial risks continued Change Risk Impact potential Link to strategy Mitigation factors Adverse interest rate movements and inflationary pressures Increased cost of borrowing and hedging reducing financial and operational flexibility Adverse impact on property valuations Interest rate hedging policy providing interest rate protection Target staggered debt maturities Geographic diversification Adverse foreign currency movements Decreased asset values Reduced operating income Debt facilities arranged in the currency of the related investment act as a partial hedge Exchange rates continuously monitored Amounts converted to Sterling at earliest opportunity Euro income hedging where appropriate Operational risks Change Risk Impact potential Link to strategy Mitigation factors Failure to anticipate changes in the property cycle Reduced investment demand and declining property values Potential pressure on banking covenants Bi annual external valuation of properties Diversified portfolio Active asset management Regular monitoring of covenants Reduced occupier demand for space increased supply or occupier defaults Reduced rental income and cash flow Increased void costs Declining property values Diverse tenant base Long leases and strong tenant covenants Open dialogue with tenants and property managers Review consumer trends Regular monitoring of tenants at risk Inappropriate cladding or construction materials Increased devastation in case of fire Annual fire risk assessment Comprehensive review of cladding and insulation in place across portfolio and close liaison with national Health and Safety Executive Development and construction risk including contractor solvency and availability planning risk and implementation challenges faced Reduced development returns resulting from cost overruns programme delays or failure to secure planning permission Existing tenant disruption Delayed or failed tenant installation Failure to obtain planning permission Strong supply chain and professional relationships facilitate assessment and monitoring Appropriate due diligence procurement and consultation prior to placing contracts including review of financial covenants Fixed priced contracts Post project assessment Legal and regulatory risks Change Risk Impact potential Link to strategy Mitigation factors Health safety and environmental risk Loss or injury to employees tenants or contractors Impact on reputation adverse publicity or financial impact Policies in place with audit and risk assessments undertaken Environmental programme in place All properties actively managed Appointed dedicated Health and Safety Manager Changes in or breach of regulatory or legislative requirements Financial or reputational impact Reduced financial returns as a result of increased taxes across nonREIT business Adverse tenant behaviour Appointment of appropriately qualified employees corporate advisers and administrators in all jurisdictions with active engagement Regular review of compliance e.
Sound governance and internal policies Viability statement In the context of the above principal risks the Directors have considered a three year time horizon in assessing longer term viability.
This aligns with the Groups internal strategic plan and is underpinned by an average unexpired lease term and weighted average debt maturity comfortably exceeding three years.
In reaching their opinion the Directors considered the Groups internal control environment together with the results of plausible but conservative scenarios.
In light of recent events the Directors paid particular attention to the risk of a deterioration in economic outlook impacting property fundamentals including the impact on property valuations of a weakening investor and occupational market coupled with restricted availability of finance.
Key inputs included extended vacancy periods increased finance costs and lower levels of scrip dividend take up.
In performing these tests the Directors considered the limit at which a threat to viability may crystallise.
Having considered these factors both individually and collectively the impact on the Groups forecast cash flows and covenant compliance the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its debts as they fall due during the next three years.
Strategic report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 18
Camino Park Crawley Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 19 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information 2017 has been an active year in terms of capital recycling and asset management activity.
Since the start of the year we have invested 41.9m and sold 132.1m of assets resulting in a material improvement to the quality of the portfolio and the sustainability of its income.
Our portfolio provides strong income characteristics with clear visibility of the mediumterm income profile and growth opportunities.
Key portfolio characteristics include a weighted average lease length of 7.4 years to the first potential lease break and 8.5 years to expiry 38.9 per cent of gross rental income is subject to inflationlinked or fixed increases rental growth potential with a reversionary yield of 6.6 per cent 90 bps higher than the current portfolio net initial yield high and stable occupancy demonstrating robust occupier demand and over 600 tenants with no single tenant accounting for more than 7.0 per cent of gross rental income.
Key statistics 1.5bn Total market value of portfolio 97.7% EPRA occupancy 38.9% Leases subject to indexation 7.4yrs WAUL T to first break 5.7% EPRA NIY Lease events completed totalling 17.3m Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 20 Strategic report
Annualised
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy Portfolio summary value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % UK Retail UK Commercial UK Hotels Total UK
Total
Wholly owned 1513.1 Held in joint ventures proportionate Portfolio positioning by business plan Each asset is viewed in terms of its ability to deliver sustainable income returns andor growth.
Approximately 76 per cent of the current portfolio is classified as either Core income or Growth income.
Core income assets typically exhibit long lease lengths high cash on cash returns and are predominantly multilet often with some form of indexation.
Growth Income assets constitute approximately 30 per cent of the current portfolio.
These assets are typically lower yielding but with higher intrinsic growth prospects.
20 per cent of the portfolio comprises properties which have shorter term more intensive asset management plans underway.
These opportunities are typically incomeled with a significant percentage of prelet income being secured before development commences.
Our ability to create marginal revenue and enhance the quality of assets is fundamental to our overall strategy.
Where we believe we have maximised the potential of individual assets or where the market is prepared to pay a higher price than our view of the assets intrinsic value we will look to recycle that capital into new opportunities.
At 31 August 2017 approximately 4 per cent of the portfolio was considered mature with a number of those assets being actively considered for sale.
Annualised
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy Portfolio by business plan value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % Core income Growth income Asset management
Total
Each asset is viewed in terms of its ability to deliver sustainable income returns.
Valuation overview The portfolio increased in value by 40.7 million or 3.0 per cent on a likeforlike basis.
This increase in value was driven by a 2.7 per cent increase in like for like annualised net rental income and an inward yield shift of 7 basis points.
A more detailed review of the valuation movement is presented in the Financial review.
Leasing activity In the last 12 months 235 lease events were agreed providing a total rent of 17.3 million a 3.9 per cent 0.6 million increase above the passing rent and a 0.7 per cent 0.1 million increase on ERV.
Portfolio occupancy remained high and stable at 97.7 per cent 2016 97.7 per cent.
As previously reported we have experienced little evidence to suggest a material change in occupational demand in the markets in which we operate.
Post year end over 53702 sqft 4989 sqm of vacant space in the UK Shopping Centre portfolio is in solicitors hands including the former BHS unit at Grand Arcade Wigan which has exchanged with Poundland resulting in the highest occupancy achieved since acquiring the shopping centres.
Rateable values In January 2016 the UK Valuation Office Agency published an updated rating list for England and Wales which has been adopted from 1 April 2017.
The change in rateable values for commercial real estate will have a direct impact on business rates and therefore the total cost of occupation for tenants and the cost of vacant space for landlords.
In general rates are to increase materially in London while many regional centres will see a reduction in rateable values.
Across our UK portfolio excluding UK Hotels rates will reduce by approximately 6.9 per cent.
Our hotels which are largely London focused will see a 51 per cent increase in rates.
While the impact of the change in rates is to be phased in over a three year period the change is already reflected in hotel property values.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 21 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
Leopard portfolio The acquisition of the controlling interest in the Leopard portfolio was completed on 26 April 2017.
The portfolio consists of 66 German retail properties which were independently valued at the time of acquisition at 175.5 million reflecting a net initial yield of 7.4 per cent.
The portfolio generates gross annualised rental income of 13.9 million of which 99.2 per cent is indexed between 60 and 70 per cent of German CPI subject to indexation reaching a cumulative hurdle of 10 per cent.
Tenants including Edeka Netto Real and Rossman account for over 85 per cent of the gross rental income.
The portfolio has a WAULT of 7.9 years and is nearly fully occupied at 99.0 per cent by ERV.
The joint venture interest was acquired for an aggregate consideration of 49.0 million 49.4 million including transaction costs.
Following the transaction the Company holds an effective 94 per cent controlling interest in the portfolio whilst providing 100 per cent of its nonbank financing requirement by way of shareholder loans.
IHL
In August the Company made an offer to increase its shareholding in IHL by 32.8 per cent from 17.2 to 50.0 per cent.
Following subsequent shareholder and court approval the Company will acquire 16429687 IHL shares from the minority shareholders by way of a scheme of arrangement and a further 1913479 IHL shares from Redefine
The transactions are expected to complete simultaneously in early November 2017.
Consideration for the IHL shares will be settled via a share for share exchange with 2.5 Redefine International shares to be issued for every 1 IHL share held.
A total of 45.9 million new Redefine International shares are expected to be allotted.
On implementation of the scheme the listing of IHLs shares on both the JSE and LuxSE will be terminated.
The Company will also later today reach agreement to acquire a further 8.9 per cent interest in IHL from Redefine Properties on the same terms as the scheme of arrangement by the issue of an additional 12.5 million new Redefine Intentional shares.
This transaction constitutes a smaller related party transaction and falls within LR 11.1.10 R of the UK Listing Rules.
The Groups interest will initially increase to 26.2 per cent and then to 58.9 per cent once the scheme of arrangement completes.
The IHL portfolio comprises nine high quality UK hotels which were last valued at 104.4 million and will complement the Companys existing hotel portfolio.
The four Travelodge hotels comprising 27.7 per cent of the portfolio are let on long term leases with average unexpired lease term of over 20 years.
These assets reflect a net initial yield of 5.3 per cent and benefit from five yearly upward only CPI escalations that provide attractive rental growth prospects in a higher inflationary environment.
The remaining five hotels valued at 75.4 million will be leased to the Companys associate RedefineBDL Hotel Group.
Four of the hotels are franchised to Holiday Inn Express and one to Hampton by Hilton.
The five hotels to be leased by RedefineBDL have a strong trading record.
The Hampton by Hilton at Gatwick Airport is integrally linked to the airport terminal building and the Holiday Inn Express Edinburgh has shown strong growth since acquisition by IHL.
The five franchised hotels are expected to deliver a net initial yield of over 7.5 per cent.
The portfolio is currently financed at 41.7 per cent loantovalue at an all in cost of debt of 3.3 per cent.
Following the transactions UK Hotels are expected to comprise approximately 21 per cent of the Companys gross assets up from 16 per cent at 31 August 2017.
It is anticipated that there will be material savings on the integration of the hotel assets into the Companys existing hotel portfolio and REIT status.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 22 Strategic report
Disposals
The success of the disposal programme in the first half of the year continued into the second half with a further 53.2 million of disposals achieved at a premium of 12.0 per cent to the 28 February 2017 book values.
Disposals for the full year totalled 148.2 million reflecting a premium of 12.2 per cent to book value.
EPRA NIY Reversionary Carrying Sales Net rental on sales yield on value price income price sales price Disposals since 31 August 2016 Completion m m m % % Brandenburg Germany September 2016 0.1 0.2  15.4 12.1 Exchange House Watford October 2016 11.8 13.3 1.0 6.9 5.8 VBG office portfolio Germany January 2017 201 Deansgate Manchester January 2017 25.5 29.2 1.1 3.6 7.0 Parliament Square Edinburgh February 2017 3.5 4.0 0.4 9.3 4.1 Delta 900 Swindon February 2017 Recklinghausen Germany February 2017 0.3 0.3  6.1 7.6 The Observatory Chatham March 2017 3.6 4.0 0.3 7.9 8.3 Bedford Woodlands June 2017 11.5 11.0 1.1 9.1 7.8 Carphone Warehouse Merton June 2017 2.1 5.5 0.1 1.8 2.0 Sytner High Wycombe August 2017 24.7 26.1 1.4 5.0 3.9 Brckmuhl Germany August 2017 5.6 6.6 0.4 5.8 6.2
Strategic disposals As part of our strategy to enhance the quality of the portfolio mature assets and assets in weaker locations will be considered for sale.
VBG office portfolio Germany On 18 January 2017 the Company completed on the sale of four German office assets for a gross consideration of 106.0 million.
The assets which were disposed of via a share sale and included related debt facilities were held in a joint venture with the Menora Mivtachim
The disposal of the Companys 49 per cent share reflected an 8.6 per cent premium to the August 2016 market value in Euro terms.
The Companys net proceeds of 25.6 million which included a net Performance Fee of 1.8 million delivered an IRR of 24 per cent over the investment period.
The properties situated in Berlin Dresden Cologne and Stuttgart total 485900 sqft 45100 sqm and are let to a German government backed social insurance body VBG on a combined WAULT of just under seven years.
The portfolio generated a total annual gross rental income of 8.1 million of which 4.0 million was attributable to the
Significant capital would have been required on expiry of the leases to make market rents achievable.
Other
Other strategic sales included certain regional office assets and a number of smaller retail assets in Germany which had limited rental growth expectations.
Realising value The ability to enhance income and value through asset management initiatives is a key part of our investment strategy.
Where asset values have been maximised through reconfiguration refurbishment or leasing activity these assets will be considered for sale.
Delta 900 Swindon Swindon was successfully sold for 3.6 million following the completion of a new 15year lease with Oxford Brookes University for 28412 sqft 2640 sqm on an agreed rent of 0.3 million 20.8 per cent above ERV.
The disposal represents a 28.6 per cent premium on book value.
Carphone Warehouse unit Priory Retail Park London The standalone Carphone Warehouse unit at Priory Retail Park Merton was sold for 5.5 million relative to an apportioned value of 2.1 million reflecting a 161.9 per cent premium.
Opportunistic disposals We are consistently looking to generate value through alternative use income led asset management or opportunistic sales.
Opportunities to recycle capital through the disposal of assets at attractive prices are considered on a riskadjusted basis taking into consideration future capital commitments planning and letting risks.
Exchange House Watford The Exchange House completed in October 2016 for 13.3 million a 12.7 per cent premium to carrying value reflecting a net initial yield of 6.9 per cent and a reversionary yield of 5.8 per cent.
The 63000 sqft 5900 sqm office building is occupied by the Department of Work and Pensions until March 2023 with a break option in March 2018.
148m generated from disposals reflecting a premium of 12.2% to book value.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 23 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information 201 Deansgate Manchester On 31 January 2017 the Company completed on the disposal of 201 Deansgate Manchester for 29.2 million.
The property provides 83700 sqft 7800 sqm of office space and delivered an annual net rental income of 1.1 million with a WAULT of 4.1 years.
The office was originally acquired as part of the AUK Portfolio in March 2016 and the sales price represents a net initial yield of 3.6 per cent and a 14.3 per cent premium to book value.
The IRR over the investment period was 22 per cent.
Sytner BMW car showroom High Wycombe The Sytner BMW showroom was sold for 26.1 million to a UK pension fund in August 2017.
The sale price reflected a net initial yield of 5.0 per cent and a premium of 5.8 per cent to the 28 February 2017 book value.
The property was acquired in March 2016 as part of the AUK transaction.
The disposal provided an opportunity to recycle capital out of an asset with limited nearterm rental growth prospects at a low initial yield.
Development and capital expenditure Development activity is largely incomeled and focused on refurbishing existing assets and adding incremental space to meet occupier demand.
Approved capital expenditure Estimated Yield on cost
Description m completion % City Arcaden Ingolstadt Primark development 20.0 Q4 2017 5.2 Holiday Inn Express Southwark 12 room extension and faade upgrade Q4 2017 Banbury Cross Retail Park PureGym  new unit Q4 2017 UK Retail Park expansions Drive through pods 4.4 Various 12.6 Albion Street Derby TK Maxx 2.2 Q4 2017 10.0 West Orchards Coventry Food court refurbishments 2.6 Q4 2017 16.9 Schloss Strassen Center Berlin Food court refurbishments 2.0 Q2 2018 6.2 German supermarket extensions Extensions and reconfigurations
Total
City Arcaden Ingolstadt The redevelopment of this prime retail asset is anticipated to be completed in late 2017 and will transform the existing retail pitch.
The completed scheme will total approximately 129000 sqft 12000 sqm including two retail units prelet to Primark and HandM of approximately 100000 sqft 9500 sqm.
The scheme is anticipated to generate 2.2 million in rental income resulting in a yield on cost of 5.2 per cent.
Holiday Inn Express Southwark The 12 room extension and upgrade to the front and rear faade completed in September 2017 and included an upgrade to the bedrooms to align with the latest Holiday Inn Express format.
The hotels operating business delivered consistent underlying revenues despite the disruptions from the extension and refurbishment works.
UK Retail Park expansions The new PureGym unit at Banbury Cross Retail Park was completed post year end.
This unit will provide an additional 0.2 million of rental income reflecting a yield on cost of 15.0 per cent.
A further seven units are in various stages of development with prelet agreements for all the units either already completed or in solicitors hands to strong A3 covenants.
We are particularly pleased with The Arches Retail Park Watford where competitive bidding resulted in indicative rental values of over 90 per sqft.
The new units will provide an additional 0.5 million of rental income reflecting a yield on cost of over 10 per cent.
Albion Street Derby In May 2017 an agreement for lease was signed with TK Maxx for a new 22000 sqft 2044 sqm store at Albion Street in Derby.
The redevelopment of 9 11 Albion Street has commenced to combine the basement ground first and second floors of the three existing units into a single modern space to accommodate TK Maxx.
The new store is scheduled to open by late 2017 once internal fittings have been installed creating 35 new jobs and improving the retail pitch for the city.
The agreed rent of 0.2 million is 50 per cent ahead of the February 2017 ERV.
Capital expenditure to reconfigure the space is anticipated to be 2.2 million.
The ten adjoining retail units under our ownership inclusive of the three being combined for TK Maxx provide a key artery in Derbys main retail centre linking the citys Intu Shopping Centre to Primark and the historic Old Town.
The area is the subject of major redesign and refurbishment plans by Derby City Council which will transform the area into a familyfocused shopping destination.
Strategic report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 24
Three Greater London offices and 15 regional offices Four well located multilet distribution centres Service station and motor trade properties which provide defensive income on long leases with leading brands including BP and Kwik Fit Six wholly owned regionally dominant shopping centres tenanted by leading retailers including Tesco Wilko Boots HandM and TK Maxx Well located retail parks of which four assets are in London UK South and Big six UK cities Other assets include a high street retail asset currently under development and a retail warehouse Our diversified portfolio has strong income characteristics with clear visibility of the mediumterm income profile and growth opportunities.
Occupancy % Lettable area m Annualised gross rental income m 39.9
Market value 33% Read more on pages 26 to 29 Read more on pages 30 to 33 Occupancy % Lettable area m Annualised gross rental income m 22.2
Market value 24% UK Retail Grand Arcade Wigan UK Commercial 127 Charing Cross Road London Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 25 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information 80 properties in Germany Three well located shopping centres in Berlin Hamburg and Ingolstadt Other assets include retail parks and small discount supermarkets Tenants are weighted to nondiscretionary food stores and discounters Eight limited service hotels in Greater London and one hotel in Edinburgh Branded Holiday Inn Holiday Inn Express Crowne Plaza Travelodge and DoubleTree by Hilton 30.4% holding in RedefineBDL the UKs largest independent hotel manager 17.2% holding in IHL a hotel and leisure focused listed entity Occupancy % Lettable area m Annualised gross rental income m 15.2
Market value 16% Occupancy % Lettable area m Annualised gross rental income m 27
Market value 27% Read more on pages 34 to 37 Read more on pages 38 and 39 UK Hotels
Holiday Inn Express Earls Court Bahnhof Centre Altona Hamburg Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 26 Strategic report
Operating review
UK
Retail
St Georges Shopping Centre Harrow Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 27 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information UK Retail The retail landscape continues to evolve rapidly resulting in a significant variation in the performance of retail assets in different subsectors and locations.
Unemployment levels are at an historic low however consumer confidence has been impacted by political uncertainty and negative real wage growth.
Unsurprisingly the investment demand for retail shopping centres in particular has been weak which has been reflected in our valuations in the second half of the year.
On the positive side our shopping centre exposure is heavily weighted toward food discount and convenience shopping which has proved more resilient when compared to retail of a more discretionary nature.
Commercialisation income of 1.1 million was collected during the year a 9 per cent increase relative to last year.
Our inhouse commercialisation team CentreStage has enhanced the quality and profitability of the speciality retailing and advertising activity within our shopping centres and retail parks collaborating with international and national brands as well as supporting smaller local businesses and communities.
Income from commercialisation activities is targeted to grow by 7 per cent in 2018.
Further opportunities to drive ancillary revenues from the Groups wider portfolio have been identified.
Shopping centres Despite a tough retail environment 76 lease events were completed during the year which were marginally down on previous passing rents.
Occupancy decreased to 96.7 per cent 2016 98.1 per cent as a result of five small units becoming vacant three of which have successfully exchanged post year end.
Annualised gross rental income decreased marginally however values declined 6.9 per cent on a likeforlike basis reflecting a weak investment market with very few transactions in the year.
The former 41315 sqft 3838 sqm BHS unit at Grand Arcade Wigan has been let to Poundland post year end.
This is a good result with the majority of old BHS units in the UK still vacant.
Shopping Centre occupancy will increase to 99.2 per cent following the inclusion of the lettings achieved post year end and will result in a saving of 0.6 million on vacancy costs.
Overall footfall increased by 2.1 per cent over the year.
The majority of our shopping centres have benefited from this increase other than Grand Arcade Wigan where the former BHS vacancy impacted footfall.
The reletting of the BHS unit to Poundland is anticipated to have a positive impact on footfall in 2018.
We have seen significant variation in the performance of retail assets in different subsectors and locations.
Key statistics Annualised gross rental income 96.8% Occupancy by ERV 8.4yrs WAUL T to first break 239350sqm 14 Number of assets 6.3% EPRA NIY Opportunity for modest rental growth reconfiguration of existing space and further development activity Shopping centres nearly fully occupied at 96.7% Good quality tenants weighted towards nondiscretionary food retailers discounters and leisure Strategic report
Operating review
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 28 Priory Retail Park Merton
Retail continued Retail parks and other retail A modest 1.0 per cent decline in likeforlike valuations was impacted by a reduction in the valuation of the House of Fraser department store in Hull.
Contracts have been exchanged on the sale of this asset post year end.
Excluding this property valuations increased 1.0 per cent.
Annualised gross rental income was down by 2.1 per cent over the last 12 months largely as a result of the development started in Derby and two vacant units totalling 17238 sqft 1601 sqm at Banbury Cross Retail Park.
There are various discussions underway to relet this space including the potential to enhance the tenant mix.
Occupier demand remains healthy particularly for our larger schemes in London and the South East.
Discussions with a number of discount food retailers and drivethrough food and beverage operators are providing potential opportunities to realise higher rental values on the parks as well as to deliver income and value enhancing asset management initiatives.
The new ten year lease with PureGym at Banbury Cross Retail Park will deliver 0.2 million of rental income and a yield on cost of 15.0 per cent for the recently completed 7500 sqft 697 sqm extension.
Annualised gross
EPRA
Market rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy UK Retail value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m % % % % yrs % % UK Shopping UK Retail 514.6 39.9 40.2 6.3 6.6 7.3 8.4 96.8 19.4 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 29 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Strategic report
Operating review
UK
Commercial
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 30 City Point Leeds Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 31 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information UK Commercial The regional office market has been resilient both in terms of occupational demand and investment volumes.
With rental growth expected to remain relatively static in a number of key regional cities and some aggressive pricing of core assets we have taken the opportunity to sell assets where we believe pricing was ahead of their growth prospects.
The London Southbank market has benefited from large scale redevelopment and investment from London Bridge through to Waterloo.
Our exposure to 104622 sqft 9720 sqm of London office space in areas undergoing material redevelopment has provided strong rental growth as well as longerterm redevelopment options.
According to UK government projections the expected growth in Londons population from 8.9 million people to 9.9 million by 2027 providing opportunities to acquire assets in improving locations with rising rental values.
Our London portfolio is well positioned to benefit from areas of structural change and has no exposure to financial services occupiers.
Distribution and industrial development activity remains restrained and general levels of supply are low suggesting the supply demand dynamics will remain positive in the near term.
The continued growth in online retailing from 14.9 per cent of total retail sales in 2016 to an anticipated 18.5 per cent by 2022 source GlobalData should provide ongoing structural support as retailers adapt to an omnichannel sales strategy.
Our focus remains on multilet industrial estates that benefit from a broad range of occupier demand and suitable to catering for growth in last mile distribution.
Our largest exposure at Camino Park Crawley benefits from the CrawleyGatwick market which has both strong occupier demand and almost negligible available supply.
With aggressive pricing of core assets we have taken the opportunity to sell assets where we believe pricing was ahead of growth prospects.
Annualised gross rental income 96.4% Occupancy by ERV 5.3yrs WAUL T to first break Increased by 2.3% on previous passing rents Progress in filling voids in regional offices to 96.4% occupancy 500bps Since acquisition the UK Distribution and Industrial WAULT increased by 30% Key statistics 184422sqm 58 Number of properties 5.1% EPRA NIY Strategic report
Operating review
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 32
Commercial continued
Offices delivered a strong result both in terms of income and valuation growth supported by a combination of factors including letting of vacant space and exposure to areas of structural change and rental growth.
Valuations increased 5.9 per cent on a likeforlike basis supported by London offices 12.8 per cent and positive letting progress at City Point Leeds and Omnibus Reigate.
Annualised gross rental income increased 5.1 per cent supported by three positive lease events at Charing Cross generating 0.2 million and reflecting a 19.0 per cent increase on passing rent and the letting of 18195 sqft 1690 sqm of vacant space across the regional office portfolio.
During the year one tenant in Newington Causeway London went into administration.
Given demand in the Southbank area we are confident this space will be relet at attractive rents.
Continued progress was also made in reducing vacancies in our regional office portfolio where vacancies have now decreased to 4.2 per cent 2016 9.5 per cent.
Distribution and industrial The distribution portfolio produced exceptional growth largely as a result of rental uplifts and lower investment yields at Camino Park Crawley.
The portfolio increased in value by 16.3 per cent on a like for like basis supported by ERV growth of 7.2 per cent.
A rent review was settled at Express Park Bridgwater resulting in a 0.1 million or 5.5 per cent increase in annual rental income.
Looking forward 64.6 per cent of rental income at Camino Park Crawley is subject to rent review in late 2017.
The current average passing rent of 7.1 per sqft is expected to show strong growth against both passing rent and ERV.
Annualised gross
EPRA
Market rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy UK Commercial value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m % % % % yrs % % UK Offices UK Offices UK Offices UK Distribution and industrial 117.6 6.3 7.5 4.8 5.0 6.0 5.0 96.3 Camino Park Crawley Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 33 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Case study Income focused portfolio Market value Disposal gross proceeds At acquisition 7.5% 31 Aug 2017 AUK delivered significant value m Triple net income at acquisition
Under development
Triple net income likeforlike
Regional oces
Triple net income 7.2% growth Annualised triple net income m Within two years the disciplined and opportunistic AUK acquisition has delivered 93.7 million of disposals at 14.6 per cent premium on acquisition value 6.7 per cent valuation growth on the remaining portfolio opportunities to reduce overrentals in retail parks with ten lease events at 10.0 per cent above ERV and 19.4 per cent above passing rent logistics signed DFS 15.5 per cent on passing rent and 14.6 per cent on ERV WAULT increased by 30 per cent to 5.0 years 9.2 years to expiry significant increase in passing rent at Charing Cross Road with six lease events improving passing rent by 22.4 per cent regional offices voids reduced by area from 19.9 per cent to 4.1 per cent and assets identified for sale Hull and Colchester.
Within two years valuation growth and premiums achieved from disposals have delivered a 7.5% increase in acquisition capital values.
Transformational 2016 acquisition delivers significant value and income growth.
UK
Hotels
Strategic report
Operating review
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 34 Holiday Inn Express Southwark Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 35 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information UK Hotels Despite the squeeze on real incomes in the UK the weak pound has helped to boost the UK hotel industry by attracting overseas visitors.
The performance of the sector in 2017 has exceeded expectations with PwC expecting occupancy average daily room rates and RevPars to finish 2017 higher than 2016 and forecast in London to increase 2.4 per cent in 2018.
The investment market was strong in the first half of 2017 with investment in London hotels of approximately 1.1 billion 55 per cent of the overall UK hotel investment volume.
London hotels have seen strong demand from Asian investors originating from Hong Kong Malaysia and Singapore with interest from India also now appearing highlighting the strength of London as a world tourist and an investment destination.
The Groups hotel portfolio remains heavily weighted to London which has consistently proven to be a stable and growing market.
The hotel portfolio will increase to approximately 21 per cent of the overall portfolio 31 August 2017 16 per cent post year end following the increase in the IHL shareholding.
The acquisition will provide further exposure to Edinburgh and to Gatwick Airport the UKs second busiest airport.
In addition the acquisition of a further four Travelodge hotels provides exposure to longdated inflation linked income.
The portfolio increased in value by 2.9 per cent on a likeforlike basis supported by underlying EBITDAs for the RedefineBDL leased hotels ending the financial year 4.7 per cent higher than last year.
The Travelodge Enfield also increased in value by 13.0 per cent reflecting the improved Travelodge covenant and the general investment demand for longdated indexlinked income.
The rent for the RedefineBDL leased portfolio for the 2018 financial year has been set at 15.4 million a 7.5 per cent likeforlike increase.
The Groups hotel portfolio remains heavily weighted to London which has consistently proven to be a stable and growing market.
Annualised gross rental income Total number of assets 9.3yrs WAUL T to first break Over 1000 rooms with further development opportunities Eight in Greater London and one in Edinburgh Key statistics 41323sqm 100%
5.9% EPRA NIY Strategic report
Operating review
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 36
Hotels continued
The Companys 30.4 per cent stake in RedefineBDL the largest independent hotel management company in the UK contributed 1.1 million to underlying earnings during the year.
Post year end RedefineBDL was awarded the management contract for a further 26 fourstar luxury hotels located throughout the UK.
Following the transaction RedefineBDL manage more than 11000 rooms across 75 hotels in the UK testament to the inhouse specialism in this sector.
IHL
The Companys 17.2 per cent investment in IHL had a market value of 8.5 million at 31 August 2017 resulting in a fair value loss of 0.3 million for the year.
Due to the scheme of arrangement currently in progress no dividend has been declared in respect of the second half of the financial year which has impacted the anticipated earnings.
IHL contributed 0.5 million in the previous financial year.
Annualised gross
EPRA
Market rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy UK Hotels value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % Greater London
London Enfield Holiday Inn Express Southampton Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 37 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Case study Scalable business Post year end we concluded on the opportunistic acquisition of an additional 56.9 per cent holding in International Hotel Properties Limited IHL which supports our strategic priority of achieving greater scale through investing in the right earnings and value enhancing opportunities.
The IHL portfolio comprises nine good quality UK hotels which were last valued in February 2017 at 104.4 million.
Supported by our strategic partnerships we expect to capitalise on the strong trading record and positive economic outlook.
Controlling our assets and simplifying our corporate structure following the transaction we will hold a controlling interest of 74.1 per cent in IHL with the remaining 25.9 per cent being held by Tsogo Sun South Africas largest hotel chain the acquisition eliminates Redefine Properties Limited the Companys major shareholder as a shareholder in IHL and further simplifies our structure and we have no further related investments with Redefine Properties Limited.
Scalable business model supported by strategic partnerships we continue to build strong operational partnerships to ensure we maximise shareholder returns through the effective management of the underlying assets straightforward integration and synergistic cost savings on hotel acquisitions we hold a 30.4 per cent holding in RedefineBDL Hotel Group the UKs largest independent hotel operator and following this acquisition RedefineBDL operates 13 of the Companys hotel assets with the remaining five hotels leased to Travelodge on long dated index linked leases.
Continuously improving our income focused portfolio quality our diversified portfolio provides us the ability to invest across sectors where we see the best growth prospects we will add nine well performing UK hotel assets to our portfolio four of the hotels valued at 29.0 million are let on long term leases to Travelodge with an effective average unexpired lease term of over 20 years.
The Travelodge portfolio reflects a net initial yield of 5.3 per cent and benefits from five yearly RPI escalations providing attractive rental growth prospects in a higher inflationary environment the remaining five hotels valued at 75.4 million will be managed by the Companys associate RedefineBDL Hotel Group.
Four of the hotels are franchised to Holiday Inn Express and one to Hampton by Hilton.
The hotels have a strong trading record and provide exposure to the Hampton by Hilton at Gatwick Airport which is integrally linked to the airport terminal building and the Holiday Inn Express Edinburgh which has shown strong growth since acquisition.
The five franchised hotels are anticipated to deliver an effective net initial yield of over 7.5 per cent and following the transaction UK Hotels will comprise approximately 21% of our portfolio by market value.
Focus on reinvesting at lower leverage the portfolio is currently financed at 41.5 per cent LTV comfortably below the Companys mediumterm target of between 45 and 50 per cent.
Earnings and NAV accretive IHL acquisition Strategic report
Operating review
Europe
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 38 SchlossStrassen Center Berlin Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 39 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
The investment market in Germany continues to attract significant domestic and foreign capital which combined with a lack of available investment product has supported competitive market activity.
Of note is the entry of Asian investors into the direct market accounting for close to nine per cent of the transaction volume in the first half of the year.
Berlin continues to see strong investment demand which bodes well for our portfolio where 20 per cent is located.
Logistics and industrial assets have witnessed a material increase in activity and the trend of increasing investment into alternative assets is rising given the competitive pricing of the traditional sectors.
The European portfolio delivered strong growth supported by a stronger Euro relative to Sterling.
The portfolio increased in value by 2.5 per cent in local currency terms and on a likeforlike basis.
Asset management activity at our Berlin shopping centre is progressing well.
Terms have been agreed to extend the REWE supermarket by 1840 sqft 171 sqm.
The lease will also be extended on a new tenyear term with the additional rent reflecting an 8.3 per cent yield on cost.
Similarly the dm pharmacy has agreed to extend its store by 1076 sqft 100 sqm.
The lease will also be extended on a tenyear term with the additional rent reflecting a 9.4 per cent yield on cost.
Both of these initiatives increase the centres weighting to food and convenience shopping and reduces the number of units on the lower ground floor improving the supply demand position of the centre.
The refurbishment of the food court began during the year and will provide a more modern concept with improved services to customers.
Redevelopment options at Altona Hamburg are currently being progressed in consultation with the local authority.
The wider master plan for this historic and commercially important area will be driven by the planned relocation of the highspeed railway terminal.
This relocation is anticipated to take place in 2023 but in the interim the development of a further 5000 new homes has already commenced.
The European portfolio delivered strong growth supported by a stronger Euro relative to Sterling.
Key statistics
EPRA
EPRA
Market rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy Europe value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m % % % % yrs % %
German supermarkets Annualised gross rental income 98.8% Occupancy by ERV 6.4yrs WAUL T to first break Including three shopping centres in Berlin Hamburg and Ingolstadt German shopping centres nearly fully occupied at 98.8% Significant development opportunity in Hamburg over the mediumterm 236598sqm 80 Total number of assets 5.4% EPRA NIY Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 40 Strategic report Gross rental income 3.7% likeforlike 2016 86.6m Portfolio valuation increase 3.0% likeforlike 2016 1.0% EPRA cost ratio 17.2% 2016 14.9%
Overview
As set out at our Capital Markets Day in February the year has seen considerable capital recycling and reinvestment targeting our core objective of delivering market leading income returns for our shareholders.
We have rebased our key earnings metric and dividend structure to ensure we retain sufficient operating cash flow within the business to fund asset management initiatives which are designed to grow incomeled total returns.
Capital profits from disposals have been partly applied towards debt restructuring and prepayments to drive down finance costs and leverage.
Guidance on the Groups rebased earnings measure set out at the Capital Markets Day has been delivered on and these full year results demonstrate solid progress against all commitments made.
Underlying earnings the Groups earnings measure were 49.8 million or 2.75 pence per share.
Aligning the comparative period which removes the impact of discontinued Company adjustments would have resulted in underlying earnings of 46.3 million or 2.8 pence per share.
The marginal reduction per share is largely attributable to both nonrecurring administrative costs and the timing of reinvestment following a period of extensive capital recycling.
EPRA NAV per share rose by 3.5 per cent to 41.4 pence driven primarily by both realised and unrealised gains on the Groups property portfolio and the impact of our European investments which benefited from the relative strength of the Euro.
An aggregate premium to book value of 16.1 million 12.2 per cent was generated through the disposal of mature assets and the strategic sale of certain high yielding assets with reinvestment into lower yielding but higher growth assets during the year.
The most significant were the disposal of the VBG portfolio and Deansgate Manchester which achieved a 24 and 22 per cent IRR respectively over the investment periods.
Proceeds from the VBG disposal were used to acquire the joint ventures interest in the German supermarket portfolio for 49.0 million an investment providing a 10 per cent cash on cash yield.
As well as being an efficient reinvestment of capital the acquisition provides flexibility over the portfolios asset management initiatives and longerterm investment decisions.
Post year end a scheme of arrangement was approved by the minority shareholders in IHL which will see the Groups interest increase from 17.2 to 50.0 per cent via a shareforshare exchange.
IHL owns nine UK hotels last valued at 104.4 million.
The transaction is anticipated to complete in early November 2017 with IHL to be delisted shortly after.
With a sector leading dividend yield of 6.3% and growth in EPRA NAV of 3.5% we have delivered a total accounting return of almost 10% for our shareholders.
Donald Grant Chief Financial Officer vacancy costs Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 41 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information In April an opportunity arose to restructure and refinance the 167.8 million Aviva facility secured over four UK Shopping centres.
In return for a prepayment of 21.7 million the interest rate on the refinanced principal of 146.1 million reduced by 31 basis points and has resulted in an annual finance cost saving of 1.7 million.
The restructuring also removed an historic arrangement whereby Aviva shared in both the annual profits and subject to certain hurdles the capital appreciation of the Grand Arcade Wigan.
An aggregate annual saving of 1.5 million is expected to result from the removal of the profit share arrangement.
The Board today declares a second interim dividend of 1.3 pence per share bringing the total paid and payable in respect of 2017 to 2.6 pence per share which represents a 94.5 per cent payout ratio on underlying earnings which is in line with guidance.
Presentation of financial information The Board reviews information and reports presented on a proportionately consolidated basis which includes the Groups share of interests in joint ventures.
To align with how the Group is managed this financial review has been presented on the same basis.
Income statement Year ended Year ended 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 Joint Group Joint Group IFRS Ventures Total IFRS Ventures Total m m m m m m Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Other income Administrative costs and other fees Net operating income Net finance costs Joint venture EPRA earnings Tax NCI and other EPRA earnings Company adjustments Debt fair value accretion Foreign exchange movements 2.0  2.0 0.9  0.9 Underlying earnings re based 49.8  49.8 46.3  46.3 Net gain on sale of joint venture interests Fair value gainloss on investment property assets held for sale and listed shares Other finance expenseincome Gain on disposal of investment property and assets held for sale Gain on disposal of subsidiary    12.2  12.2 Fair value movement on derivatives Share of nonEPRA joint venture profitslosses Deferred tax on investment property Tax NCI and other IFRS profit attributable to shareholders Diluted weighted average ordinary shares millions 1811.9 1637.9 EPRA earnings per share pence Underlying earnings per share re based pence Other income on an IFRS basis includes 100 per cent of the VBG Performance Fee generated on disposal in January 2017.
The Groups share of the resulting charge is reflected within joint venture adjustments.
Joint venture EPRA earnings for the year were 1.7 million 31 August 2016 7.3 million.
This is presented as a single line item under IFRS and linebyline under proportionate consolidation.
Gross revenue exceeded 100 million for the first time in 2017 following a full year of rental income from the 2016 AUK Portfolio acquisition.
On a like for like basis gross rental income increased by 3.7 per cent or 0.7 per cent on a local currency basis.
The strengthening of the Euro contributed an additional 2.1 million.
Asset management initiatives across the Groups retail schemes grew rents by 1.7 per cent.
UK Shopping centres recorded likeforlike income growth of 0.7 per cent in spite of the underlying challenges facing this asset class which demonstrates the resilience of our largely discount and convenience focused portfolio.
Strong performers were St Georges Harrow and Banbury Cross the only Retail Park currently included in likeforlike income which has delivered well against expectations since acquisition.
Successful rent reviews within the Kwik Fit portfolio and the Government Office portfolio contributed to an overall 2.1 per cent likeforlike increase in the UK Commercial portfolio.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 42 Strategic report
Likeforlike rental income Year ended Year ended
31 August 31 August currency 2017 2016 Change Change change Gross rental income m m m % % UK Retail UK Commercial UK Hotels UK Total
Likeforlike gross rental income
Disposals
Development
Total gross rental income The income from the UK Hotel portfolio fell 1.3 per cent like for like the result of lease incentive payments extended for general improvements to the portfolio which masked a modest headline rental increase.
European rents were relatively flat in local currency terms although a stronger Euro relative to Sterling during the year resulted in a 12.3 per cent increase in Sterling terms.
Property operating expenses have increased primarily due to the enlarged portfolio and a repairs and maintenance programme carried out on a number of German schemes the most significant being the Berlin Shopping Centre.
Other income of 2.7 million includes a Performance Fee earned on the VBG portfolio disposal of 1.6 million.
This arose from the asset management services provided to the joint venture and the IRR achieved on exit.
The Groups administrative cost base increased by 4.2 million to 15.6 million in part due to significant nonrecurring charges incurred during the year.
As guided 1.6 million was paid to terminate the historic AUK asset management contract following the Groups 2016 acquisition and integration of the portfolio with a further 0.4 million in professional fees incurred through the year which are nonrecurring.
The residual increase in cost base can be attributed to the enlarged portfolio.
The EPRA cost ratio although above our medium term target has been managed downwards during the second half of the year to 17.2 per cent after adjusting for non recurring items.
A saving in net finance costs of 4.1 million has been achieved as a result of several refinancing initiatives carried out during the year.
The Aviva refinancing in April reduced finance costs by 3.2 million relative to 2016 benefiting from both a lower cost of debt and the extinguishment of the historic profit share arrangement with the lender to Grand Arcade Wigan.
Other finance expense includes a 4.3 million non cash charge in relation to the net fair value adjustment on refinancing of the fixed rate Aviva facility.
The fair value adjustment on the new facility was lower than that released on the old due in part to the 21.7 million prepayment made.
The year also saw 10.7 million in realised profits following disposal of 11 properties with significant premiums received on Deansgate Manchester Exchange House Watford and a Carphone Warehouse unit at Priory Retail Park in Merton.
In addition the VBG portfolio was disposed of via a share sale at a 3.8 million premium to the Groups proportionate share of its carrying value at 31 August 2016.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 43 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Following a number of asset management initiatives the portfolio increased in value by 3.0 per cent like for like.
The overall increase was supported by the Groups European investments which benefited from the relative strength of the Euro increasing by 11.2 per cent compared to 2.5 per cent in local currency terms.
The UK Retail portfolio decreased by 25.1 million or 4.7 per cent driven by the UK Shopping centre portfolio which suffered rising yields and a general lack of transactional evidence.
The UK Commercial portfolio continued its strong performance with an 8.3 per cent like for like increase in values.
Underpinning this performance were particularly strong uplifts in offices and distribution warehouses caused by a reduction in vacancies rising rents and the weight of both overseas and domestic capital fuelling a competitive investment market.
The UK Hotels portfolio increased by 2.9 per cent following a strong trading performance despite the increase in business rates during the year.
The DoubleTree by Hilton in Edinburgh performed particularly well drawing from Edinburghs RevPar growth in 2016 of 17 per cent.
The London portfolio also continues to benefit from one of the highest occupancy rates in the UK at 82 per cent with growth in occupancy average daily rate and RevPar forecast for both 2017 and 2018.
Balance sheet 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 Joint Group Joint Group IFRS Ventures Total IFRS Ventures Total m m m m m m Property portfolio carrying value 1520.7 25.6 1546.3 1396.4 140.9 1537.3 Net borrowings Other assets liabilities and NCI IFRS NAV Fair value of derivatives Deferred tax EPRA NAV Diluted number of shares millions 1830.1 1795.4 EPRA NAV per share pence Market value of property including property assets held for sale adjusted to reflect head leases and tenant lease incentives.
EPRA NAV per share increased by 1.4 pence or 3.5 per cent to 41.4 pence per share.
This was primarily the result of realised and unrealised gains on the property portfolio a strengthening of the Euro and earnings for the year offset by dividends paid.
Property portfolio
31 August 31 August currency 2017 2016 Gainloss Gainloss Gainloss Market value of the property portfolio m m m % % UK Retail UK Commercial UK Hotels UK Total 1118.4 1098.3
Likeforlike property portfolio 1430.1 1378.2
Disposals
Development
Total market value of the property portfolio 1538.7 1529.0 Valuation movements include the effect of capital expenditure amortisation of head leases tenant lease incentives and foreign currency translation where applicable.
Valuation
1 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 44 Strategic report
Debt and gearing 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 m m Nominal value of drawn debt Cash and short term deposits Net debt Market value of the property portfolio 1538.7 1529.0 LTV % Pro forma LTV % 50.0 na Weighted average debt maturity years Weighted average interest rate % Interest cover times Debt with interest rate protection % Pro forma LTV adjusted for transactions completed post year end as outlined in Note 38 to the financial statements.
The Groups capital structure continued to improve during the year with an overall reduction in net debt increased weighted average debt maturity to 7.3 years a 30 basis point reduction in borrowing costs and enhanced coverage of finance costs by operating income.
Cash flow Year ended Year ended 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 Joint Group Joint Group IFRS Ventures Total IFRS Ventures Total m m m m m m Operating cash flows Purchase and development of property 18.9  18.9 489.9  489.9 Joint venture disposal and acquisition Disposal of property Disposal of shares Cromwell
Investing cash flows Issue of shares Net debt repaiddrawn Dividends paid
Financing cash flows Net cash flow Operating cash flows increased by 8.8 million on the prior year to 51.6 million a result of the increased net rental income from the AUK acquisition and the German supermarket portfolio joint venture buyout.
Investing cash inflows were generated from disposal proceeds the most significant being the VBG portfolio and Deansgate Manchester.
Cash outflows applied to investment activities included the acquisition of our joint venture partners interest in the German supermarket portfolio 18.9 million applied primarily towards development activity at Ingolstadt in Germany and a 12bedroom extension to our Southwark Hotel on Londons Southbank.
Financing activities included net repayment and prepayment of debt and dividends paid including withholding tax.
Scrip takeup on the two dividend payments made during the year were 27.3 per cent and 28.8 per cent respectively which resulted in a cash saving of 12.3 million.
Cash balances including the Groups proportionate share of cash held in joint ventures was 53.4 million at 31 August 2017 with an additional 10.0 million available from committed undrawn facilities.
Dividends
The dividends paid and payable during the year represent an annualised yield of 6.3 per cent on EPRA NAV and 6.6 per cent based on the Groups share price at 31 August 2017.
The Board intend to offer shareholders a scrip dividend alternative.
Full details including the tax components of the dividend and the timetable will be released separately on Friday 27 October 2017.
The dividend payment date has been set for Monday 18 December 2017 to shareholders on the register on Friday 1 December 2017.
Going concern At 31 August 2017 the Groups cash and undrawn facilities were 63.4 million and its capital commitments were 16.8 million.
Having considered severe but plausible scenarios the Directors are satisfied that the security of the Groups income taken together with an average debt maturity profile in excess of seven years headroom against financial covenants and strong interest cover continues to provide a reasonable expectation that the Group will have the resources it requires to meet ongoing and future commitments.
Accordingly the 2017 financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
Donald Grant Chief Financial Officer 26 October 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 45 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
EPRA performance measures
Definition of measure 2017 2016
Earnings from operational activity Net asset value NAV adjusted for investments held at fair value and excluding items not expected to be realised Triple net asset value EPRA NAV adjusted to include fair value of financial instruments debt and deferred taxes Net initial yield Annualised income based on passing rent less non recoverable operating expenses expressed as a percentage of the market value of property 5.7% 5.8% Topped up initial yield Net initial yield adjusted for the expiration of rent free periods or other incentives 5.9% 6.1% Occupancy rate Estimated rental value of occupied space divided by that of the portfolio as a whole 97.7% 97.7% Cost ratio incl.
24.6% 17.4% Cost ratio excl.
19.8% 14.9% 17.2% when adjusted for nonrecurring items.
Other EPRA investment property reporting Accounting basis Refer to page 109 for accounting policies adopted in relation to the Groups property portfolio.
Valuation information Refer to Note 12 of the financial statements on pages 119 to 121 for valuation information.
Likeforlike rental and capital growth Refer to the financial review for disclosures on likeforlike income page 42 and likeforlike capital page 43.
Investment and development assets Refer to pages 148 to 150 for detailed disclosure on the Groups sub portfolio metrics.
Refer to page 23 for information on the Groups significant development projects during the year ended 31 August 2017.
Capital expenditure analysis Refer to page 149 for detailed disclosure on the Groups capital expenditure during the year ended 31 August 2017.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 46 Strategic report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 46 Strategic report Corporate social responsibility Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 47 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information We value our relationships with all our stakeholders including customers and the communities in which we invest.
We have delivered on our EPC risk strategy devoted considerable time to support communities and charitable initiatives while striving to minimise our environmental impact through effective stakeholder collaboration.
We work hard to make decisions today which pave the way for future sustainability.
Mike Watters Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the CSR Committee
Redefine International completed its second full disclosure to the Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark GRESB Assessment during 2017.
GRESB is the global benchmark for assessing the sustainability performance of property companies against a wide range of environmental social and governance ESG issues.
The Company achieved a 12 per cent improvement in its GRESB score this year and was awarded Green Star status for the first time.
This recognises the significant effort made to improve sustainability performance both in the area of policy and management as well as implementation and measurement.
This year the Company has also participated in the new GRESB Public Disclosure Assessment which specifically rates the accessibility of ESG information for listed property companies and REITs.
Redefine
International achieved a B rating for its level of public disclosure above the GRESB global average of C.
Key objectives and initiatives have been set for 2018 aimed at continued improvement in sustainable initiatives and are in line with the Companys Corporate Social Responsibility CSR strategic framework.
Key achievements in the year 4% 100% Green Energy switch made during 2017 A tenant satisfaction survey in May 2017 achieved a 90.2% response rate Sustainability training delivered to head office and operational locations and made available to all our employees We raised for our charity of the year The Childrens Hospital Trust and two other community causes
EPCs either reviewed or renewed to ensure 100% risk free EPC strategy achieved We donated 1207 hours to local community initiatives and charities Our portfolio waste diversion from landfill maintained at 100% Water consumption LikeforLike LfL reduction of 6% 90% HSE Q Compliance site scores consistently above 90% 12% YearonYear GRESB score increase of 12% surpassing the peer average increase of 8% Our Utilities and Waste data within the 2017 CSR Report is now aligned to EPRA sBPR core requirements 8% Scope 2 CO e reduction LikeforLike LfL Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 48 Strategic report Corporate social responsibility continued CSR strategy At Redefine International CSR means understanding and pro actively managing ESG risks and opportunities that can impact on income growth and net asset value whilst also taking account of the Companys responsibilities towards stakeholders in particular investors and shareholders employees the businesses with which we work and the communities in which we operate.
The CSR Committee which comprises three of the four Executive Directors and is attended by our CSR advisers asset managers and the Company Secretary was formed in 2014 to establish and implement a formal CSR strategy for the Group.
The strategy seeks to ensure that our governance and risk management framework together with our investment and asset strategy continue to be resilient to the ever changing economic social and environmental landscape and sets out a series of actions in the form of a CSR roadmap targeting both short and medium term strategic objectives.
CSR Committee meetings Appointed Resigned Meetings Mike Watters 2382014 Adrian Horsburgh 2382014 Donald Grant 1122016 Stephen Oakenfull 2382014 1122016 11 The CSR Committee implements the CSR strategy using targets and carefully selected KPIs to measure progress tasking key stakeholders within the business responsible for the day to day management of those targets.
The CSR Committee meets regularly to review progress against the CSR roadmap review environmental performance data and receive updates on UK and German CSR related legislation.
During 2017 the Company has made several achievements the most notable being the Companys participation in the GRESB Real Estate Assessment benefited from a continued increase in score up 12 per cent on the prior years result a four per cent like for like LfL reduction in carbon CO e emissions based on 39 of our properties a six per cent LfL reduction in water consumption across 24 of our properties utilities and waste data within our 2017 CSR Report is now aligned to EPRA sBPR core requirements over 500 Energy Performance Certificates EPCs have been either reviewed or renewed to ensure our 100 per cent risk free EPC strategy is achieved achieved outstanding Q compliance Health and Safety scores across our UK Shopping centres and inaugural GRESB Public Disclosure rating of B for Redefine International against an industry average C rating.
WOMEN
MEN
Senior management Men 56% Women 44%
MEN
Gender split across the Group
Men 65% Women 35% Resilient governance We will uphold the highest standards in ethical behaviour and support our workforce.
We seek to operate in a manner that fosters open stakeholder engagement and demonstrates best practice in social and environmental risk management.
Resilient investment We undertake to realise the full potential of our investments for both our shareholders and the communities in which we operate.
Resilient assets We are mindful of our wider role as placemakers and we aim to contribute to the longterm prosperity of the communities in which we invest.
In doing so we will undertake asset management which minimises risk and maximises asset value whilst providing the best experience possible for occupiers and visitors alike.
Resilient investment Resilient assets Resilient governance Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 49 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
Approach
Redefine International seeks to operate efficient processes and procedures that demonstrate social and environmental risk management and foster open stakeholder engagement.
The Group will also continue to uphold the highest standards of ethical behaviour and actively support our workforce.
The Groups approach to maintaining these commitments include complying with all applicable regulation and preparing for anticipated future regulation and its implications providing confidence to stakeholders of our sound management of CSR risks through our ongoing participation in the most prominent industry benchmark survey GRESB ensuring employees receive appropriate training on ESG issues and providing bespoke training on sustainability topics to those that require it maintaining best practice in health and safety management to the benefit of tenants contractors customers and employees ensuring that suppliers adhere to a code of ethics covering inter alia anti bribery and modern slavery continued relationship with first class sustainability advisers to provide leadership and guidance on sustainability across the business operating a robust data management system to ensure our disclosure and reporting is accurate and fostering a culture of openness.
With respect to our employees the Group will ensure that no applicant or employee is discriminated against either directly or indirectly treat all employees prospective employees agents contractors tenants and suppliers fairly and equally regardless of their gender age race sexuality or disability promote staff training and development with a focus on fostering innovation seek to diversify our workforce to support the nature of the Companys operations or the communities in which we operate taking into account relevant skills experience knowledge personality ethnicity and gender whilst maintaining our responsibility to select the best candidate recognise our social and moral duty to offer opportunities to people with disabilities and doing all that is practicable to meet their needs uphold our commitments under our Code of Ethics which promotes honesty and integrity in business dealings and conduct commensurate with an organisation of our size.
Any breaches will lead to disciplinary proceedings and if appropriate disciplinary action and all employees are provided with a handbook outlining the Companys key policies which are designed to encourage a pleasant working environment free from discrimination undue stress or bullying.
The Company recognises respects and upholds all UK employment rights and human rights and outlaws any forms of modern slavery.
Performance
Good progress was made during 2017 in relation to CSR governance.
Over the last twelve months the focus has been on ensuring a year on year continual improvement to the GRESB Real Estate Assessment score.
In order to support this objective the available utilities data set has been expanded from 24 properties to 39 representing over a 60 per cent improvement in data collection and reporting across the two geographic locations where Redefine International hold assets under management.
This has enabled discussion around setting corporate targets given the solid foundation formed during the last twelve months on provision of a vastly improved data set aligned to the EPRA sBPR 2nd edition core requirements.
The utilities reduction target is now subject to Board approval for integration within the 2018 set of CSR Roadmap objectives.
During the year the CSR Committee has reviewed the implementation of green building certification across the portfolio.
The Omnibus Building in Reigate was certified to Environmental Management Systems International Standard ISO140012015 a great achievement.
The CSR Committee has considered the implementation of SKA assessments for planned refurbishments and investigation into whether an asset level BREEAMInUse certification would be suitable for certain properties within the portfolio.
A number of developments have been reviewed for SKA suitability with the current redevelopment of the food court at West Orchards Coventry in process of being SKA assessed.
The award of the first Green Star for GRESB 2017 and the 12 per cent year on year improvement in score has meant another successful year of reporting has been achieved.
Notwithstanding the ongoing aspirations to continually improve and the associated tasks that accompany this objective this is a good result and demonstrates our commitment to sustainability and positions the Company well for the future.
The Company believes that achieving compliance with environmental legislation is key to protecting value and enabling the improvement of our assets.
In order to manage and reduce risk we have either reviewed or renewed over 500 portfoliowide EPCs in relation to the ongoing management and commitment required as part of our 100 per cent EPC risk free compliance strategy.
In particular our portfolio exposure across England and Wales to the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards MEES regulation in tandem with our CSR Roadmap target of 100 per cent compliance has meant that EPCs rated F or G now have ongoing action plans in place.
EPCs identified as missing either on a whole building basis or per area of tenant occupied demise under lease now have EPCs.
For clarity where required under MEES these EPCs have been prepared on a lease by lease basis covering each area of tenant occupied demise.
The assessments included FRIs and E or D rated EPCs if completed prior to 2011.
Focused sustainability training was delivered to all employees based at the Groups head office and across its operational locations.
Ensuring our employees are made aware of and educated in sustainability issues helps bring sustainability to life and allows for integration of initiatives into everyday activities throughout the workplace.
Redefine International has its own dedicated Health and Safety Manager whose role it is to provide guidance and support to tenants contractors customers and employees alike.
The Group manages an environmental data reporting system which is able to collect and analyse quarterly performance data from a growing portfolio.
The Company has met its obligations under the CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme with allowances purchased to cover 2017 emissions of 7076 tonnes of CO at a cost of 121707.20.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 50 Strategic report Corporate social responsibility continued Redefine International is committed to maintaining its culture of openness and transparency.
There is a strong work ethic amongst staff and team spirit is fostered through regular meetings and team building days which encourage better working relationships and provide the forum for sharing ideas with the executives in a less formal environment.
As the Company expands and the number of employees and responsibilities increases the Board committees have ensured that the necessary internal controls have been implemented and that executives and employees remain well rewarded.
The Board recognises the importance of culture and providing a good working environment to attract and retain high calibre staff.
To this end an employee survey was undertaken to provide a forum for confidential feedback.
The Board was pleased that there was a generally positive response to the survey whilst providing for areas of focus for further improvements to employees satisfaction and health and wellbeing.
It is the aim of Redefine International to extend diversity within the Group and acknowledge accept and accommodate the differences between individuals.
The Group strives to treat all employees prospective employees agents contractors tenants and suppliers fairly and equally regardless of their gender sexual orientation family status race colour nationality religious or political belief age or disability.
The Company is committed to having an appropriate level of diversity that reflects the nature of the Groups operations and which best supports the achievement of strategic objectives.
Over the last year diversity across the Group and the Board has remained unchanged.
The Nominations Committee regularly considers skills experience knowledge personality ethnicity and gender of the Board and has set a target to extend the female representation at Board level to at least one third by 2020.
During the year a wide pool of candidates were selected for consideration as a new non executive.
The Company hopes to make an announcement regarding a new appointment by the end of the year.
Employee turnover has been modest during 2017.
All employees are based in the UK or Germany where there are few human rights issues.
No human rights concerns or whistleblowing reports were received from employees during the year.
Employees and diversity
Men % Women % Board non executives Board executives Senior management Other employees
All employees working part time 49 43 All employee leavers total Figures for 2016 are shown in brackets.
All employees excludes Board non executives.
R esilient investment
The Company seeks to implement an effective investment strategy that realises the full potential of our investments for both our shareholders and the communities in which we operate throughout the investment life cycle.
The Group will achieve this by identifying investment risks during acquisition due diligence and identifying opportunities to add value considering the social and environmental performance of our assets and monitoring and measuring our resource consumption to identify efficiencies particularly relating to energy and reduce our carbon emissions footprint and the operational costs for our tenants.
Performance
We have continued to take important steps in the deployment of our resilient investment strategy.
The Company has invested time with its CSR advisers to prepare utilities and waste data sets aligned to EPRA sBPR 2nd edition core requirements.
Data capture has been significantly improved and a new reporting format is now presented in line with industry accepted environmental performance indicators.
In 2017 Redefine International celebrated its tenth anniversary since listing and to commemorate this milestone the Company undertook a community project called Ten for 10.
This entailed investing ten days into initiatives designed to support the communities in which we operate.
See our case study for more information on page 55.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 51 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Our Tenant Energy Data TED initiative commenced during the year.
The initiative is aimed at understanding how the Company can support and influence tenants to reduce their energy consumption.
TED proved to be a complex task due to factors such as tenant nondisclosure time factors to which tenants did not wish to commit and general data unavailability.
Significant progress was however made on the eight hotels under third party management which given their relative size should make a material difference.
Energy efficiency audits have been undertaken across a third of our existing shopping centre locations in order to identify areas where energy conservation measures can be realised at either no cost or via low cost projects.
Over the next financial year the BBP Better Buildings Partnership 2017 will launch their Acquisitions Sustainability Toolkit.
This will be investigated to ensure the Group is equipped with practical guidance on how to ensure sustainability risks and opportunities are captured as part of the acquisition process.
R esilient assets
Redefine International will undertake asset management which maximises net asset value whilst providing the best experience possible for occupiers and visitors alike.
Redefine International will uphold this commitment by engaging with and contributing to charitable and community initiatives on an ongoing basis engaging with local authorities and supporting their community campaigns collaborating with tenants to conceive and promote joint community projects understanding enhancing and promoting the Groups role as a placemaker with a focus on creating and maintaining prosperous communities in the local areas where we invest ensuring key environmental and social risks are well managed when the Group is undertaking development activities and throughout the management of our portfolio and engaging with tenants to better respond to their needs and position ourselves to anticipate future requirements.
Performance
The Company has continued to refine its procedures to manage environmental risks reduce cost and future proof its assets across the portfolio.
Specifically the continuation of an asset management working group to ensure lessons learnt are discussed and best practice disseminated amongst the growing team ensuring Health Safety and Environmental HSE compliance audit scores across UK retail and shopping centre locations are over ninety per cent driven by the relationship between managing agent Centre Management teams and the Groups Health and Safety Manager the HSE audit scores are generated from software which is provided by a third party HSE compliance auditing company Q Compliance.
The software captures tracks and analyses HSE compliance activity related to a set of predefined indicators.
The current scope will be broadened to include the remainder of the UK assets and German investments over the forthcoming year the Group has undertaken Fire Risk Assessments and Water Hygiene Audits with external auditors across the UK Shopping centre portfolio to ensure compliance continued commitment to participation in the GRESB Real Estate Assessment process completed an EPC risk review of the UK portfolio ensured all funding raised from charitable activities undertaken at each UK Shopping centre are channelled to the nominated local charity which has fostered a great community spirit conducted a tenant satisfaction survey with the objective of seeking feedback for improvement and considered SKA assessments for all suitable development projects to ensure development activities consider the materials used and their associated impact on the environment.
This has led to developments at Southwark Derby Banbury and the West Orchards in Coventry undergoing scoping review.
Due to a combination of timing and the type of fitout planned for Southwark Derby and Banbury the fitout itself was unable to benefit from the SKA certification process yet West Orchards in Coventry is expected to gain certification post year end.
Energy Performance Certification EPC risk The Companys exposure to EPC risk from the forthcoming MEES and present Section 63 legislation has been thoroughly reviewed for the UK portfolio with a view to identifying and integrating applicable EPC improvement measures into asset business plans ahead of legislative deadlines.
Addressing the MEES risk has been viewed as a necessary pro active step and balances sustainability with regulation and stakeholders interests alike.
A minimum EPC rating level of D will be sought for planned refurbishments and upgrade works to our portfolio assets.
Performance data The Company is committed to monitoring and measuring the environmental impact of energy water usage and waste management which falls under its operational control.
Since
November 2014 Redefine International has maintained a data management system to capture this information at a property level.
In order to enhance our level of utilities waste and emissions disclosure this year we have adopted guidance provided within the EPRA sBPR 2nd edition in accordance with the core requirements.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 52 Strategic report Corporate social responsibility continued Absolute Abs LikeforLike LfL Impact area EPRA code Indicator Index Units of measurement 2017 2016 Change % 2017 2016 Change % Energy Elec Abs Elec LFL Electricity Landlord procured and sub metered to tenants MWh MWh 12994 12154 7 8518 8412 1 DHandC Abs DHandC LFL District heating and cooling Landlord procured and sub metered to tenants MWh 1569 1832 14 1111 1346 17 Fuels Abs Fuels LFL Fuels Landlord procured and sub metered to tenants MWh 9622 8530 13 4736 4150 14 Proportion of energy data estimated 1% 0% Greenhouse gas emissions GHG Dir Abs GHG Dir LfL Direct Scope 1 tonnes CO e 1792 1 GHG Indir Abs GHG Indir LfL Indirect Scope 2 location based 5187 5406 4 3480 3762 8 Scope 2 market based 4135 5406 24 2434 3762 35 Proportion of GHG data estimated 1% 0% Water Water Abs Water LfL Water Landlord procured cubic metres m 99480 96966 3 86568 92046 6 Proportion of water data estimated 0% 0%
Waste Abs Waste LfL Waste Recycled Metric tonnes % weight by disposal route 20% Offsite Materials Recovery Facility 15% Incineration with energy recovery 64% Proportion of waste data estimated 2% Normalisation Energy kWhmillion net rental income  1 GHG tCO emillion net rental income 124 144 14 76 96 22 Water m million net rental income 1064 1086 2 926 1031 10 Disclosure coverage Energy GHG Water No.
Waste 15 0 Total number In Organisational Boundary Managed Assets 41 Estimation methodology used Energy GHG Water  pro rata estimation based on nearest available period of recorded consumption using primary evidence.
Waste  estimation based on industry standard conversions volume to weight.
EPRA Sustainability Performance Measures for our managed portfolio Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 53 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Absolute Abs LikeforLike LfL Impact area EPRA code Indicator Index Units of measurement 2017 2016 Change % 2017 2016 Change % Energy ElecAbs
Electricity Landlord procured and submetered to tenants MWh MWh 12994 12154 7 8518 8412 1
DHandCLFL
District heating and cooling Landlord procured and submetered to tenants MWh 1569 1832 14 1111 1346 17
FuelsLFL
Fuels Landlord procured and submetered to tenants MWh 9622 8530 13 4736 4150 14 Proportion of energy data estimated 1% 0% Greenhouse gas emissions GHGDirAbs
Direct Scope 1 tonnes CO e 1792 1
GHGIndirLfL
Indirect Scope 2 location based 5187 5406 4 3480 3762 8 Scope 2 market based 4135 5406 24 2434 3762 35 Proportion of GHG data estimated 1% 0% Water WaterAbs
Water Landlord procured cubic metres m 99480 96966 3 86568 92046 6 Proportion of water data estimated 0% 0%
WasteAbs
WasteLfL
Waste Recycled Metric tonnes % weight by disposal route 20% Offsite Materials Recovery Facility 15% Incineration with energy recovery 64% Proportion of waste data estimated 2% Normalisation Energy kWhmillion net rental income  1 GHG tCO emillion net rental income 124 144 14 76 96 22 Water m million net rental income 1064 1086 2 926 1031 10 Disclosure coverage Energy GHG Water No.
Waste 15 0 Total number In Organisational Boundary Managed Assets 41 Estimation methodology used Energy GHG Water  prorata estimation based on nearest available period of recorded consumption using primary evidence.
Waste  estimation based on industry standard conversions volume to weight.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 54 Strategic report EPRA commentary The Company has enhanced its environmental performance data disclosure to align with the EPRA sBPR 2nd edition and our reporting to the GRESB Real Estate Assessment.
We now present consolidated property energy greenhouse gas GHG water and waste data on both an absolute Abs and like for like LfL basis covering assets in both our UK and German portfolios.
We believe that adopting this approach provides greater transparency and comparability for our stakeholders in respect to the environmental performance of assets under management.
As per mandatory greenhouse gas disclosure our organisational boundary for environmental disclosure is based on the principle of operational control and therefore includes all property assets where we are responsible for the procurement of energy water and waste services.
A total of 41 assets fall within the boundary in both the 2016 and 2017 reporting periods.
We have provided data to cover 95 per cent of these assets for the current reporting period.
Only two assets in Germany under our operational control are excluded from the disclosure due to lack of reliable and accurate data.
As our data management programme is continually evolving we are not yet able to report the specific end use of procured energy and water.
We have also considered the EPRA guidance in relation to segmental analysis.
We believe that reporting managed assets provides a fair overview of performance given that the majority of environmental impact is associated with our shopping centre assets and to a lesser extent a small number of multilet offices.
We will continue to consider the need for further segmental analysis in the future development of our data management programme.
A small proportion of our data may be subject to estimation this is completed to ensure that our reporting per asset covers the correct reporting period and is complete.
Estimation is only made where actual billed or metered data and where the date of the data recording falls within six months or less from the period to be estimated.
Our methodologies use prorated calculation or likeforlike replacement.
In terms of absolute energy consumption change electricity and gas consumption increased by seven per cent and 13 per cent respectively in the past year due to property acquisitions and increased occupancy and heating demand across our multi let properties.
District heating consumption fell significantly due to reduced demand for heating within our German shopping centre assets.
Building certification and labelling % of managed portfolio with BREEAM or LEED Rating New Construction Refurbishment InUse 0% SKA Ratings Project In Progress Bronze Targeted 5% Our LfL portfolio for the purpose of the EPRA disclosure is mostly composed of our UK Shopping centres and to a lesser extent our German shopping centres.
These properties have the largest environmental impact of all assets under management.
Actual LfL increase in electricity consumption was less pronounced one per cent.
Water consumption saw a six per cent decrease due to decreased demand.
In relation to intensity of environmental performance we have chosen to use net rental income as the denominator to be consistent with our GHG disclosure methodology.
However we recognise that other normalisation factors may be more appropriate for use in the future with a particular focus to ensure that like for like performance changes can be properly understood.
Our absolute scope 1 and 2L GHG emissions remained broadly the same as conveyed by the mandatory GHG emissions reporting table see page 58.
We expect to continue to enhance our data reporting programme during the course of the next year to provide better insight into where energy and water data is submetered exclusively to tenants as well as improve the coverage of our data management system.
Corporate social responsibility continued Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 55 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information In January 2017 Redefine International launched Ten for 10 a community engagement programme enabling us to contribute and connect with the local communities in which we operate.
In celebration of Redefine Internationals tenth anniversary staff across our property portfolio and our head office pledged to donate ten working days per location to local community groups and charities through the Ten for 10 volunteering programme.
The scope of the project enabled the Redefine International team to work with a wide range of people within the local community from school children to the elderly providing much needed support and making a difference to the lives of so many.
At the Grand Arcade Shopping Centre in Wigan the Centre Management team supported ten local groups including the British Heart Foundation New Lodge Preschool and the Green Slate Community Farm.
West Orchards Coventry and Byron Place Seaham had large teams supporting local litter picking and community cleanup projects.
Staff at Weston Favell Shopping Centre Northampton supported the Salvation Armys homelessness project by volunteering with their street team and the team at St Georges Harrow assisted at a Mother and Toddler group and marshalled the Run Wembley community event.
Birchwood Shopping Centre Warrington helped to remodel a sensory garden for their Charity of the Year Brainwave.
Head office staff supported the Grenfell Tower relief effort by collecting donating and delivering much needed essentials for the victims of the disaster which occurred in June 2017 as well as volunteering at one of the many donation centres set up in West London.
In total 26 community groups and organisations benefited from the initiative which ran until August 2017 with 127 days volunteering completed across Redefine Internationals six UK Shopping centres and the head office team.
Case study Ten for 10 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 56 Strategic report Case study legislative value enhancement Redefine International continues to consider ways to deliver compliance strategies that are aligned to investors interests.
This is underpinned by our commitment to resilience in governance investments and assets.
Spanning two geographic locations the Group continually seeks to better understand legislation that affects the portfolio from an environmental perspective.
2015 marked an early step in ensuring the EPC strategy was developed in the most cost effective manner whilst targeting a risk free status.
During the last two years any EPCs which were found to be missing were instructed and any EPCs reviewed and seen to be within the risk zone were revisited.
Risk zone EPCs were classed as either any existing F and G rated areas of demise across our properties soon to expire EPCs prior to the MEES regulations coming into play on 1 April 2018 affecting all new leases.
Across Scotland risk in relation to Section 63 meant that from September 2016 upon a new sale or lease of a building greater than 1000m an approved Section 63 action plan must be in place and made available in the same way as an EPC and reviewed annually.
The action plan identified targets for improvement of the carbon and energy performance of the building and how these targets would be met through physical improvements to the property all produced and registered by a Section 63 Advisor.
Categories of EPC risk were assigned based on analysis of data provided.
The categories were risks that were yet to be fully investigated Risk risks under control with planned actions accounted for where required Managed Risk and risk is managed and declared safe in respective of relative jurisdiction specific EPC legislation and known portfolio impacts have been assessed Safe Zone.
EPCs which may soon to expire rated either F or G or lease or break dates forthcoming were assigned category 2.
With respect to MEES this will mean that any areas of demise planned for lease from April 2018 may be at risk of impacting on assetunit expected rentable value ERV.
Thereby any EPC recommendations such as improvements to improve building fabric heating efficiencies and lighting can be planned in earlier stages and either accrued centrally where required or foster tenant engagement into a planned programme of building upgrades to ensure their occupation remains risk free as each lease nears expiry and EPC recommendations are implemented ensuring minimum disruption and maximum value.
The total F or G figure is relatively low across the portfolio and the Group will target planned refurbishments to achieve a minimum rating of D.
Strong data management platform A Group Health and Safety
A legislative portfolio gap analysis A 100% EPC risk free strategy Legislative value enhancement Corporate social responsibility continued Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 57 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Our German assets have been reviewed as part of the legislative gap analysis with respect to the three pieces of German legislation being EDL GEnergy Services Act ENEVEnergy Saving Ordinance and KrWGCircular Economy
From information provided by Redefine International to third party consultants the following conclusions were drawn EDLGEnergy Services Act Reporting of total energy consumption energy audits of properties and operations Whilst the balance sheet of Redefine International exceeds the threshold as set out by the EDL G neither the number of employees nor the turnover exceed the appropriate thresholds.
Therefore Redefine does not qualify under the EDL G and does not have to meet the requirements.
EDL G German legislation spans from the EU Energy Efficiency Directive Article 8.
In the UK this was translated into UK law in June 2014 as the Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme ESOS.
The same third party consultants deemed the UK companies to stand outside of qualification of ESOS phase one in this respect and compliance activity surrounding ESOS Phase 2 will be revisited ahead of the compliance notification date of 5 December 2019.
ENEVEnergy Saving Ordinance Display a building energy performance certificate provide a certificate to potential tenantsbuyers Redefine Internationals portfolio has been checked in the respect of building energy performance certificates required for display.
This comprises all buildings with a floor space of 500m or greater which the public access frequently such as supermarkets.
There are also a number of buildings in Redefines portfolio which have been leased since July 2009 at which point building energy performance certificates have been provided to the interested party.
Third party consultants understand this applies to five units in a mixed use building in Leipzig and three units in a mixed use building in Munich.
It has been noted that any buildings leased or sold in the future by Redefine must continue to have building energy performance certificates which are provided to interested parties at this point.
KrWGCircular Economy Act Disposal of waste in line with regional requirements The disposal of waste is undertaken in line with requirements through the hire of a competent waste disposal company where the Company is responsible for waste generation.
On the basis our UK and German based assets are compliant data has to be managed maintained and updated.
The relationship between Redefine International and that of their CSR Advisers is one of assurance and provides a data repository which can be used during regular review reporting and in leading high level through to asset level discussions on where compliance activity should be focused.
A snapshot into this world here shows some legislative risks and Redefines interpretation of responsible compliance activity.
With each part of the Legislative Value Enhancement LVE process working actively with one another in equilibrium Redefine International is sure to maintain its LVE process and broaden key areas of focus as and when required to maximise the opportunity presented by legislative compliance.
Safe Zone 35% Managed Risk 60%
5% Safe Zone 48% Managed Risk 52% Safe Zone 93% Managed Risk 7% We are now 100% compliant with energy performance certifications with action plans in place for all F and G rated units.
Safe zone vs at Risk vs Managed Risk related to EPCs Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 58 Strategic report
Redefine Internationals carbon emissions disclosure has been produced in accordance with guidance issued in the ISO 14064 12006 international standard and the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard Revised Edition.
Location based emissions factors are sourced from the UK Government 2016 and 2017 and International Energy Association to cover German assets.
Guidance on the reporting of Scope 2 GHG emissions under the GHG Protocol was updated in 2015 and we are now required to report two different values to reflect the locationbased and marketbased emissions resulting from purchased electricity.
The location based method uses an average emission factor for the national grid on which electricity consumption occurs.
The marketbased method reflects emissions from the electricity that companies have chosen to purchase in the market.
Where a market based emissions factor is unavailable the residual mix or location based factor has been applied.
Markets differ as to what contractual instruments are commonly available or used by companies to purchase energy or claim its specific attributes.
Redefine
International has chosen to use a supplier specific emissions rate.
This method has been used in alignment with the GHG Protocols quality criteria.
In alignment with UK DEFRA Environmental Reporting Guidelines we have used the conversion factor for the year the emissions took place.
Data is disclosed in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013.
Data qualifying notes The boundary of Redefine Internationals carbon emissions disclosure is based on the principle of operational control.
Therefore emission sources within real estate assets owned and managed by Redefine International are included in the reported emission figures.
We do not have responsibility for any emissions sources that are not included in our consolidated statement.
We are not responsible for the purchase of the energy supplied to our head office in London.
Emission sources relating to occupier activities that do not fall under the operational control of Redefine International are excluded except where we are responsible for procurement and supply of energy to occupiers.
Due to adjustment of our emission scope compared to the previous year  we have chosen to recalculate the previous years emission figures as the hotels although owned are not under the operational control of Redefine and had previously been included in prior years reporting.
We have also adjusted our normalisation metric from Net Operating Income to Net Rental Income to ensure that the measure of carbon intensity is better reflective of our business type.
For
2016 and 2017 there have been no reported fugitive emissions from air conditioning refrigerant leaks and there has been no top up of refrigerant volume.
CSR advisers statement As Redefine Internationals strategic adviser on corporate social responsibility Savills would like to acknowledge the continual improvement demonstrated by Redefine International in terms of their focus on how they have chosen to implement maintain and improve Redefines CSR strategy.
The continuation of robust data collection supported by core reporting systems provides a strong basis on which to focus environmental efficiency improvements and strengthen reporting against best practice standards and industry benchmarks.
Special comment should be noted for the significant action taken in respect of Redefine Internationals preparation for the upcoming MEES legislation across England and Wales and Section 63 in Scotland leaving the Company 100 per cent risk free.
In addition the commitment given by their CSR Steering group has been invaluable to reaching their years CSR Targets.
Redefine International is a proactive Company that considers their CSR responsibility to be embedded within their core operations and integrated within their investment strategy for short medium and long term growth.
Our engagement with the Company has shown that employees have high levels of interest with respect to the Company CSR initiatives and are well equipped to proceed with their implementation and by ensuring that sufficient time and resources are made available Redefine International will effectively tackle both the straightforward and the more challenging targets which have been approved within the CSR Roadmap for the 2018 financial year.
We confirm that environmental data published in this report provides a true representation of the Companys current performance.
Savills will continue to support Redefine International over the coming year to achieve their 2018 CSR targets and will provide progress updates within the CSR Committee held quarterly prior to preparing next years CSR Annual Report and corresponding updates to their website.
Jonathan Hale Associate Director
26 October 2017 Corporate social responsibility continued Mandatory GHG emissions reporting tabletel revised % change reported Direct greenhouse gas emissions in tonnes of CO combustion of fuel and operation of facilities Scope 1 1792 1570 14 2089 Indirect greenhouse gas emissions in tonnes of CO Scope 2L  location based 5187 5406 4 7422 purchased electricity heat steam and cooling Scope 2M  market based 4135 5406 24 7422 Total carbon footprint in tonnes of CO Total scope 1 and 2L 6979 6975 0 9511 Scope 1 and 2L intensity tCO em net rental income 107 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 59 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information CSR target roadmap Progress achieved against CSR targets set for 2017 Resilient governance Resilient investment Resilient assets Further improve GRESB score targeting three Green Stars for 2017.
We will do this by a broadening the available dataset to obtain greater coverage b setting corporate targets for example emissions and energy consumption and c implement green building certifications.
Pro actively invest in sustainability measures within our portfolio and abide by EPRA guidelines.
Conduct energy audits where appropriate for new investments.
Maintain compliance and improve Health Safety and Environmental audit scores.
We target 100 per cent compliance with Energy Performance Certifications EPCs ensuring all F and G ratings have ongoing action plans in place.
The assessment will include FRIs and E or D rated EPCs if completed prior to 2011.
Ensure full data picture is available for all operational sites.
Improve tenant awareness and seek feedback for improvements through engagement in a satisfaction survey which will include sustainability and health and wellbeing aspects.
Complete staff training for all staff on CSR and sustainability issues.
Paying it back 2016 was Redefine Internationals tenth anniversary so to celebrate we implemented a community project called Ten for Across our portfolio of shopping centres and at the Companys head office we invested ten days into initiatives designed to support the communities in which we operate.
Undertake fitout projects to SKA Assessment Bronze level as a minimum across all suitable properties.
Good progress Sound progress Some progress CSR targets for 2018 Resilient governance Resilient investment Resilient assets Develop a stakeholder engagement programme to provide a strategy policy and action plan for mobilisation across the managed estate to cover tenants communities and employees.
Independently verify the performance of our assets through certification of our portfolio during operation refurbishment or new construction using appropriate green building certification schemes.
Set a property wide relative reduction target for total energy consumption on a like for like LFL basis in terms of energy per unit floor area kWhm Review the Company induction format to include a section specifically on sustainability for the benefit of all new employees and to maintain awareness amongst current employees.
Continue to maintain high levels of tenant satisfaction through an engagement programme in order to act on the findings from the most recent survey.
Facilitate the transition to greener forms of transportation via the installation of electric vehicle EV charging points across appropriate shopping centre locations.
Harmonise Company Health Safety and Environmental HSandE policies across Redefine Internationals two geographical locations.
Ensure employees are made aware of Company initiatives which support their health and wellbeing and gain an insight into their perceptions and aspirations.
Improve data across our German Assets to ensure the ability to measure key performance indicators KPIs can be realised.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 60 With a sharper focus on risk management and mitigation the Redefine International Board remains confident that it has the right strategy to sustain the Company through potential uncertainties ahead.
Directors report
Chairmans statement 2017 has been a year of political and economic uncertainty with a constantly changing macroeconomic backdrop.
With a sharper focus on risk management and mitigation the Redefine International Board remains confident that it has the right strategy to sustain the Company through potential uncertainties ahead whilst continuing to provide our shareholders with marketleading income returns.
During the year the Board has sought to strengthen the portfolio through the recycling of assets with lower rental or growth potential in favour of assets with stronger property fundamentals and longerterm growth prospects.
Disposal proceeds have largely been reinvested or used to reduce gearing.
Refinancing initiatives have broadly been concluded at lower levels of gearing and resulted in a reduced cost of debt and a stronger capital structure.
Communication of the Companys strategy was conveyed to shareholders at the Capital Markets Day in February which was well attended and received.
The Boards decision to rebase the dividend to better align earnings with operating cash flow has been clearly set out and communicated.
The Company has made significant progress in becoming the UKs leading income focused REIT.
On 1 December 2017 the Company will be rebranded to Real Estate Diversified Income REIT or RDI REIT.
The purpose of rebranding is to ensure the Company has a clear and independent identity as well as supporting better communication with stakeholders.
Greg Clarke Chairman of the Board Through communication with its wider stakeholder base the Company strives to improve both our buildings and the environments they provide whilst contributing where possible to communities in which we operate.
We endeavour to ensure that our suppliers adhere to a strict code of ethics and undertake to pay them fairly and within agreed timeframes.
We build strong relationships with our lenders and deal with them in an open and transparent manner.
We encourage openness amongst our employees and listen to their concerns while supporting them to develop their careers and worklife balance through training and transition through various stages in their lives.
At the heart of our success is our culture.
Both internally and externally the Company is considered agile and experienced hands on proactive efficient personable and approachable.
The personable and experienced nature of the Board and its executive has resulted in a strong leadership team.
A team that is relentlessly inquisitive seeking out new opportunities with agility enabling opportunities to be harnessed.
Boardroom culture is good natured and constructive and relationships between executives and nonexecutives are good although with the uncertainty of the political and economic environment the nonexecutives have been increasingly challenging management to ensure that the longterm success of the Company has been properly considered.
An analysis was conducted in January to record how Redefine International should react to a range of different scenarios that could be faced by the Company in the next few years.
The
Board evaluation conducted at year end showed that Directors wanted more time set aside to review strategy to ensure that the current model remains fit for purpose in the constantly changing economic environment.
As Chairman of the Board and Nominations Committee I have sought to expand the experience and diversity of the Board and I am confident that the appointment of a new Nonexecutive Director will be announced before the end of the calendar year which will further enhance the strength of the
Succession planning for the executives and committee chairs will be a focus area during 2018.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 61 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information I thank shareholders for their support of the Companys new Remuneration Policy which was approved at the AGM in January 2017.
During 2016 the CEO received 62 per cent of his target income considerably below comparable peers.
The policy was amended following a strategic review to ensure closer alignment between remuneration strategy and shareholder returns.
The new policy provides the executives with a fair and balanced package that motivates performance and rewards results.
For the first time this year the Company will be reporting under the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and the Audit and Risk Committee adopted new model terms of reference to comply with the provisions of the new Code FRC guidance and revised ethical standards published earlier this year.
Focus areas for the committee this year have been to oversee compliance and regulatory change improvement in internal controls and risk reporting.
With robust corporate governance a strong Board and strategy I am pleased to report that the Company has delivered a solid set of results and is well positioned to look to the future with confidence.
Full details of the Companys operations have been laid out in this Annual Report which the Board has reviewed and considers to be fair balanced and understandable and provides shareholders with the necessary information with which to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Board recommends that shareholders vote to adopt the Annual Report and support the reelection of the Board at the AGM to be held on 25 January 2018 where Directors will be available to answer any questions shareholders may have regarding the operation of their Company.
I have informed the Board that I intend to step down as Chairman during 2018.
The exact timing will be determined by the process to recruit a new Chair and execute an appropriate handover.
By this time I will have been Chairman of Redefine International for seven years during which time we have domiciled to London become a REIT and entered the FTSE 250.
I consider it time to move on and for a new Chair to oversee the next exciting phase of Redefine Internationals future.
Greg Clarke Chairman of the Board 26 October 2017 Corporate governance statement Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Code Redefine International is a UKREIT with a premium listing on the Main Market of the LSE and a secondary listing on the Real Estate Real Estate Holding and Development sector of the Main Board of the JSE.
The Company was incorporated in the Isle of Man with registered number C in 2004 and was reregistered under the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 in December 2013 with registered number V.
The Companys home state is the United Kingdom.
Further to the secondary listing of the Company in South Africa on 28 October 2013 the JSE accepted that Redefine International will primarily comply with the Code as issued by the Financial Reporting Council in April 2016 www. rc.
Governance for South Africa 2016.
It should be noted that during the reporting year ended 31 August 2017 and up to the date of this document the Company has complied with all of the Code principles but has not complied with the following Code provisions a.
Code B.1.2.
Half of the Board should comprise independent Nonexecutive
Explanation At year end the Board comprised four executives four independent nonexecutives and two nonexecutives who represent the major shareholder Redefine Properties Limited.
Although the composition fails to meet the provisions of the Code the Board structure does meet the Code principles with no block of individuals dominating the decision making and includes an appropriate combination of Executive and Nonexecutive Directors.
With an additional appointment expected by the end of the year the balance will be improved but in order to reach the required Board composition another independent Nonexecutive Director would need to be appointed taking the Board size to 13 which is considered too large.
It should be noted that to ensure that there is enough independent oversight of related party transactions a committee comprising solely of independent Directors has been established to review such matters before deciding whether a transaction can progress to the Board for final consideration. b.
Code B.2.3 Nonexecutive Directors should be appointed for a specified term.
Explanation Directors are appointed for a term which expires when either the Director i is not reappointed following retirement ii is removed or vacates office iii resigns or does not offer himself for reelection or iv terminates his appointment on three months notice.
It should be noted that as a FTSE 250 company all Directors are subject to annual reelection and therefore it is considered that the Companys terms are appropriate. c.
Code E2.4 Notice of general meetings.
Explanation The EGM held on 25 April 2017 regarding the acquisition of the German supermarket Portfolio was held on 14 clear days notice in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association rather than the 14 business days required by the Code.
This was due to the transaction being time sensitive and the Board was mindful that any delay would cause a transactional risk.
Compliance with the Listing Rules During the reporting year Redefine Properties Limited was regarded as a controlling shareholder of the Company in accordance with LR 6.1.2A.
As a Chapter 6 Company with a controlling shareholder Redefine International has complied with LR 9.8.4 R 14 The Company entered into a relationship Agreement with Redefine Properties on 17 November 2014 the Agreement and the Board confirms that during the period under review a. b.
Redefine Properties has complied with the independence provisions included in the Agreement and c. of LR 9.2.2. i. ii. the Company.
No independent Director has declined to support the statements in 1 above.
Compliance with the Disclosure and Transparency Rules The disclosures required under DTR 7.2 of the Disclosure and Transparency Rules are contained in the following pages of this Directors report.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 62 Board of
GREG CLARKE MBA BA Hons
Age 60 Appointed October 2011
Independence Complied with independence criteria of the UK Corporate Governance Code on appointment as Chairman.
Skills and experience Significant Board experience including CEO and Chair roles Over 30 years experience working for and running large international public corporations across Europe Australia and South Africa Former CEO of Lend Lease Corporation an ASX 50 international property corporation Former CEO of Cable and Wireless Communications Plc Former Chairman of The Football League and former Chairman of the Meteorological Office External appointments Chairman of the Football Association Chairman of two private equity owned businesses.
MIKE WATTERS MBA BSc Eng.
Civil
Chief Executive Officer
Age 58 Appointed December 2013
Skills and experience Over 28 years experience in the investment banking and real estate industries Significant experience as a director of property and investment companies in the UK and South Africa SA Former director of Sycom Property Fund Hyprop Investments Limited and Redefine Properties Limited in SA and Sapphire Retail Fund in the UK External appointments Chairman of RedefineBDL Hotel Group Director of International Hotel Properties Limited.
STEPHEN OAKENFULL CFA BSc Hons Construction
Deputy Chief Executive Officer
Age 38 Appointed December 2013 Committee None Skills and experience Over 17 years experience working in corporate finance and real estate Former COO of Redefine International Fund Managers Former analyst at DTZ Corporate Finance in London Former management consultant for Turner and Townsend External appointments None.
Directors report Governance Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 63 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information DONALD GRANT CA Chief Financial Officer Age 43 Appointed August 2015
Skills and experience Over ten years experience working in various banking and broking institutions Over eight years experience working in the property sector Former financial controller of Capital and Counties Properties PLC a FTSE 250 company External appointments None.
ADRIAN HORSBURGH MRICS Property Director Age 55 Appointed March 2014 Committee C Skills and experience 30 years experience in the investment property sector specialising in retail and shopping centres Former Retail Investment Director and International Director at Jones Lang LaSalle Former Equity Partner and Trainee Surveyor in the investment department at King Sturge External appointments None.
All Directors served throughout the year.
There were no appointments or resignations.
Key to committees A Audit and Risk Committee Corporate Social Responsibility Committee I Investment Committee N Nominations Committee R Remuneration Committee Denotes chair of a committee Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 64 Directors report
Board of
GAVIN TIPPER MBA CA BCom BAcc Independent Nonexecutive Director Age 52 Appointed August 2011
Skills and experience Over 20 years financial experience of companies listed in both the UK and South Africa Former technical partner at KPMG Previously COO of the Coronation Group External appointments Nonexecutive Director of Hyprop Investments Limited AVI Limited York Timber Holdings Limited and various private companies and trusts.
SUE FORD ACA BSc Hons Independent Nonexecutive Director Age 57 Appointed December 2013
Skills and experience Over 30 years experience working within various leading organisations overseeing finance strategy and governance matters Cofounder and former finance director for Metric Property Investment plc now LondonMetric Property plc an income focused diversified FTSE 250 REIT External appointments None.
MICHAEL FARROW FCIS MSc Corporate Governance Senior Independent Nonexecutive Director Age 63 Appointed August 2011
Skills and experience Over 20 years experience of UK listed and private property companies and funds working as a director and a company secretary Former Group Company Secretary of Cater Allen Jersey Founding director of Consortia Partnership Limited a Jersey licensed trust company External appointments Chairman of Bellzone Mining Plc Nonexecutive Director of RedT Energy plc and Circle Property plc.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 65 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information ROBERT ORR MRICS BSc Estate Management Independent Nonexecutive Director Age 58 Appointed April 2015
Skills and experience Over 30 years experience of the German and European real estate markets Former Country Manager for Germany and former European CEO at JLL Founded the International Capital Group for JLL External appointments Nonexecutive Director of Tishman Speyer Properties UK Limited and APCOA Parking Holdings GmbH.
Adviser to UK and European Investments and EQT Real Estate 1 Fund.
Trustee of Dementia UK.
MARC WAINER Nonexecutive Director Age 69 Appointed August 2011 Committee I Skills and experience Over 35 years experience in the property industry in South Africa Founder of Investec Property Group Investec Banks property division Founder of Redefine Properties Limited External appointments Executive Chairman of Redefine Properties Limited.
Nonexecutive
Director of Cromwell Property Group and Echo Polska Properties N.
BERNIE NACKAN BA Econ SEP Nonexecutive Director Age 73 Appointed April 2014 Committee None Skills and experience Over 50 years experience working in finance investment property in South Africa and Internationally Former financial editor of the Rand Daily Mail managing director of Sage Unit Trusts and Executive Director of Sage Group Former member of the Collective Investment Scheme Advisory Committee in South Africa External appointments Nonexecutive Director of Redefine Properties Limited Chairman of its Investment and Nominations Committee and member of the Remunerations Committee.
Nonexecutive of Rezco Asset Management Limited.
All Directors served throughout the year.
There were no appointments or resignations.
Key to committees A Audit and Risk Committee Corporate Social Responsibility Committee I Investment Committee N Nominations Committee R Remuneration Committee Denotes chair of a committee Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 66
The Board Led by the Chairman the Board is collectively responsible for the long term success of the Company and operates under a formal quarterly schedule of matters reserved for the Board.
This ensures that the Companys strategy and objectives risks Group operations internal controls policies and debt providers are all reviewed throughout the year.
To assist in the effectiveness of its operations certain matters are delegated to committees whose roles and duties are outlined in terms of reference set by the Board.
The committee chairs provide a summary of the committee activities at each Board meeting advising of any issues or recommendations.
Daytoday management of the Company is overseen by the CEO and the executives who carry out the strategy established by the Board within the confine of policies and delegated authorities set by the Board.
Each year four scheduled Board meetings are held aligned to the financial calendar and there are four scheduled update calls.
Four meetings four update telephone calls page 69 Committee of the Board Independent Committee of the Board Approves ad hoc matters between Board meetings Subject to authority levels To review any related party transactions or matters where a conflict may arise Directors  any two Independent Directors  at least one Independent Nonexecutive Directors  Any three Eight meetings page 69 Two meetings page 69 Audit and Risk
Nominations
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Corporate Social Responsibility Committee Ensures that the Groups financial reporting and risk management is properly monitored controlled and reported Considers the composition skills and succession planning of the Board Determines the remuneration of the Executive Directors within the approved remuneration policy and monitors employee pay Safeguards the interests of stakeholders
Nonexecutive Directors Gavin Tipper chair Sue Ford Michael Farrow
Nonexecutive Directors Greg Clarke chair Sue Ford Gavin Tipper
Nonexecutive Directors Michael Farrow chair Sue Ford Robert Orr Executive Directors Mike Watters chair Donald Grant Adrian Horsburgh Four meetings page 74 Three meetings page 70 Two meetings page 78 Three meetings page 48 Investment Committee Executive Committee Assesses investment proposals as to whether they should progress to the Board Daytoday management of the Company
Nonexecutive Director Robert Orr chair
Directors
Marc Wainer Mike Watters Executive Directors Mike Watters chair  CEO Stephen Oakenfull  Deputy CEO Donald Grant  Chief Financial Officer Adrian Horsburgh  Property Director The Investment Committee operates in an informal manner to discuss all major acquisitions disposals and capital expenditure.
Its recommendations are forwarded to the Board for final consideration.
The Executive Committee meets informally on a weekly basis to discuss acquisitions and disposals finance asset management activities and operational matters and to consider the status of any potential inside information.
Directors report
The Board is collectively responsible for the long term success of the Company.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 67 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
Chairman  Greg Clarke F P U Chairman of the Board since 1 December 2011 Responsible for leadership and governance of the Board There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman who runs the Board and the CEO who runs the business 40% Executive Directors Daytoday management of Company Mike Watters
F P U S E Stephen Oakenfull Deputy CEO F P U E Adrian Horsburgh Property Director P E U Donald Grant Chief Financial Officer U F 40% Independent Nonexecutive Directors To constructively challenge the executives and represent the interests of the shareholders Michael Farrow Senior Independent Director F P U E Gavin Tipper F S U Robert Orr P E U Sue Ford U F 20% Nonexecutive Directors Representing the Companys major shareholder  Redefine Properties Marc Wainer F P U E S Bernie Nackan Key to skills F Finance P Property E Europe U UK listed companies S SA listed companies
Chairman
40% Executives 20% Non executives 40% Independent
Gender diversity 9% women 91% men Average age 40  9% 4050  9% 5060  46% 6070  27% 70  9% Board tenure Appointment  Executive 2 years  Donald Grant 3 years  Adrian Horsburgh 4 years  Stephen Oakenfull Mike Watters Appointment  Nonexecutive 2 years  Robert Orr 3 years  Bernie Nackan 4 years  Sue Ford 6 years  Greg Clarke Michael Farrow Gavin Tipper Marc Wainer Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 68 For related party transactions any Director with a conflict of interest may be asked to leave the meeting whilst the matter is discussed and opinion letters from the Companys sponsor ascertaining as to whether the transaction is fair and reasonable are circulated for the independent Directors consideration.
All related party transactions will be reviewed and approved by a committee comprising solely of independent Nonexecutive Directors to ensure that the matter is given a measure of independent oversight.
Related Party transactions during the year were Acquisition of the controlling interest in the Leopard Portfolio from Redefine Properties
Redefine Properties is a major shareholder of the Company.
A Fair and Reasonable letter was obtained from the Companys UK sponsors and the transaction was approved by an Independent Committee of the Board and by shareholders at an EGM held on 25 April 2017.
Scheme of Arrangement to acquire the minority shareholdings in International Hotel Properties Limited IHL and additional IHL shares from Redefine Properties.
Redefine International and Redefine Properties are both shareholders of IHL and Mike Watters is a Director of IHL and Redefine International.
A Fair and Reasonable letter was obtained from the Companys UK sponsors and from Mazars and the transaction was approved by an Independent Committee of the Board and by IHL shareholders at an EGM held on 15 September 2017.
Board meeting agendas Management formally report to the Board on the following standard agenda items providing information seven days in advance of Board meetings Management report report from the CEO acquisitions and investments disposals portfolio report and special projects.
Finance and tax financial results banking facilities and derivatives and treasury and foreign currency exposure.
Shareholder and investor relations shareholder information and trading statistics reports on shareholders views and shareholder communications.
Marketing report from Head of Marketing.
Administrative matters committee reports corporate governance updates and corporate governanceadministrative matters.
Board operations Directors report
2017 meetings schedule Meetings Attendance Four scheduled quarterly Board meetings All Directors attended all the meetings Four scheduled quarterly conference calls to provide operational updates to Directors All Directors participated in all the calls Eight ad hoc Board meetings responding to business needs Attendance at ad hoc meetings is subject to authority levels requiring either a full Board or a committee of three Directors one of which must be independent Two meetings of independent Directors Attended only by independent Directors All Board meetings and Board calls during 2017 were attended by all the Directors.
Additional matters were approved by a Committee of the Board which had the necessary delegated authority or independence levels to oversee such matters.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 69 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Scheduled Board meetingsupdate calls Corporate calendar items Nonstandardad hoc matters discussed Ad hoc committee meetings Matters approved
Board update call
Dividend rebase on EPRA earnings Foreign exchange rates Capital Markets Day
Board update call Board meeting Review of all policies
Strategy
Stress test and gearing sensitivities Capital Markets Day
Board update call Board meeting Interim results and associated items Review of matters reserved for the Board
Effects of dividend rebase Maximising earnings
Shareholder Circular for the Leopard Portfolio acquisition UK Shopping Centre facility agreement Interim Results
Issue of scrip dividend shares
IHL Scheme of Arrangement
Board update call Board meeting Review of Group strategy objectives and corporate structure Review of internal controls and risk management Review of financial strategy Review of marketing strategy
Property cladding assessment Manchester attacks Approval of Audit and Risk Committees Terms of Reference
Financial results for year ended 31 August 2016
Issue of scrip dividend shares
Annual Report VBG sale
Sale of the Observatory Chatham Independent committee of the Board.
Board meeting Year end results and associated items Review and approval of budget Confirmation of Directors independence Evaluation of Board Compliance Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 70
Committee
Directors report
Greg Clarke Chair of the Nominations Committee Appointed Meetings Greg Clarke MBA BA Hons 25102011 33 Gavin Tipper MBA CA Bcom BAcc 30072014 33 Sue Ford ACA BSc Hons 30012014 33 The Nominations Committee operates within terms of reference a copy of which is available at the website site The evaluation has identified a strong Board with the necessary cohesion to serve our shareholders.
Nominations Committee events during the year Date Matters discussed Attendees
CEO succession Progress of internal candidates Board size and mix All members
Job specification drawn up for new independent Nonexecutive Director Quote from recruitment agencies All members and Robert Orr
ZRG Partners LLC present diverse pool of 50 candidates Shortlist of four selected All members and Robert Orr
Candidates are interviewed Chairman
A shortlist of two candidates are selected All members ZRG and Robert Orr
Further interviews of the candidates are undertaken and a recommendation is made to the Board
All members and all independent
Redefine International is an income focused diversified UKREIT listed in the UK and South Africa with properties in the UK and
For such a diversified company it is essential that the Board has the right balance knowledge and skills appropriate for overseeing the business and as the Chairman is responsible for the leadership and effectiveness of the Board it is appropriate for the Nominations Committee to be led by the Chairman Greg Clarke.
Two independent Nonexecutive Directors from the UK and SA complete the committee and all members have significant experience as Directors of listed companies and are aware of the skills necessary for the operation of a dual listed diversified company.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 71 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Board composition The Nominations Committee started the year by reviewing the size and mix of the Board.
Since 2015 the Board has comprised 11 Directors the Chairman four executives four independent nonexecutives and two nonexecutives.
This composition is not compliant with the UK Corporate Governance Code and although the Board works well the Nominations Committee was mindful that there was not enough independent oversight on the Board and was intent on improving the level of independence.
However in 2016 due to the pending requirement for a prospectus in February 2016 to support the capital raise for which a new Director would have taken full responsibility it was considered in everyones best interests that the matter be put on hold.
The Nominations Committee was keen to address this matter again in 2017.
Before commencing the search for a new independent Nonexecutive Director the Nominations Committee reviewed the mix of the Board to identify any potential area of weakness to ensure that the Board was fully equipped to deal with the current strategy and any potential challenges ahead.
The
Committee agreed with the conclusions of last years external evaluation that the Board had a good balance of skills with a strong industry focus and deep financial expertise with sufficient knowledge of the European markets and no major skill gaps.
Diversity was considered.
The Directors number ten male and one female aged from 38 to 74 with a range of different educational backgrounds from the UK South Africa and New Zealand.
Although the Nominations Committee considered there to be a diversity of thought the Board is committed to having an appropriate level of diversity which reflects the nature of the Groups operations.
The Committee acknowledged that gender diversity and ethnicity was poor.
ZRG Partners LLC which has no prior connection with the Company was appointed to assist with the search for an independent Nonexecutive Director and instructed to encourage a wide pool of candidates with experience of Board membership evidence and understanding of business strategy and shareholder value creation with property or property finance expertise.
A long list of 50 diverse candidates was drawn up 14 were interviewed and four were recommended to be shortlisted.
Those shortlisted were discussed at length by the Nominations Committee assisted by Robert Orr an independent Nonexecutive Director with a depth of property experience.
The two best candidates were interviewed by the CEO and separately by the Nominations
As well as assessing skills and experience it was important that the new Director fit into the Board chemistry as the current Board works well as a team.
The Boardroom culture is good natured and constructive and relationships between Executive and Nonexecutive Directors are good although Nonexecutive Directors are not afraid to challenge executives during meetings.
The Chairman and CEO set a tone of openness and thoroughness which is upheld by the Board and Directors hold themselves to a high standard of integrity.
Following an indepth discussion between the Nominations Committee and all the independent Nonexecutive Directors to consider the merits of each candidate a final recommendation will be made to the Board in the near future.
It is hoped that an announcement will be made to shareholders before the end of the year.
The appointment of an additional independent Nonexecutive Director will improve the level of independent oversight and will provide an opportunity to review and possibly refresh membership of the
Diversity on the Board will also be improved and the Company is confident it will be able to meet its target of one third female membership by 2020.
Appointment terms All new Nonexecutive Directors are provided with a letter of appointment detailing the terms of their appointment and their expected commitment to the role.
Nonexecutive
Directors are not appointed for a specified term but until the Director is either i not re appointed following retirement ii removed or vacates office iii resigns or does not offer himself for reelection or iv terminates his appointment on three months notice.
All Directors are expected to attend the quarterly Board meetings quarterly update calls any committees of which they are a member and shareholders meetings.
Nonexecutive Directors are expected to make themselves available for a minimum of eight days per year in the discharge of their duties.
The Board has agreed that any Director may if necessary in the furtherance of their duties take independent professional advice at the Companys expense subject to having first notified the Company Secretary.
Any such payment by the Company would of course be subject to any restriction under company law.
The Company has liability insurance which covers Directors and officers of the Company and any subsidiary company of Redefine
Conflict of interest policy Directors are not without the consent of the Board to accept any other appointment or enter into any arrangement which might reasonably be expected to lead to a conflict of interest arising.
Furthermore Directors must not hold any directorships of any company other than the Company or a subsidiary of the Company of which any Director of the Company or any of its subsidiaries or of the property adviser or property manager to the Company or any shareholder of such entities is also a Director without the prior written approval of the Board.
Any possible appointments are discussed with the Chairman to ensure that there are no conflicts of interest or that a Directors independence is not compromised.
Directors induction An induction afternoon is provided by the executive team which includes an overview of the historical activities of the Group funding options and providers and property details.
Further information is provided on the Companys key business and risks along with the latest financial information for the Group.
The Company Secretary provides a list of matters reserved for the Board the corporate calendar and an overview of the Directors obligations for an Isle of Man company with a dual listing.
Further information is provided tailored to the needs of each Director.
Meetings with key advisers are set up as required and tours of the properties are undertaken to provide a full overview of the Companys activities.
Directors are also provided with details of the Board evaluation undertaken at the end of the financial year.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 72 Directors report
Board evaluation The 2017 evaluation was performed using an online questionnaire which allowed each Director to anonymously evaluate the performance of the Chairman the individual Board members the Board operations and its committees.
The main strengths of the Board identified were the diversity of expertise the level of experience the robust debate and the agility of the Board to respond to situations.
All Directors enjoyed Board meetings which is a key characteristic of a motivated and successful team.
However with the uncertainty of Brexit and the UK economy Directors highlighted that for the year ahead more focus and time should be spent on the points listed below.
Disappointingly these are broadly the same points as raised at last years external evaluation although action has already been taken to address many of these points Long term strategic decision making Long term decision making is to be addressed with strategy days planned for next year.
Thorough risk analysis Risk governance has been a strong focus for the Audit and Risk Committee meetings during the year.
Full details of their review and findings were presented at the October Board meeting and will continue to be presented to the Board on a six month basis going forward to ensure that the Board as well as the Audit and Risk Committee have a full overview of risks.
Shareholders and stakeholders The work of the CSR Committee is now finding momentum and as it becomes embedded into everyday operations will improve and increase importance in 2018 the road map for which can be found on page 59 of the Annual Report.
Board composition Board composition will be improved with the appointment of a new Independent Nonexecutive Director enhancing independence and diversity on the Board.
Composition will continue to be reviewed.
Succession The Nominations Committee has been primarily focused on succession planning for the CEO.
Mike Watters was CEO of the management company from 2008 and following internalisation of management became the CEO of Redefine International in 2013.
The possible retirement or departure of such a long standing employee obviously is a large risk to the Company and the Chairman has been personally managing the development of the Deputy CEO Stephen Oakenfull involving mentoring arranging external residential management development programmes and increased external networking.
A succession plan of internal candidates has been drawn up by management and a presentation by the pipeline candidates will be given to the Nonexecutives next year so they are able to meet and question the potential successors to the executives.
Directors training As part of the evaluation each Director was assessed by the rest of the Board.
The Chairman discussed the results with each Director.
Any training and development needs were identified and Directors were encouraged to update their skills knowledge and familiarity with the Company to fulfil their roles on the Board.
Advisers and managers may be asked to present at meetings to provide Directors with detailed information relating to the Company.
Property tours are undertaken to enable Directors to view the Companys assets and discuss matters directly with the responsible asset manager.
At each Board meeting Directors are kept abreast of changes to regulatory rules and corporate governance matters and any concerns or developments regarding inter alia insurance health and safety sustainability bribery and whistleblowing cyber security and the Modern Slavery Act.
Nominations
Committee continued Directors re election All Directors will be standing for reelection at the AGM on 25 January 2018.
The Chairman considers that each of the Directors continue to be effective members of the Board that collectively they hold the requisite range of skills to enable the Board to operate successfully and the Directors function well together as a team.
It is noted that Michael Farrow and Gavin Tipper have both been on the Board for six years.
Michael Farrow and Gavin Tipper were evaluated by the rest of the Board as being either good or outstanding Directors and were considered to spend sufficient time and were committed to their roles as Directors of the Board and as chairs of committees.
The Chairman therefore recommends all Directors for reelection at the AGM on 25 January 2018.
Re election of independent Directors The interests of each of the independent Directors are monitored to ensure that their position is not compromised and are checked each year against the requirements of the Code to ensure their independence is still valid.
The Chairman is satisfied that Michael Farrow Gavin Tipper Sue Ford and Robert Orr remain independent in both character and judgement and adhere to the independence criteria of the Code.
Their biographical details can be found on pages 62 to 65 and are contained in the AGM Notice of Meeting.
Greg Clarke Chair of the Nominations Committee 26 October 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 73 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
Investor
Key investor events held 7  8 September 2016 EPRA conference  received EPRA most improved financials award and presented on the midcap UK panel 30 September 2016 Property day focused on Berlin and Hamburg assets with South African investors 27 October 2016 2016 Full Year Results Announcement 27 October 2016 Full Year Results Roadshow  UK 4 November 2016 including Scotland 11 January 2017 JPM European Real Estate CEO Conference 23 January 2017 AGM 6 February 2017 Capital Markets Day in UK and live webcast 7  20 February 2017 Strategy and Preclose Roadshow  SA and UK 1 March 2017 Jeffries Property Panel to debate Income vs Growth 26 April 2017 2017 Half Year Results Announcement 27  28 April 2017 2017 Half Year Results Roadshow  UK 5  6 June 2017 JPM Amsterdam Roadshow 20  21 June 2017 Germany property site visit hosted by Instinctif for South African investors 6  7 September 2017 EPRA conference 12 September 2017 JP Morgan Mid Cap Conference 26 October 2017 2017 Full Year Results Announcement 26 October 2017  2017 Full Year Results Roadshow  SA and UK 3 November 2017 The Board endeavours to regularly engage and communicate clearly with shareholders throughout the year promoting dialogue with both existing and potential investors on Company strategy management remuneration and governance.
The four Executive Directors who act as the primary contact for institutional shareholders are supported by the Head of Investor Relations with Nonexecutive Directors attending and meeting investors at results presentations and property tours.
Directors are kept informed of investor relations through a quarterly report and timely updates.
They are provided with analyst coverage of the Company and any feedback received from investors.
In addition shareholders are invited to directly contact the executives to raise any matters opinions or issues of concern with the Company and are encouraged to attend the AGM to put any questions to the Board in person.
January 2017 AGM The AGM was held on 23 January 2017 at the Companys head office in London.
Approximately 70 per cent of all shareholders voted but it was noted that a significant amount of shareholders particularly on the JSE register voted against four resolutions namely the new Remuneration Policy 20.09 per cent the general Directors authority to allot shares 20.56 per cent the disapplication of preemption rights limited to a five per cent issuance of shares for cash 19.54 per cent and a further five per cent issuance of shares for cash in connection with a specified investment 21.10 per cent.
The proposed authorities were in line with current UK guidelines but the Board is aware that such guidelines differ to those in South Africa and advised that it would continue to liaise with South African shareholders on such matters.
February 2017 Capital Markets Day A Capital Markets Day was held in February which was well attended by both buy side and sell side analysts reflecting efforts by the Company to engage with these audiences.
The general consensus on conclusion of all meetings was that the majority of holders and nonholders were supportive of the longterm strategy to rebase the dividend in exchange for a higher growth outlook and stronger balance sheet whilst still maintaining a top quartile dividend yield.
There was some concern about how the Company would balance the reduction of LTV whilst maintaining a sufficiently strong dividend yield to ensure the Companys shares remain attractive.
Caution and concern was also raised around Brexit and the Company will endeavour to provide information regarding how this issue is being addressed.
The event was seen as a success and there was appetite for the Company to host similar events in the future.
April 2017 EGM An EGM was held on 25 April 2017 in connection with the proposed acquisition of the controlling interest in the German supermarket portfolio.
The EGM was called on 14 days clear notice in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association due to the transaction being time sensitive and the Board was mindful that any delay could cause transactional risk.
59 per cent of independent shareholders voted with shareholders voting overwhelmingly in favour of the proposal.
January 2018 AGM This years AGM is due to be held at 11.00am on 25 January 2018 at the Companys new Head Office at 33 Regent Street London SW1Y 4NE.
The AGM Notice will be sent to shareholders on 15 December 2017 more than 20 business days in advance of the meeting and will contain all the notes for the proposed resolutions rather than referencing sections in the Annual Report for the shareholders convenience and consideration.
It should be noted that following significant opposition to certain resolutions at the 2017 AGM the executives have liaised with South African investors.
The routine request authorising Directors to allot up to one third of the existing issued share capital and a further one third for preemptive rights issues has subsequently been reduced to a general authority to allot 20 per cent of the Companys current issued share capital of which half it is proposed could be issued in cash.
This level is more in line with South African guidelines and the Board hopes that shareholders will now be supportive of all resolutions at the 2018 AGM.
Website and app To enable the effective distribution of information to investors all communications and related presentation materials are published on a timely basis on the website which has been improved to promote ease of use site An investor relations app is now available to deliver easily accessible information on daytoday operations and business performance.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 74 Directors report
Audit and Risk Committee the Committee Gavin Tipper Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee Appointed Meetings Gavin Tipper MBA CA Bcom BAcc 28062012 44 Michael Farrow FCIS MSc 23082011 44 Sue Ford ACA BSc Hons 30012014 44 The Audit and Risk Committee operates within terms of reference a copy of which is available at the website site The terms of reference under which the Audit and Risk Committee operates were updated and approved by the Board in July 2017.
These take account of the changes incorporated in the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the FRC guidance and the revised ethical standards.
Audit and Risk Committee events during the year Date Matters discussed Attendees
Report from management Consideration and review of the Financial Results for year ended 31 August 2016 Presentation from Strutt and Parker valuers of the UK shopping centres Presentations from management explaining the procedures undertaken to ensure applicability of annual attestations and to confirm that the results were fair balanced and understandable Presentation by internal auditor on the results of the reviews performed Presentation by external auditor on the results of the audit for the year ended 31 August 2016 Review of external auditor effectiveness and consideration for reappointment Consideration of viability and going concern statements Consideration of dividend The Committee
Deputy CEO
Financial Controller External Auditor Internal Auditor
January
Presentation of interim review plan by external auditor Consideration and approval of external audit fee The Committee
Financial Controller External Auditor
Report from management Consideration and review of the Interim Results for the six months ended 28 February 2017 Presentation by Savills valuers of the German Shopping centre portfolio Presentations from management internal and external auditors Review of governance matters and applicable policies Update of finance information technology developments Consideration of dividend The Committee
CFO
External Auditor Internal Auditor
July
Report from management External auditor presentation of strategy and plan for the yearend audit Review of key areas of judgement and uncertainty Presentation of findings from risk review process Internal controls review Consideration of the effectiveness of internal audit Approval of 2018 internal audit plan The Committee
CFO
Financial Controller External Auditor Internal Auditor Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 75 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information The Committee comprises three independent Nonexecutive Directors who are considered to have the necessary skills knowledge and professional qualifications to understand the financial complexities of the Companys business the applicable accounting standards and regulatory framework and who as a whole have experience of working in the property sector in which the Group operates.
Gavin Tipper is a Chartered Accountant with over 25 years financial experience in listed and unlisted companies including property companies Sue Ford is also a Chartered Accountant with over 30 years of financial experience and was a cofounder and until 2013 the finance director of Metric Property Investments a UKREIT focused on the retail sector of commercial real estate and Michael Farrow is a Chartered Secretary with 30 years experience who has worked in a number of listed and private property companies.
The terms of reference under which the Audit and Risk Committee operates were updated and approved by the Board in July 2017.
These take account of the changes incorporated in the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code against which the Company is reporting this year and the FRC guidance and revised ethical standards published earlier this year.
The terms of reference outline the role of the Audit and Risk Committee relating to the interests of shareholders regarding financial reporting internal controls and risk management.
The Committee also seeks to provide the Board with assurance regarding the efficacy and reliability of the financial information used by the Directors in the discharge of their duties and to comment on associated risks.
The Committee is responsible for monitoring the effectiveness of internal controls the internal and external auditors the provision of nonaudit services and the independence of the external auditor.
It is also responsible for reviewing and assessing the integrity of the risk control systems for ensuring that risk policies and strategies exist and that there is an effective risk management process in place.
Details of the principal risks facing the Group are set out on pages 16 and 17 and in note 34 to the financial statements.
The Committee held four meetings during the financial year aligned to the Companys financial reporting and risk management cycle.
Committee packs are sent out seven days in advance of meetings to allow members time to properly consider the matters to be discussed.
Independent external advice may be taken by the Committee if required although none was sought this year.
Time is provided during the year for the Committee to meet privately with both the external and internal auditors without the executives or management being present to discuss any potential issues or concerns.
All meetings were attended by the Committee members the Chief Financial Officer and representatives of the auditors.
Valuers attended two meetings to discuss the processes undertaken in determining the market values of selected portfolios at each reporting date.
The valuers for the UK and German shopping centre portfolio were invited to attend this year.
During the year the Committee reported to the Board at each Board meeting on its responsibilities Audit plans the Committee met with the external auditor at the audit planning and reporting stages to consider and discuss the audit strategy and plan the results of the audit work undertaken and areas of significant complexity judgement or uncertainty and the Committee approved the internal auditors risk based audit plan for the financial year and the related audit fee.
Reviewing effectiveness of the external and internal auditors of internal controls particularly financial controls and confirmed to the Board that they remained appropriate of the systems of risk management and of the Groups whistleblowing and antibribery policies.
Monitoring
REIT compliance the level of nonaudit services provided by the external auditor cyber risk and security reports from the JSE addressed to Audit Committee chairs and compliance with statutory and listing obligations.
Assurances met with independent property valuers to discuss the valuation processes applicable to selected property portfolios and considered the appropriateness of the assumptions underlying the property valuations and received and reviewed reports from the Groups Chief Financial Officer and Financial Controller relating to the various assurances provided by the committee.
Recommendations to the Board the dividend the Annual Report as a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups financial position and results for the financial year the interim and annual financial statements the accounting policies used and the appropriateness of the related judgements and estimates the Groups viability statement including the appropriateness of the underlying methodology assumptions and stress tests applied refer to page 17 the appropriateness of the application of the going concern concept refer to page 92 and the reappointment of the external auditor.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 76 Directors report
Audit and Risk Committee continued Significant areas of judgement In recommending the financial statements to the Board the Committee assessed whether suitable accounting policies had been adopted and whether management had made appropriate estimates and judgements.
The
Committee considered areas of judgement when assessing classification provisioning and the appropriateness of inputs used in arriving at fair value.
The following matters are examples of the complex areas of estimation and judgement considered by the Committee during the year.
Valuation of investment property Investment property valuations are the most significant judgement in the Groups balance sheet and changes to valuations can impact materially on financial performance.
Property valuations require significant judgements and estimates and are based on assumptions including estimated rental values future rental income anticipated maintenance costs and future development costs and market yields.
The conclusion of the Committee was that the valuation processes which included the use of external valuers appeared to be thorough and meticulous the assets were valued on a highest and best use basis consistent with prior periods the assets were valued using reasonable estimates and professional judgements and the assets were valued on a basis which took account of comparable market transactions.
Fair value of restructured liabilities New borrowings or existing borrowings which have been substantially modified are recognised at fair value.
The determination of fair value involves the application of judgement with the key judgement involving an assessment of whether the transaction price equates to fair value and if not what the market price should be.
During the year the Group refinanced its Aviva UK shopping centre facility and it was determined that a significant modification had occurred.
Judgement was applied to determine whether the contractual rate on the refinanced debt represented a market rate and if not what observable market rate should apply having regard to the term duration and security arrangements in place.
The Committee concluded that the approach taken by management was reasonable and that the transaction price was not a market price and that sufficient observable inputs were available.
Taxation
The Committee satisfies itself as to the judgements applied in the calculation of any provisions for taxation where final determination of the amounts was outstanding.
Risk management review A Risk Register has been established which aggregates the Groups significant risks from its various divisions and corporate functions.
The threshold for a risk to be determined as significant was established as being either a risk carrying a potential impact of five per cent or greater of the Groups distributable earnings or a risk with the potential to expose the Group to reputational damage.
The risks as reflected in the risk register were reviewed challenged and analysed to highlight any significant shifts in the Groups risk profile.
In comparison to last year key changes were political and economic uncertainty resulting from Brexit leading to potential volatility in share prices and valuations higher expectations on inflation and a consequential impact on interest rates changing consumer behaviour and the impact on rental income tenant default and valuation on the retail portfolio development risk due to delays and the resultant impact on returns the type of cladding and insulation materials in place following the Grenfell disaster tax risk arising from enquiries or changing legislation BEPS and new tax evasion legislation key person and key supplier risk potential terrorist action and an improvement in the outlook for Europe reducing the risk of adverse foreign currency fluctuations.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 77 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Report on internal controls and effectiveness of internal audit The internal auditor reported to the Committee at each of its meetings with the main areas of focus during the year being liquidity forecasting risk management capital expenditure human resources and compliance.
With the appointment of a dedicated inhouse resource and the appointment of Grant Thornton as internal auditor last year the internal audit framework within the Company has improved.
The internal auditor tracks the issues to be resolved and ensures that they are suitably addressed within an agreed timeframe.
Effectiveness independence and appointment of the external auditor KPMG was appointed via a tender process in 2010 and has expressed their willingness to remain in office.
The Committee intends to put the audit out to tender during 2018 which aligns with the scheduled rotation of the audit partner.
The Committee has undertaken its annual review with the auditor of any threats to its independence and has concluded that the auditor may continue to be considered as independent.
In this regard KPMG has informed the Committee of all significant facts and matters including those related to the provision of nonaudit services and the safeguards it has in place to maintain its independence which it considers may impact on its independence and the objectivity of the main audit partner on the team.
KPMG undergoes regular reviews of the composition of the audit team including rotation in accordance with relevant regulations.
In assessing the effectiveness and level of service from the external auditor the Committee considered KPMGs knowledge of the market and Group the depth of understanding of the key accounting and audit judgements the extent to which the audit plan was carried out input from management and the content of the auditors reports to the
The Committee was satisfied with the effectiveness of the external audit.
The Committee monitored the ratio of audit to nonaudit services and related fees and the level of nonaudit services and fees incurred during the year was compliant with the Companys policy in that regard.
The Committee is satisfied that KPMG is independent and recommends the reappointment of KPMG at the Companys AGM on 25 January 2018.
Audit fees The following fees were paid to KPMG during the year and are included in net operating income in the Group income statement Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 m m Audit fees
Nonaudit fees Reporting accountant under Listing Rules
Required for the AUK acquisition and related capital raise.
Gavin Tipper Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee 26 October 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 78 Directors report Remuneration  unaudited Remuneration Committee events during the year
Event Result 31 August Performance period ends for the first executive awards made under the 2013 long term incentive plan LTIP and Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at 2015 AGM 0% vesting as explained on page 70 of the 2016 Annual Report 1 September Review of 2017 salaries for executives and senior management Executives salaries adjusted as discussed on page 70 of the 2016 Annual Report 1 September Review of 2017 Nonexecutive Director fees Nonexecutive Director fees adjusted as discussed on page 70 of the 2016 Annual Report 17 October Appointment of Deloitte as advisers to Remuneration Committee Replacement of Willis Towers Watson who had served as the Companys remuneration consultants since 2013 20 December Award of 2016 bonuses for executives and senior management Executive 55% bonus paid in cash as discussed on page 70 of the 2016 Annual Report 23 January New Remuneration Policy recommended to shareholders at the 2017 AGM Approved by 79.91% of shareholders 25 January Grant of 2017 contingent awards under the Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM Award made to executives equivalent to 200% of salary based on the performance period 1 September 2016  31 August 2019.
25 January Board considers Nonexecutive Director fees for committee chairs All committee chairs to be paid 50500 from 1 December 2016 to acknowledge their time commitment 31 August Performance period ends in respect of the 2014 awards made under the 2013 LTIP and Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at 2015 AGM 0% vesting for the second year running 1 September Review of 2018 salaries for executives and senior management Executives 4% increase 1 September Review of 2018 Nonexecutive Director fees 2%  4.5% increase.
Aggregate fees 389000 within the 420000 fees permitted in the Articles of Association 1 September 2017 bonus award  Executives 121.9% bonus 60% of which will be paid in cash in December 2017 40% awarded in shares deferred for two years to be settled in September 2019 Michael Farrow Chair of the Remuneration Committee
Appointed attended Michael Farrow FCIS MSc 23012013 22 Sue Ford ACA BSc Hons 10092015 22 Robert Orr MRICS BSc 23042015 22 The Remuneration Committee operates within terms of reference a copy of which is available at the website site
A new remuneration policy for the Executive Directors was approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM No changes have been proposed to the executive remuneration policy this year.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 79 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information 5% One special award of 15% 121.9% of salary 40% paid in deferred shares 0%
Salary increase Bonus L TIP vesting Awarded 1 September 2016 Employee increase 6.3% Awarded for the performance period 1 September 2016  31 August 2017 Maximum award 150% of salary 45% Underlying Distributable Earnings 45% NAV growth 22.5% cash flow and 37.5% Personal objectives.
Awarded for the three year performance period ended 31 August 2017 Based on the policy approved at the 2015 AGM Companys TSR measured against a bespoke peer group TSR and the FTSE EPRANAREIT Developed Europe Index.
2017 remuneration at a glance Total remuneration received for year ended 31 August 2017
Watters
Stephen
Oakenfull
Adrian
Horsburgh
Donald
Grant
Actual salary paid Annual bonus payable in respect of the financial year
Taxable benefits Read more on Single figure remuneration on page 86 Executive single total figure of remuneration for 2017 0 100000 300000 500000 600000 700000 800000 900000 200000 400000 1000000 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 80 Directors report Remuneration  unaudited Annual statement by the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee RemCo For the year ended 31 August 2017 not subject to audit
On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 August 2017.
It should be noted that as an Isle of Man company Redefine International is voluntarily reporting under the UK regulations in order to provide transparency to our shareholders.
2017 Policy New Executive Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders on 23 January 2017 At the start of the financial year the RemCo concluded that the executive remuneration package but particularly the outcome of the LTIP did not correctly reflect the executives performance nor did it align with shareholder returns achieved over the same period.
A strategic review of the remuneration policy was therefore undertaken.
A new remuneration policy for the Executive Directors was recommended and approved by 79.91 per cent of shareholders at the AGM on 23 January 2017 the New Policy and applied to all remuneration components awarded after that date.
The New Policy will remain in place for the next three years unless any material changes are proposed.
No changes have been proposed to the executive remuneration policy this year.
A summary of the New Policy can be found on pages 84 to 85.
Remuneration for the 2017 financial year 2017 Performance the table overleaf shows how the executives have implemented the strategic priorities as detailed on pages 14 and 15 of this Annual Report and how their actions reflect on the bonus targets.
2017 Salary awarded 1 September 2016.
The average salary increase for employees for 2017 was 6.3 per cent.
A 15 per cent salary increase was awarded to the Deputy CEO to bring his salary closer to that of the CEO and to recognise his increased responsibilities within the executive team.
All other executives received a 5 per cent increase which although above inflation still resulted in their salaries being in the lower quartile of our peer group.
2017 Bonus awarded for the performance period 1 September 2016  31 August 2017.
Due to redressing the balance between long and short term compensation the maximum executive bonus has increased from 100 per cent to 150 per cent of base salary.
Having exceeded the targets set for cash flow NAV and achieving the target for earnings the executives have been awarded a cash bonus of 121.9 per cent of base salary.
Of the award 60 per cent will be settled in cash immediately with 40 per cent deferred for two years subject to continuous employment in the Group and to be settled in shares.
The bonus award is in line with in the lower quartile of the FTSE 250 where the Company is currently positioned.
2017 LTIP vesting for the three year performance period ended 31 August 2017.
The performance period for the award related to the three years ending 31 August 2017 and was subject to the historic TSR performance conditions.
The outcome of the LTIP award has again resulted in nil vesting.
2017 LTIP Contingent award awarded for the three year performance period from 1 September 2016 to 31 August 2019.
Contingent awards equivalent to 200 per cent of salary were made to each of the executives on 25 January 2017.
These will be subject to the performance criteria set out in the New Policy approved at the 2017 AGM and will subject to performance vest on 25 January 2020.
2017 Single figure remuneration the total remuneration package received for the 2017 resulted in the executives total salaries remaining in the lower quartile of the FTSE 250.
On average the executives received 56 per cent of target remuneration outlined in the implementation scenario within the 2014 Annual Report.
2017 Non executive Director fees On 1 September 2016 Nonexecutive Directors received a fee increase of 3000 and the Chairman received an increase in fee of 6500.
These awards were made in recognition of increased responsibilities following the completion of AUK transaction and the substantial augmentation of the
This resulted in the standard Nonexecutive Director fee being 43000 although the Audit and Risk Committee chair was paid 50500 and the Remuneration Committee chair was paid 48000 to recognise their additional time commitments.
Following the review of the remuneration policy by the RemCo and the work undertaken by the Investment Committee for the AUK transaction the Board wished to acknowledge the increase in responsibilities significant time commitment shared by all the committee chairs and resolved that the fees of all committee chairs be brought in line.
From
1 December 2016 all committee chairs have been paid 50500.
Although these increases were above market norm the fees for the Nonexecutive Directors and chairs remained in the lower quartile of the FTSE 250.
Directors remuneration continued Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 81 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information 2017 Executive performance Bonus KPI
Maximum 150% performance achieved Actions taken by executives during the year Link to strategy Higher earnings 45% 50% budget met Capital was recycled into assets with stronger potential growth or used to lower the level of gearing and associated finance costs which has strengthened the balance sheet and capital structure.
Newer assets have delivered significant value.
The AUK assets have seen 6.2% valuation growth and 7.2% growth in triple net income since their acquisition in 2016.
Asset management activities targeting our best performing assets.
Demonstrated through the potential development of Charing Cross Road London and extensions at Banbury Cross Retail Park and Holiday Inn Express Southwark.
Growth in NAV 45% 100% 120% of budget achieved Disposals totalled 148.2 million during the year at an average 12.2% premium to book value.
Properties sold tended to demonstrate weak longer term growth potential thus strengthening the underlying property fundamentals of the portfolio.
Active recycling of capital into assets demonstrating stronger property fundamentals.
Focusing on assets in geographical locations with the best growth potential.
Demonstrated with the IHL acquisition where properties are located in the South East of England or big six UK centres.
Stronger operating cash flow 22.5% 100% 120% of budget achieved Refinancing activity has seen the average cost of debt reduced to 3.1% from 3.4% in 2016 resulting in a significant finance cost saving.
Internal cost of capital reduced with stronger dividend cover and headroom on operational cash flow.
Maintained headroom over operational cash flow to invest in asset management initiatives to grow value.
More flexible capital structure has allowed the Group to apply available cash reserves against revolving credit facility to achieve lower ratcheted margin throughout the year.
Extended debt maturity profile following refinancing initiatives removing refinancing risk with no significant maturities until 2020.
Personal objectives 37.5% 85% at RemCos discretion Leadership at the Capital Markets Day held in February 2017 the Company outlined clear and measurable medium term targets and the executives have demonstrated conviction in executing and delivering on all targets throughout the year.
Communication with shareholders extensive UK and South African road shows and to meet explain and listen to major shareholder views positive investor and analyst feedback following simplification of strategic objectives clear communication and no surprises in full results and active engagement with investment market as demonstrated by the quantum of capital recycling completed and premiums to book values achieved.
Communication with stakeholders CSR initiatives undertaken to engage with communities and tenants GRESB improvement and all suppliers required to abide by our code of ethics.
Loyalty of staff a desirable working culture and environment has been developed demonstrated by a low staff turnover and a positive employee survey outcome.
Income focused portfolio Efficient capital structure Financial discipline Scalable business See page 14.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 82 Directors report Remuneration  unaudited
Statement of implementation of remuneration for the 2018 financial year Set out below is a summary of the planned implementation of the remuneration policy for the financial year ending 31 August 2018.
2018 Salary awarded 1 September 2017.
2017 2018 Mike Watters 391000 406600 Stephen Oakenfull 278100 289200 Adrian Horsburgh 253100 263200 Donald Grant 235200 244600 Average salary increases of 4.6 per cent have been awarded to employees for 2018 which was arrived at using a base inflationary adjustment of 2.5 per cent with additional increases awarded to recognise extra responsibilities progress made in professional exams and changes in roles.
Taking this into account and a review of relevant market data the executives were all awarded a 4 per cent increase.
2018 Pension and benefits Company pension contribution remains at 12.5 per cent of salary for the CEO and 9 per cent of salary for other Executive Directors.
Other benefits comprise life assurance private medical insurance car allowance CEO only incapacity benefit season ticket allowance and Directors and officers insurance.
2018 Annual bonus to be awarded for the performance period 1 September 2017 31 August 2018.
Executive Directors can be awarded a bonus of up to 150 per cent of salary.
This is based on underlying distributable earnings 45 per cent adjusted NAV growth 45 per cent operating cash flow performance 22.5 per cent and personal objectives 37.5 per cent.
40 per cent of any award made will be subject to a two year deferral period to be settled in shares.
The targets for financial measures are deemed to be commercially sensitive.
However retrospective disclosure of the targets and performance against them will be provided in future remuneration reports.
2018 LTIP vesting relating to the three year performance period ending 31 August 2018.
The awards made on 28 October 2015 for the performance period 1 September 2015 to 31 August 2018 will vest on 28 October 2018.
These awards are the last awards subject to the old policy performance conditions approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM.
This required the attainment of certain targets each weighted at 50 per cent relating to the performance of the Companys TSR against the TSR of two comparator groups namely i a bespoke peer group TSR and ii the FTSE EPRANAREIT Developed Europe Index.
2018 Contingent LTIP Award to be awarded for the three year performance period ending 31 August 2020.
Executive Directors will receive an LTIP award over shares worth 200 per cent of salary with the relevant performance targets being based on underlying distributable earnings per share 50 per cent relative TSR 25 per cent and relative total property return 25 per cent all measured over a three year performance period.
These measures are intended to align the awards with the Companys strategic objectives and with shareholder interests.
In particular a the EPS measure is designed to incentivise distribution growth to shareholders b the relative TSR measure retained from the previous policy but with a reduced weighting measures the total shareholder return of the Company against an appropriate index and provides a direct link between shareholder returns and compensation and c the relative total property return measure is designed to incentivise the enhancement of portfolio quality and distribution growth.
Targets for these measures are set out on page 89.
Non executive Director remuneration The table below shows the fee structure for Nonexecutive Directors for 2018.
2017 fees 2018 fees Chairman of the Board 94500 98000 Audit and Risk Committee chair fee 50500 52000 Remuneration Committee chair fee 50500 52000 Investment Committee chair fee 50500 52000 Basic nonexecutive fee 43000 45000 It is acknowledged that Nonexecutive Director fees remain below market average.
Increases
Aggregate fees for seven Nonexecutive Directors amounts to 389000.
The Nominations Committee has reported on its search for a new independent Nonexecutive Director.
It is hoped that an appointment will be made before the end of the year which will result in aggregate fees for the Nonexecutive Directors totalling 434000 p.
This exceeds the current 420000 aggregate limit set out in the Articles of Association and therefore a resolution will be proposed at the AGM on 25 January 2018 to amend the limit of fees to 500000 p.
Annual General Meeting The full remuneration report for the financial year ended 31 August 2017 can be found on pages 86 to 91.
The RemCo recommends the remuneration report to shareholders and hopes that shareholders will support the resolution at the AGM on 25 January 2018.
Michael Farrow Chair of the Remuneration Committee 26 October 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 83 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Policy report on remuneration Not subject to audit Remuneration Policy for the Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors Remuneration comprises an annual fee for the Chairman and for Nonexecutive Directors.
Additional fees may be given at the discretion of the Board for specific roles such as the chair of the Audit and Risk Remuneration and Investment Committees.
All fees are paid in Sterling.
Component Purpose Operation Maximum potential value Termination Annual fee A fixed market competitive fee to attract and retain nonexecutives of sufficient quality to constructively challenge the executives in delivering the Groups strategy.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the fees periodically compared with a peer group taking into account the time spent company size ownership sector risk and other company specific factors.
Its recommendations are then presented to the Board for final approval.
Fees of the Nonexecutive Directors other than alternative Directors are determined by the Board provided that such sums do not exceed in the aggregate 420000 or as the Company may by ordinary resolution approve.
Directors are not appointed for a specified term but are appointed for a term which expires when either the Director is i not reappointed following retirement in accordance with the Articles of Association ii removed or vacates office iii resigns or does not offer themselves for reelection or iv terminates their appointment on three months notice.
There is no provision for loss of office payments.
It should be noted that a resolution will be proposed at the AGM on 25 January 2018 to increase the limit of fees to 500000.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not receive remuneration other than fees but are entitled to be paid all reasonable travelling hotel and other expenses properly incurred in attending meetings of the Board committees of the Board general meetings or otherwise in connection with the business of the Company.
Letters of Appointment Each Nonexecutive Director has a Letter of Appointment the terms and conditions of which are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
Remuneration policy for the Executive Directors The key principles of the executive remuneration policy are to attract retain and motivate to ensure the long term success of the Company.
Performance measures and targets for incentive awards are selected so as to provide alignment with our key strategic goals.
A summary of the elements of the executive remuneration policy is shown overleaf.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 84 Directors report Remuneration  unaudited Policy report on remuneration continued Summary of the Executive Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at the AGM held on 23 January 2017 Component Purpose Operation Maximum potential value Applicable performance measures Claw back Exit payments Base salary A fixed market competitive remuneration base to attract and retain executives of sufficient quality to deliver the Groups strategy.
Normally reviewed annually with changes effective 1 September.
However the Company is under no obligation to award an increase following the review.
No maximum salary is set.
Increases are dependent on the results of the annual review and are normally in line with the average increase for the wider work force inflation and market data.
However increases may be made above this level at the RemCos discretion to take account of individual circumstances such as an increase in scope and responsibility or to reflect the individuals development and performance in a role or for alignment to a market level.
None None Termination of the service contract can be given by either party by way of notice in writing for a period not exceeding 12 months.
Payment may be given in lieu of notice subject to the Companys sole and absolute discretion up to a maximum of one years basic salary.
There is no provision in the contracts for loss of office payments other than those required by employment law.
Pension Part of the overall package providing comprehensive remuneration and retirement benefits.
The Company contributes monthly to the Directors personal pension plans.
At the Companys discretion a cash allowance of equivalent value may be offered.
The Company contributes between 9% and 12.5% of their base salary.
Values vary by Directors and are reviewed periodically.
None None Payments would cease on the leaving date.
Other benefits Part of the overall package providing comprehensive remuneration.
Life assurance Private medical insurance
Season ticket allowance Directors and officers insurance Car allowance Other benefits may be provided as appropriate As the costs of providing benefits will depend on a Directors individual circumstances the RemCo has not set a monetary maximum.
None None All benefits would cease on the leaving date.
Bonus  STIP A short term incentive to reward executives on their personal performance and the Companys performance in line with shareholder returns.
Performance will be assessed in line with specific KPIs 75% of the award will focus on financial measures and 25% on personal objectives.
The purpose of the personal objectives is to encourage leadership loyalty of staff and to communicate with stakeholders particularly shareholders in a transparent manner.
Designed to offer an annual bonus of between 0% to 150% of the executives base salary.
Payable in cash and deferred shares.
40% of award to be settled in shares subject to a two year deferral period.
An executive is entitled to dividends on shares under the STIP award which will accrue over the deferral period and will be paid on vesting.
KPIs are based on 15% operating cash flow 30% underlying distributable earnings 30% adjusted NAV growth and 25% personal objectives.
The financial KPIs 13 are calibrated according to the level of budget met Less than 90% budget  nil Meeting budget  75% and 120% of budget  150%.
The deferred shares are subject to a two year deferral period conditional only upon continued employment subject to the RemCos discretion such as in the event of long term illness or death.
If the employment of an executive is terminated for any reason or if he is under notice of termination whether given by the executive or the Company at or before the date when a bonus might otherwise be payable he will have no right to receive a bonus or time apportioned bonus save that the RemCo will have discretion to award a time apportioned bonus to a Good Leaver for the year of cessation.
LTIP award A long term incentive to align the executives interests with those of the shareholders and to promote the long term success of the
Structured as a rolling annual award of performance shares with a three year performance period.
Awards are granted as nil cost options to acquire shares or contingent rights to receive shares.
Such awards may carry award dividends entitling the executive to dividends which would have been received on the vested shares during the vesting period payable either in cash or ordinary shares.
The aggregate number of shares which may be awarded may not exceed 23000000 over the ten year life of the LTIP.
Individual awards in any financial year shall not be greater than 200% of the executives base salary but in exceptional circumstances an award can be made up to 400% of the executives base salary providing that such an award does not exceed 7000000 shares.
Awards will vest at the end of a three year period dependent on the following performance conditions 50% of the award is to be linked to underlying distributable earnings per share.
25% of the award will vest upon attaining earnings per share comparable with the immediate preceding financial year with 100% vesting achieved for average annual outperformance of CPI during the performance period of 1% 25% of the award to be linked to FTSE EPRANAREIT Developed Europe Index performance.
25% of the award will vest for median performance with 100% vesting achieved for upper quartile performance and 25% of the award to be linked to the relative total property return of the Companys UK assets in comparison to IPD UK All Property Index.
25% of the award will vest once performance reaches that of the benchmark with 100% vesting achieved for 2% outperformance.
In circumstances where an error has been made in determining the extent to which the performance conditions were met financial results have been materially misstated or the executive has contributed to serious reputational damage to the Company or engaged in serious fraud or misconduct the RemCo in its absolute discretion may determine that an award will cease or lapse or impose further conditions on the award.
If the executive leaves employment of the Company other than as set out below the award will lapse or cease to be exercisable on the leaving date.
If the executive leaves employment for reasons such as ill health redundancy or retirement or any other reason at the discretion of the RemCo or in the event of a takeover scheme of arrangement demerger or winding up of the Company the RemCo acting fairly and reasonably will determine whether and to what extent a performance target shall then be deemed to be satisfied.
Subject to that determination the award will vest in proportion to the extent of the vesting period which has expired at the date of the relevant event.
In the event that an executive is not reelected by shareholders at an annual general meeting of the Company the vesting of any awards will be subject to the discretion of the RemCo.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 85 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Summary of the Executive Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at the AGM held on 23 January 2017 Component Purpose Operation Maximum potential value Applicable performance measures Claw back Exit payments Base salary A fixed market competitive remuneration base to attract and retain executives of sufficient quality to deliver the Groups strategy.
Normally reviewed annually with changes effective 1 September.
However the Company is under no obligation to award an increase following the review.
No maximum salary is set.
Increases are dependent on the results of the annual review and are normally in line with the average increase for the wider work force inflation and market data.
However increases may be made above this level at the RemCos discretion to take account of individual circumstances such as an increase in scope and responsibility or to reflect the individuals development and performance in a role or for alignment to a market level.
None None Termination of the service contract can be given by either party by way of notice in writing for a period not exceeding 12 months.
Payment may be given in lieu of notice subject to the Companys sole and absolute discretion up to a maximum of one years basic salary.
There is no provision in the contracts for loss of office payments other than those required by employment law.
Pension Part of the overall package providing comprehensive remuneration and retirement benefits.
The Company contributes monthly to the Directors personal pension plans.
At the Companys discretion a cash allowance of equivalent value may be offered.
The Company contributes between 9% and 12.5% of their base salary.
Values vary by Directors and are reviewed periodically.
None None Payments would cease on the leaving date.
Other benefits Part of the overall package providing comprehensive remuneration.
Life assurance Private medical insurance
Season ticket allowance Directors and officers insurance Car allowance Other benefits may be provided as appropriate As the costs of providing benefits will depend on a Directors individual circumstances the RemCo has not set a monetary maximum.
None None All benefits would cease on the leaving date.
Bonus  STIP A short term incentive to reward executives on their personal performance and the Companys performance in line with shareholder returns.
Performance will be assessed in line with specific KPIs 75% of the award will focus on financial measures and 25% on personal objectives.
The purpose of the personal objectives is to encourage leadership loyalty of staff and to communicate with stakeholders particularly shareholders in a transparent manner.
Designed to offer an annual bonus of between 0% to 150% of the executives base salary.
Payable in cash and deferred shares.
40% of award to be settled in shares subject to a two year deferral period.
An executive is entitled to dividends on shares under the STIP award which will accrue over the deferral period and will be paid on vesting.
KPIs are based on 15% operating cash flow 30% underlying distributable earnings 30% adjusted NAV growth and 25% personal objectives.
The financial KPIs 13 are calibrated according to the level of budget met Less than 90% budget  nil Meeting budget  75% and 120% of budget  150%.
The deferred shares are subject to a two year deferral period conditional only upon continued employment subject to the RemCos discretion such as in the event of long term illness or death.
If the employment of an executive is terminated for any reason or if he is under notice of termination whether given by the executive or the Company at or before the date when a bonus might otherwise be payable he will have no right to receive a bonus or time apportioned bonus save that the RemCo will have discretion to award a time apportioned bonus to a Good Leaver for the year of cessation.
LTIP award A long term incentive to align the executives interests with those of the shareholders and to promote the long term success of the
Structured as a rolling annual award of performance shares with a three year performance period.
Awards are granted as nil cost options to acquire shares or contingent rights to receive shares.
Such awards may carry award dividends entitling the executive to dividends which would have been received on the vested shares during the vesting period payable either in cash or ordinary shares.
The aggregate number of shares which may be awarded may not exceed 23000000 over the ten year life of the LTIP.
Individual awards in any financial year shall not be greater than 200% of the executives base salary but in exceptional circumstances an award can be made up to 400% of the executives base salary providing that such an award does not exceed 7000000 shares.
Awards will vest at the end of a three year period dependent on the following performance conditions 50% of the award is to be linked to underlying distributable earnings per share.
25% of the award will vest upon attaining earnings per share comparable with the immediate preceding financial year with 100% vesting achieved for average annual outperformance of CPI during the performance period of 1% 25% of the award to be linked to FTSE EPRANAREIT Developed Europe Index performance.
25% of the award will vest for median performance with 100% vesting achieved for upper quartile performance and 25% of the award to be linked to the relative total property return of the Companys UK assets in comparison to IPD UK All Property Index.
25% of the award will vest once performance reaches that of the benchmark with 100% vesting achieved for 2% outperformance.
In circumstances where an error has been made in determining the extent to which the performance conditions were met financial results have been materially misstated or the executive has contributed to serious reputational damage to the Company or engaged in serious fraud or misconduct the RemCo in its absolute discretion may determine that an award will cease or lapse or impose further conditions on the award.
If the executive leaves employment of the Company other than as set out below the award will lapse or cease to be exercisable on the leaving date.
If the executive leaves employment for reasons such as ill health redundancy or retirement or any other reason at the discretion of the RemCo or in the event of a takeover scheme of arrangement demerger or winding up of the Company the RemCo acting fairly and reasonably will determine whether and to what extent a performance target shall then be deemed to be satisfied.
Subject to that determination the award will vest in proportion to the extent of the vesting period which has expired at the date of the relevant event.
In the event that an executive is not reelected by shareholders at an annual general meeting of the Company the vesting of any awards will be subject to the discretion of the RemCo.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 86 Annual report on remuneration The information provided in this part of the Directors Remuneration Report will detail how the remuneration policy has been implemented during the year ended 31 August 2017.
This report together with the Chairmans annual statement will be subject to an advisory shareholder vote at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 25 January 2018.
Non executive fees Single total figure of remuneration for Nonexecutive Directors Audited The table below shows the remuneration paid to all Nonexecutive Directors who served during the financial year ending 31 August 2017 with a comparable annual fee figure for the financial year ending 31 August 2016.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not receive any other remuneration other than fees but are entitled to be paid all reasonable travelling hotel and other expenses properly incurred in attending meetings of the Board committees of the Board general meetings or otherwise in connection with the business of the Company.
Annual fees Annual fees Actual fees 2017 paid for 2017 Greg Clarke Chairman 88000 94500 94500 Michael Farrow chair of the Remuneration Committee 45000 48000 50500 from 1122016 49875 Gavin Tipper chair of the Audit and Risk Committee 47500 50500 50500 Sue Ford 40000 43000 43000 Robert Orr chair of the Investment Committee 40000 43000 50500 from 1122016 48625 Marc Wainer 40000 43000 43000 Bernie Nackan 43000 43000
340500 365000 375000 from 11216 372500 Payments to past Directors and for loss of office Audited There were no Director resignations during the year.
There were no payments to former Directors during the year.
Executive salaries Single total figure of remuneration for Executive Directors Audited The table below shows remuneration paid to the Executive Directors during the financial year ending 31 August 2016 and 2017 Annual bonus payable in
Annual bonus respect of the remuneration payable in financial year received for Year ending Actual Taxable respect of the  deferred Shares year ended 31 August salary paid Pension benefits financial year shares vesting 31 August Mike Watters 2017 391000 48875 31653 285919 190612 0 948059 2016 372383 46548 13297 204810 na 0 637038 Stephen Oakenfull 2017 278100 25029 8239 203360 135574 0 650302 2016 241080 21697 7578 132594 na 0 402949 Adrian Horsburgh 2017 253100 22779 10459 185080 123386 0 594804 2016 241080 21697 11750 132594 na na 407121 Donald Grant 2017 235200 21168 7962 171990 114660 na 550980 2016 224000 20160 8351 123200 na na 375711 Taxable benefits include the provision of private medical insurance season ticket allowances and 17000 car allowance CEO only.
Mike Watters served as a Nonexecutive Director of Redefine Properties Limited until February 2017 for which he received a net amount of R134500 circa 7000 for the period 1 September 2016 to 27 February 2017.
Mike Watters served as a Nonexecutive Director of International Hotel Properties Limited during the year for which he received 1299.96.
Directors report
Annual report on remuneration Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 87 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Executive bonus Audited The maximum bonus for the year ended 31 August 2017 was capped at 150 per cent of annual base salary 40 per cent of any bonus is deferred in shares.
Bonuses are based on the performance against three financial KPIs and each individuals personal objectives apportioned as follows 25 per cent personal objectives 15 per cent operating cash flow 30 per cent underlying earnings and 30 per cent adjusted NAV.
The personal objectives award is at the RemCos discretion and is designed to encourage leadership loyalty of staff and communication with stakeholders and shareholders in a transparent manner.
In reaching their decision the RemCo considered the Capital Markets Day held in February at which the Company communicated to shareholders clear and measurable medium term strategic targets.
The Executives have demonstrated strong leadership and clear conviction in executing the strategy throughout the year resulting in tangible progress across all areas.
Key personnel have been retained and there has been a low staff turnover.
An increased time commitment and prominence given to CSR matters has resulted in the Companys improved GRESB rating.
A table illustrating the executives performance against the Bonus KPIs and strategy can be found on page 81.
The financial KPIs are compared to the Board approved budget as follows Level of budget met Bonus awarded % of respective weighting Less than 90% budget
Meeting budget 50% 120% of budget 100% The actual target ranges for 2017 for the financial performance measures have not been disclosed.
This is considered by the Board to be commercially sensitive as certain aspects could be considered to constitute a profits forecast.
Retrospective disclosure of the target ranges will be made in next years annual report on remuneration once the information is no longer considered commercially sensitive.
Personal
KPI
Cash flow Earnings NAV growth objectives
Weight of bonus award 22.5% 45% 45% 37.5% 150% 2017 Performance % of maximum payout achieved 100% 50% 100% 85% Award to all executives % of salary 22.5% 22.5% 45% 31.9% 121.9% Disclosure of 2016 annual bonus financial performance targets The RemCo is committed to publishing the financial performance targets once they cease to be commercially sensitive.
The financial performance targets that applied in respect of the year ended 31 August 2016 are no longer commercially sensitive accordingly the targets and the Companys performance against these targets are now set out below.
The 2016 annual bonus awards were based 75 per cent on financial performance and 25 per cent on the individuals performance during the year.
Actual this element Weighting Target range performance of the bonus Cash flow 15% 0.7m  0.4m 9.9m 100%
30% 2.9p  3.8p 3.2p 50% NAV growth 30% 2.8%  3.7% 2.3% 0% Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 88 Long Term Incentive Plans Audited On 25 January 2017 the Executive Directors received an LTIP award over shares worth 200 per cent of salary in relation to their 2017 remuneration package.
These awards are subject to the performance targets of the New Policy approved by shareholders at the AGM on 23 January 2017 measured over a three year performance period from 1 September 2016 to 31 August 2019.
The award price is based on the share price at close of trading on 1 September 2016.
The following contingent awards were made to Directors for 2015 2016 and 2017 financial years
Award price Value of award Basis on which award was made Date of grant
Performance conditions applicable policy approved at 2017 AGM Vesting level achieved
Watters
1698440 43.85p 774766 200% of base salary 25 January Measured over the financial years ending 31 August 31 August 31 August Vesting subject to the attainment of the performance targets being based on 50% underlying earnings per share 25% relative TSR and 25% relative total property return.
Awards will vest on 25 January
Oakenfull
1099567 43.85p 482160
Horsburgh
1099567 43.85p 482160
Grant
1021665 43.85p 448000
Award price Value of award Basis on which award was made Date of grant
Performance conditions applicable policy approved at 2015 AGM Vesting level achieved
Watters
1698515 52.2p 886625 250% of base salary 28 October Measured over the financial years ending 31 August 31 August 31 August Vesting subject to the attainment of certain targets relating to the performance of the Companys TSR against the TSR of two comparator groups each weighted at 50% bespoke peer group TSR and EPRANAREIT TSR.
Awards will vest on 28 October
Oakenfull
1099617 52.2p 574000
Horsburgh
1099617 52.2p 574000
Grant
1072797 52.2p 560000
Award price Value of award Basis on which award was made Date of award
Performance conditions applicable policy approved at 2015 AGM Vesting level achieved
Watters
1773250 50p 886625 250% of base salary 3 February Measured over the financial years ending 31 August 31 August 31 August Vesting subject to the attainment of certain targets relating to the performance of the Companys TSR against the TSR of two comparator groups each weighted at 50% bespoke peer group TSR and EPRANAREIT TSR.
0% Vesting
Oakenfull
1148000 50p 574000 250% of base salary
Horsburgh
478333 50p 239167 104% of base salary It should be noted that awards made prior to 2016 are based on 250 per cent of the current salary.
Awards made in 2016 and subsequently are based on the previous years salary and were awarded at the share price on the first day of the performance period.
Directors report
Annual report on remuneration continued Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 89 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Awards cannot be made during closed periods and therefore awards are not granted until a closed period has ended.
The awards will vest three years from the date of grant subject to continued employment and the satisfaction of performance targets.
The figures above reflect the maximum number of shares that may vest.
The actual number to vest will be dependent on performance against comparator targets over the applicable performance period.
2015 and 2016 awards vesting schedule The 2015 and 2016 awards are subject to the LTIP policy approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM and will be measured against two total shareholder return related performance targets 50 per cent of any such award will be subject to a performance target which measures the Companys TSR relative to that of the members of a bespoke comparator group and 50 per cent of the award will be subject to a performance target which measures the Companys TSR relative to that of each of the members of EPRANAREIT Developed Europe Index.
The 2015 and 2016 awards are subject to the following vesting schedule Relative TSR performance Percentage of one half FTSE EPRANAREIT of an award that vests Upper quartile 100% Between median and upper quartile Between 25% and 100%
25% Below median 0% 2017 awards vesting schedule The 2017 awards are subject to the LTIP policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM with the relevant performance targets measured over a three year period being based on 50 per cent on underlying earnings per share 25 per cent on relative TSR and 25 per cent on relative total property return.
The 2017 awards are subject to the following vesting schedule which forms part of our shareholder approved New Policy Performance condition Applicable measure Vesting thresholds Growth in underlying earnings per share Immediately preceding financial year earnings per share  25% on attaining previous earnings per share 100% on achieving average annual outperformance of CPI plus 1% Straight line vesting between 25% and 100% Relative TSR FTSE EPRANAREIT Developed Europe Index  25% on achieving median performance 100% on achieving upper quartile performance Straight line vesting between 25% and 100% Relative total property return of the UK portfolio IPD All Property Index  25% for performance in line with IPD 100% achieved for 2% outperformance Straight line vesting between 25% and 100% The RemCo may adjust upward or downwards the extent to which a LTIP award would otherwise vest if it considers that such level of vesting is not reflective of overall corporate performance or of the executives personal performance.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 90 Directors report
Annual report on remuneration continued Statement of Directors shareholdings and share interests Audited Although there is no requirement for Directors to own shares in the Company the table below shows the total number of Directors interests in shares as at 31 August 2017.
2017 Bonus deferred LTIP share shares LTIP share awards due awarded awards due to vest on 28 due to vest on to vest on 25 Number of October 2018 1 September January 2020 ordinary shares subject to 2019 subject subject to held as at % of issued performance to continued performance 31 August 2017 share capital conditions employment conditions Total Mike Watters CEO 0.36 1698515 476292 1698440 10388885 Stephen Oakenfull Deputy CEO 0.03 1099617 338766 1099567 Adrian Horsburgh 62189 0.00 1099617 308311 1099567 Donald Grant 50000 0.00 1072797 286507 1021665 Gavin Tipper 508630 0.03 Marc Wainer Bernard Nackan 20911 0.00 Robert Orr 23529 0.00
9484797 0.52 Less than 0.001 per cent.
Mike Watters shares are held through a pension fund structure.
573536 of Stephen Oakenfulls shareholding is held in his wifes name.
Marc Wainers beneficial interest is held through 127593 shareholding in his wifes name 175000 shareholding held through his Drawood Trust and 2755541 shareholding in Ellwain Investments Pty Limited of which he is a 50 per cent shareholder.
Changes to Directors shareholding since 1 September 2017 and up to the date of this document can be found on page 93 of this Annual Report.
CEO comparable performance Total remuneration figure for CEO since the internalisation of management in 2013 The table below shows the total remuneration figure for the CEO for the years since the internalisation of management in December 2013.
Annual bonus awarded For the as a percentage year ending Total of the maximum
31 August remuneration possible award awards Mike Watters 2017 948059 81% 0% Mike Watters 2016 637038 55% 0% Mike Watters 2015 606647 55% na Mike Watters appointed CEO 3 December 2013 2014 490600 55% na Performance graph and CEO remuneration table The table below illustrates the performance of the Company since the merger of Wichford P. and Redefine International plc in August 2011.
This is measured against the performance of EPRA and the FTSE All Share index both of which the Company is a constituent.
25tel50 Aug 2011 pence Redene International FTSE All Share EPRA Index Sterling Aug 2017 Feb 2017 Feb 2012 Aug 2012 Feb 2013 Aug 2013 Feb 2014 Aug 2014 Feb 2015 Aug 2015 Feb 2016 Aug 2016 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 91 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Percentage change in remuneration of CEO Pursuant to the salary reviews on 1 September 2017 the following increase in base salary benefits and bonus relative to prior year base salary benefits and bonus is compared for the CEO and those employees of the Companys head office who were determined to be the most appropriate benchmark due to the nature and location of the Companys residual workforce.
2017 Salary
Bonus
Base salary Mike Watters 4.0% 138.0% 132.7% Average employee per capita figure 4.6% 1.0% 11.2% The base salary comparison is in relation to the 1 September 2017 salary review.
The benefits comparison is in relation to benefits for 2017 financial year compared to 2016.
The bonus comparison is in relation to bonus for 2017 performance compared to bonus for 2016 performance.
2.5% 736.7% 23% %  percentage change Prots after tax Sta costs Dividends Relative importance of spend on pay Consideration by the Directors of matters relating to Directors remuneration The Directors who have served on the RemCo during the reporting year can be found on page 78.
No executives attend formal meetings of the RemCo.
Deloitte replaced Willis Towers Watson as the Companys remuneration advisers during the financial year.
Deloitte is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and have no connection with the Company.
The RemCo is satisfied that the advice received has been objective and independent.
Total fees paid to Deloitte during the financial year were 13460 Willis Tower Watson fees were 28909 2016 45530.
All advice received was duly considered by the RemCo and their proposals presented to the Board for final approval.
Statement of voting at the Annual General Meeting At the Companys AGM held on 23 January 2017 the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 August 2016 was approved by shareholders.
The results were as follows
Votes
Votes
Resolution for % against % withheld To approve the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 August 2016 1246629118 99.57 5375309 0.43 9225003 To approve and adopt the new Remuneration Policy 1000333466 79.91 251542808 20.09 9433156
This report was approved by the Board of Directors on 26 October 2017 and signed on its behalf by Michael Farrow Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Directors report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 92 The Directors report comprises pages 60 to 94 together with certain sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference as outlined below future developments and the outlook for the Company are contained in the CEO report on pages 4 to 6 important events that have taken place since the end of the financial year are described on page 147 details of financial instruments and the financial risk management objectives and policies of the Company are detailed in pages 140 to 143 principal risks and uncertainties pertaining to the Group and the way in which it manages and controls these risks are outlined in the Strategic Report on pages 16 and 17 the Companys three year viability statement can be found on page 17 disclosures regarding the employment of disabled people and employee involvement are contained in the corporate social responsibility report on page 49 although it should be noted that the Company employs less than 250 people diversity policy for the Group is on page 49.
In addition it should be noted that the Nominations Committee is seeking to expand the female membership of the Board to at least one third by 2020 and greenhouse gas reporting is included in the corporate social responsibility report on page 58.
Results and proposed dividends The Group statement of comprehensive income is set out on page 100 and shows a profit attributable to equity holders of the Parent of 78.7 million.
The Board has declared a second interim dividend of 1.3 pence per share or a scrip alternative.
Dispatch of share certificates or the cash dividend will be paid on 18 December 2017 to those shareholders on the register as at 1 December 2017 and will result in a total dividend of 2.6 pence per share for the financial year.
Going concern At 31 August 2017 the Groups cash and undrawn committed facilities were 63.4 million and its capital commitments were 16.8 million.
Weighted average debt maturity of 7.3 years and LTV adjusted for events occurring up until the day of signing this years Annual Report was of 50.0 per cent which provides sufficient headroom against financial covenants.
Attention is also drawn to the viability statement contained within the Groups principal risk disclosures on pages 16 and 17.
After considering severe but plausible scenarios the Directors are satisfied that there continues to be a reasonable expectation that the Group will have the resources it requires to meet ongoing and future commitments.
Accordingly the 2017 financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
Issued share capital As at 31 August 2017 the Companys total issued share capital was 1828060146 ordinary shares of 8.0 pence each.
Increases in the issued share capital during the year have resulted from the following
Reason for issue Shares issued Total 1 September 2016 Start of the financial year 12 December 2016 Scrip dividend 17141172 1811739822 26 June 2017 Scrip dividend 16320324 1828060146 Further details of the authorised and issued share capital are shown in Note 25 to the financial statements.
Redefine International has one class of share all shares rank equally and are fully paid.
Voting rights and restrictions of transfers of shares Shareholders are entitled to receive notice of to attend and to vote at all general meetings of the Company.
Further details on the voting rights of shareholders can be found in the Companys Articles available on the website site There are no specific restrictions on the size of shareholding nor on the transfer of ordinary shares imposed by the Articles of Association of the Company.
Other than in connection with the 150 million Euro secured exchangeable bonds issued by Redefine Properties Limited in September 2016 exchangeable into shares of Redefine International P. agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
Additional disclosures to the Directors report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 93 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Purchase of own shares and shares in Treasury At the 2017 AGM shareholders granted the Directors authority to make market purchases of ordinary shares in the Company in certain circumstances and to hold those shares in Treasury.
Shares were purchased by the Company in 2011 but Directors have no present intention of exercising this power.
The authority to purchase shares would only be exercised after careful consideration by the Directors and as and when conditions were favourable with a view to enhancing earnings per share andor net asset value per share which would be of benefit shareholders.
Legislation in the Isle of Man was enacted in 2014 which allows companies who buy their own shares to hold them in Treasury rather than cancel them up to a maximum of 10 per cent.
If the Company purchased its own shares it would therefore hold such shares as treasury shares which the Company could sell for cash.
All rights attaching to shares purchased under this authority including voting rights and rights to dividends would be suspended whilst they were held in treasury.
During the financial year and up until the date of this document no shares were purchased and no shares were held in Treasury.
Notified shareholdings As at the date of this report the Company had been notified or was otherwise aware of the following persons who were directly or indirectly interested in three per cent or more of the issued share capital of the Company.
Percentage
Shareholder
Shareholding held Redefine Properties Limited 539635248 29.52 Allan Gray Asset Management 135171096 7.39 Dealings of Directors and their Persons Closely Associated The Company adheres to a strict Share Dealing Code in line with the Market Abuse Regulations which prohibits persons discharging managerial responsibility PDMR dealing in shares for a designated period preceding the announcement of its annual and interim financial results or any other period considered price sensitive.
PDMRs are advised of such periods and acknowledge their obligations and potential sanctions if the obligations are breached.
Dealings in shares by PDMRs are strictly monitored during the year with the necessary RNS announcements and FCA notifications being made in respect of dealings performed by PDMRs or persons closely associated with them as required.
During the year the following Directors dealings occurred and were reported to the market Number of Number of ordinary shares ordinary shares held as at Scrip shares Acquisition Scrip shares held as at 31 August 12 December 24 February 26 June 31 Augusttel 2017 2017 Greg Clarke Michael Watters CEO 6515638    6515638 Stephen Oakenfull Deputy CEO 573536  50000  623536 Adrian Horsburgh 10000 347 50000 1842 62189 Donald Grant 50000  50000 Michael Farrow Gavin Tipper Sue Ford Robert Orr 23529    23529 Marc Wainer 1680364    1680364 Bernard Nackan 19610 682  619 20911
Michael Watters shares are held through a pension fund structure.
573536 of Stephen Oakenfulls shareholding is held in his wifes name.
Marc Wainers beneficial interest is held through 127593 shareholding in his wifes name 175000 shareholding held through his Drawood Trust and 2755541 shareholding in Ellwain Investments Pty Limited of which he is a 50 per cent shareholder.
Directors interests in the ordinary shares including their contingent awards and deferred bonus shares can be found in the Directors remuneration report on page 90 and are set out in Note 32 related party transactions.
Directors report Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 94
Directors appointment and Directors powers Subject to the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 the Articles of Association of the Company and any directions given by special resolution of the Company the business of the Company shall be managed by the Board which shall exercise all the powers of the Company whether relating to the management of the business or not.
Subject to the provisions of the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 and the Articles of Association of the Company the Board shall have the power to appoint a person who is willing to act as a Director either to fill a vacancy or as an addition to the existing Board.
Any Director so appointed must retire at the next AGM and put themselves forward for reelection by the shareholders.
As a Chapter 6 Company Redefine International confirms that whilst Redefine Properties Limited is a controlling shareholder of the Company the election or reelection of independent Directors will be conducted in accordance with the election provisions of LR 9.2.2. the independent shareholders of the Company.
In addition to any power of removal conferred by the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 the Company may by ordinary resolution remove any Director before the expiration of his period in office and by ordinary resolution appoint another person who is willing to act as a Director in his or her place.
Significant agreements There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs during a takeover bid.
However in the event of a takeover scheme of arrangement demerger or winding up of the Company any awards made to the Executive Directors under the performance share plan may vest early subject to the relevant performance targets being met and at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
Amendment of Articles The Companys Articles of Association may be amended by a special resolution of the Companys shareholders.
The Companys Articles of Association were last amended on 26 January 2016.
Political donations During the period Redefine International made no political donations.
Donald Grant Chief Financial Officer 26 October 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 95 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Financial statements Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Directors report and the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
The Directors have elected to prepare the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
The Group and Company financial statements are required by IFRS as issued by the IASB to present fairly the financial position and performance of the Group and Company respectively.
In preparing each of the Group and Company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state that the financial statements of the Group and Company comply with IFRS as issued by the IASB and in the case of the Company in accordance with those parts the Isle of Man Companies Acts 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time its financial position.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and Company and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Responsibility statement Each of the Directors confirms that to the best of each persons knowledge and belief the Group and Company financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities and financial position of the Group and Company at 31 August 2017 and in the case of the Group of its profit for the year then ended and in the case of the Company its loss for the year then ended the adoption of a going concern basis for the preparation of the Group and Company financial statements continues to be appropriate based on the year end position and having reviewed the forecast financial position of the Group the Directors report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Companys performance business model and strategy.
The Annual Report is published on the Groups website.
The maintenance and integrity of the Groups website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the financial statements contained therein.
Signed on behalf of the Board on 26 October 2017.
Mike Watters Donald Grant
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 96 1 Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Redefine International P.
Company for the year ended 31 August 2017 which comprise the Group and Company Income Statements the Group and Company Statements of Comprehensive Income the Group and Company Balance Sheets the Group and Company Statements of Changes in Equity the Group and Company Statements of Cash Flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 2.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS.
2 Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Group financial statements Valuation of investment property Refer to page 76 Audit Committee Report page 106 key judgement in accounting policies and pages 119 to 121 financial disclosures The key audit matter The valuation of the Groups investment properties involves significant judgements made by management using the advice of external valuers particularly those around the selection of valuation models and the inputs to those models current market conditions and rental levels.
The valuation exercise also relies on the completeness and accuracy of the underlying lease and financial information provided to the valuers by management.
How the matter was addressed in our audit In this area our audit procedures included among others assessing managements process for reviewing and addressing the work of the external valuers assessing the competence objectivity and integrity of the external valuers.
This assessment included but was not limited to assessing their professional qualifications experience and independence from the Group discussing and where appropriate challenging the external valuers in respect of the valuation process adopted the significant assumptions used and critical judgement areas in the valuation process including break clauses future lease income and yields and the performance of the relevant portfolio. considering the completeness and adequacy of the disclosures associated with investment property.
Our Results based on the results of our testing we consider the investment property valuations to be acceptable.
Debt refinancing Refer to page 76 Audit Committee Report page 107 key judgement in accounting policies and pages 128 and 129 financial disclosures.
The key audit matter In determining the fair value of debt on initial recognition the Group must assess whether fair value equals the transaction price or specifically whether the contractual interest rate agreed with the counterparty reflects a market interest rate.
If an alternative interest rate is applied in the measurement of fair value the Group must corroborate why the contractual rate is not considered representative of a market rate.
In reflecting the difference between the estimated fair value of the debt and the transaction price the difference is taken to profit and loss only if the interest rate derived is based on observable inputs.
How the matter was addressed in our audit In this area our audit procedures included among others assessing whether the new debt arrangement was considered a substantial modification in accordance with the provisions of IAS 39 assessing whether the contractual refinanced rate was considered representative of an offmarket transaction having regard to corroboratory market evidence assessing the reasonableness of the market interest rate applied to the refinanced debt to calculate fair value on initial recognition and assessing the completeness and accuracy of the calculations and journal entries associated with the refinancing.
Our Results Based on the results of our testing we consider the accounting treatment of the debt refinancing to be acceptable.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 31 August 2017 and of the Groups profit and of the Companys loss for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB and the Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Redefine International P.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 97 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
Refer to page 76 Audit Committee Report pages 108 and 109 accounting policy and pages 118 and 131 financial disclosures The key audit matter The Group has a significant and diversified portfolio across the UK and Europe and is therefore subject to the relevant tax legislation in a number of jurisdictions.
The Group encounters challenges by tax authorities on a range of tax matters during the normal course of business and recognises provisions for anticipated tax audit issues based on estimates of whether additional taxes will be due.
The calculation of these provisions is underpinned by judgemental assumptions as the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
How the matter was addressed in our audit In this area our audit procedures included among others including KPMG international and domestic taxation specialists in the Group audit team.
These specialists evaluate the assumptions and methodologies used by the Group and its taxation advisers in calculating the taxation provisions for the period.
Particular focus is placed on assumptions relating to provisions for uncertain tax positions specifically considering the taxation risks arising from the Groups operations when assessing the accounting for taxation related balances and applying sensitivity analysis to determine the appropriateness of key judgements and assessing the presentation and disclosure in respect of taxation related balances and considering whether the Groups disclosures reflect the risks inherent in the accounting for the taxation balances.
Our Results based on the results of our testing we consider the Groups treatment of uncertain tax positions to be acceptable.
Company financial statements Investment in subsidiary undertakings Refer to page 109 accounting policy and page 121 financial disclosures The key audit matter Investments in subsidiary undertakings are carried in the Companys separate financial statements at cost less impairment.
Impairments of these investments are determined by reference to the EPRA adjusted net assets of the Group.
Investment in subsidiary undertakings is significant as the subsidiarys performance can directly impact that of the Company.
How the matter was addressed in our audit In this area our audit procedures included among others assessing the carrying value of subsidiaries for any objective indicators of impairment and assessing the accuracy of managements fair value calculations.
Our Results based on the results of our testing we consider the carrying value of investments in subsidiary undertakings to be acceptable.
3 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit The materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 16.3 million 2016 16.7 million.
This has been calculated with reference to a benchmark of total assets of which it represents circa 1 per cent 2016 1 per cent which we consider to be one of the principal considerations for members of the Company in assessing the financial performance of the Group.
Redefine
International P. on the assets held.
Materiality for the Company financial statements as a whole was set at 6.4 million 2016 6.0 million determined with reference to a benchmark of Company total assets of which it represents 1 per cent 2016 1 per cent.
We reported to the Audit Committee all corrected and uncorrected misstatements we identified through our audit with a value in excess of 0.8 million 2016 0.8 million in addition to other audit misstatements below that threshold that we believe warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
The Group consists of a number of components all of which with the exception of the Groups 30.4 per cent 2016 25.3 per cent investment in RedefineBDL Hotel Group Limited are accounted for at the Groups head office in
The Group audit team performed the audit of all other components including the audit of the Company within the Group as if it were a single aggregated set of financial information.
These components represent 99.3 per cent 2016 99.3 per cent of total assets and 98.5 per cent 2016 80.2 per cent of Group profit before tax.
The audit was performed using the materiality level set out above.
The remaining 0.7 per cent 2016 0.7 per cent of total Group assets and 1.5 per cent 2016 19.8 per cent of Group profit before tax is represented by the Groups investment in RedefineBDL Hotel Group Limited which is considered immaterial to the Groups financial position.
4 We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors statement in Note 2 to the financial statements on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the Group and the Companys use of that basis for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements or the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 92 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 98 Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of Redefine International P.
5 We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The Directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and Directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the Directors report and in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation within the viability statement on page 17 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the Directors statement of principal risks describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the Directors explanation in the viability statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the viability statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit and the Directors statement where the Directors consider that the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the Annual Report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We are required to report to you if the Corporate Governance Statement does not properly disclose a departure from the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
6 Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 95 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and otherwise comply with the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud other irregularities or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud or other irregularities is higher than for one resulting from error as it may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal control and may involve any area of law and regulation not just those directly affecting the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
7 The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
N.
Marshall for and on behalf of Chartered Accountants Statutory Audit Firm 1 Harbourmaster Place
Dublin 1
26 October 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 99 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel Continuing operations Note m m m m
Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Other income Administrative costs and other fees Net operating incomeexpense Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Loss on revaluation of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of subsidiary undertaking Distributions from investment at fair value Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Amortisation of intangible assets Gain on disposal of other noncurrent assets held for sale Foreign exchange gain Intragroup transactions Settlement of loans Reversal of impairment of loan
Loss on disposal of investment at fair value Gain on disposal of subsidiary Foreign exchange gain on loans advanced Profitloss from operations Finance income Finance expense Other finance expense Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Net gain on sale of joint venture interests Net impairment of joint venture and associate interests 1516 0.1 0.6 Share of posttax lossprofit from joint ventures Share of posttax profit from associate 1620 1.1 1.7 Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of joint venture interest Profitloss before tax
Profitloss for the year Profitloss attributable to Equity holders of the Parent Noncontrolling interests Earnings per share Weighted average number of shares millions 1809.9 1637.2 1809.9 1637.2 Diluted weighted average number of shares millions 1811.9 1637.9 1811.9 1637.9 Basic earnings per share pence Diluted earnings per share pence Net gain on sale of joint venture interests relates to the disposal of the propertyowning subsidiaries of one of the Groups joint ventures Wichford VBG Holding S.
While the holding structure has been retained the business of the joint venture has been disposed of and Wichford VBG Holding S. holds only residual cash to settle working capital.
The net gain on sale includes 2.2 million of cumulative foreign currency translation that has been transferred to the income statement as part of the disposal.
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Income statements for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 100 Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel Continuing operations Note m m m m Profitloss for the year Other comprehensive incomeexpense Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of subsidiaries Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of joint venture interests Foreign currency translation on subsidiary foreign operations Foreign currency translation on joint ventures held by subsidiary foreign operations Total other comprehensive income Total comprehensive incomeexpense for the year Total comprehensive incomeexpense attributable to Equity holders of the Parent Noncontrolling interests The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Financial statements Statements of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 101 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Group Company
Represented
31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel Note m m m m Noncurrent assets Investment property 12 1494.9 1396.4 Investment in subsidiary undertakings Investment at fair value through profit or loss Investment in joint ventures Loans to joint ventures Investment in associate Intangible assets Property plant and equipment Derivative financial instruments Trade and other receivables Total noncurrent assets 1529.0 1480.1 539.9 539.0 Current assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Noncurrent assets held for sale Total current assets Total assets 1624.6 1538.8 635.6 595.4 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings including finance leases Derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Total noncurrent liabilities Current liabilities Borrowings including finance leases Trade and other payables Tax liabilities Total current liabilities Total liabilities Net assets
Share capital Share premium Other components of equity Total attributable to equity holders of the Parent Noncontrolling interests Total equity The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 26 October 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Mike Watters Donald Grant
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer Balance sheets as at 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 102 Financial statements Statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 August 2017
Foreign attributable Reverse Retained currency to equity Non Share Share acquisition profit Other translation holders of controlling Total capital premium reserve loss reserves reserve the Parent interests equity
Note m m m m m m m m m Balance at 1 September 2016 Profit for the year Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of joint venture interests Foreign currency translation on subsidiary foreign operations Foreign currency translation on joint venture interests held by subsidiary foreign operations 15      1.0 1.0  1.0 Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with equity holders of the Parent Dividends paid Scrip dividends Release of reverse acquisition reserve 26   134.3 134.3 Fair value of sharebased payments 33     1.0  1.0  1.0 Changes in ownership interests in subsidiaries Reclassification of noncontrolling interest shareholder loans to liabilities Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests Noncontrolling interests on acquisition of control of former joint venture Acquisition of noncontrolling interests Balance at 31 August 2017 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 103 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 August 2016
Foreign attributable
Share Share acquisition Retained Other translation holders of controlling Total capital premium reserve loss reserves reserve the Parent interests equity
Note m m m m m m m m m Balance at 1 September 2015 Profit for the year Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of subsidiary Foreign currency translation on subsidiary foreign operations Foreign currency translation on joint venture interests held by subsidiary foreign operations 15      8.6 8.6  8.6 Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with equity holders of the Parent Shares issued for cash Dividends paid Scrip dividends Fair value of sharebased payments Changes in ownership interests in subsidiaries Decrease in noncontrolling interests Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests Acquisition of noncontrolling interests Balance at 31 August 2016 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 104
Foreign attributable Reverse Retained currency to equity Non Share Share acquisition profit Other translation holders of controlling Total capital premium reserve loss reserves reserve the Parent interests equity
Note m m m m m m m m m Balance at 1 September 2015 Loss and total comprehensive expense for the year Transactions with equity holders of the Parent Shares issued for cash Dividends paid Scrip dividends Fair value of sharebased payments Balance at 1 September 2016 Loss and total comprehensive expense for the year Transactions with equity holders of the Parent Dividends paid Scrip dividends Fair value of sharebased payments Balance at 31 August 2017 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Financial statements Statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 105 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Statements of cash flows for the year ended 31 August 2017 Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel Continuing operations Note m m m m Cash generated from operations Interest received Interest paid Net tax paid Net cash inflow from operating activities Cash flows from investing activities Net cash disposed on sale of subsidiary Purchase and development of investment property Net proceeds on sale of investment property Net proceeds on sale of investment property held for sale Distributions from investments at fair value Disposal of investment at fair value Acquisition of investment at fair value Net proceeds received on sale of joint venture interests Acquisition of control of joint venture Cash transferred on acquisition of control of joint venture Increase in loans to joint ventures Decrease in loans to joint ventures Distributions from associate Disposal of other noncurrent assets held for sale Increase in loan to external party Increase in loans to related parties Decrease in loans to related parties Cash flows from intragroup investing activities Investment in subsidiary undertakings Deferred consideration on acquisition of subsidiary undertakings Distributions from subsidiary undertakings Net cash inflowoutflow from investing activities Cash flows from financing activities Issue of share capital Share issue costs paid Dividends paid to equity holders Proceeds from borrowings Repayment of borrowings Payment of Aviva share of profit Settlement of Aviva profit share right on refinancing Other finance expense Derivative financial instruments purchased and settled Dividends paid and loans repaid to noncontrolling interests Acquisitions from noncontrolling interests Movement in restricted cash and cash equivalents Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities Net increasedecrease in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents Effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash and cash equivalents Unrestricted cash and cash equivalents at 1 September Unrestricted cash and cash equivalents at 31 August Restricted cash and cash equivalents at 31 August Cash and cash equivalents at 31 August Net proceeds of 18.7 million received during the year to 31 August 2017 on disposal of joint ventures interest of Wichford VBG Holding S.
49 per cent share of the proceeds received of 38.2 million after the deduction of the Performance Fee of 3.4 million gross cash proceeds 41.6 million and includes the repayment of loans advanced by the Group to the joint venture of 12.5 million.
The Performance Fee received has been separately presented under operating activities.
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 106 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements for the year ended 31 August 2017 General information Redefine International P.
C and was reregistered under the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 on 3 December 2013 Registered Number V.
On 4 December 2013 the Company converted to a UKREIT and transferred its tax residence from the Isle of Man to the United Kingdom UK.
The Company holds a primary listing on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange LSE and a secondary listing on the Main Board of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange JSE.
Significant accounting policies 2.1 Statement of compliance The Group financial statements for the year ended 31 August 2017 have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
The Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB and with those parts of the Isle of Man Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The relevant new standards amendments and interpretations that have been adopted as applicable by the Group and the Company during the year are set out below.
Annual improvements to IFRSs 20122014 cycle IFRS 5 NonCurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations amendment IFRS 5 IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures amendment IFRS 7 Other amendments IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements amendment IAS 1 IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment amendment IAS 16 IAS 27 Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements amendment IAS 27 IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures amendment IAS 28 IAS 38 Intangible Assets amendment IAS 38 IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statement amendment IFRS 10 IFRS 11 Joint Arrangements amendment IFRS 11 IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities amendment IFRS 12 The adoption of these improvements and amendments has not had a material impact on the financial statements of the Group or Company.
The accounting policies otherwise applied are the same as those applied in the audited financial statements as at and for the year ended 31 August 2016.
Disclosed in the following table are the relevant new standards amendments and interpretations that have been issued by the IASB but are not yet effective or have not been early adopted.
The impact of these improvements and amendments on the financial statements is being assessed.
Effective for annual periods beginning on or after Annual improvements to IFRSs 20142016 cycle IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities amendment 1 January 2017 IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures amendment 1 January 2018 Other amendments IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows amendment IAS 7 1 January 2017 IAS 12 Income Taxes amendment IAS 12 1 January 2017 IFRS 2 ShareBased Payment amendment IFRS 2 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments amendment IFRS 9 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 1 January 2018 IAS 40 Investment Property amendment IAS 40 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 1 January 2019
IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration 1 January 2018 IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments 1 January 2019 2.2 Basis of preparation The financial statements are presented in Great British Pounds which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentational currency of the Group and rounded to the nearest hundred thousand pounds.
They are prepared using the historical cost basis except for investment property certain assets held for sale derivative financial instruments and financial instruments designated at fair value through profit and loss all of which are carried at fair value.
Going concern The Directors are satisfied that both the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and for this reason the financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
Representation of prior year comparatives Certain presentational changes have been made to the comparative balance sheet to ensure consistency with the current year.
This has resulted in the reclassification of tenant lease incentives of 3.8 million Group and other receivables of 0.9 million Group from current assets to noncurrent assets.
In line with the requirements of IAS 1 Paragraph 60 these amounts would not have been settled or recovered within 12 months of the balance sheet date as at 31 August 2016.
In addition current tax liabilities of 2.4 million Group and 1.3 million Company as at 31 August 2016 have been presented separately on the face of the balance sheet in accordance with IAS 1 Paragraph 54 n.
Current tax liabilities were previously included in trade and other payables.
2.3 Key judgements and estimates The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of judgements and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the reporting date and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the year.
Although these estimates are based on the Directors best knowledge of the amount event or actions actual results may differ materially from those estimates.
The principal areas where such judgements and estimates have been made are detailed below Investment property valuation The Group uses valuations determined by independent valuers in accordance with IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement IFRS 13 as the fair value of its investment property.
The valuations are based upon assumptions including estimated rental values future rental income anticipated maintenance costs future development costs and appropriate market yields.
The valuers also make reference to market evidence of transaction prices for similar properties.
Further details are provided in Note 12.
Corporate and property acquisitions When control is obtained over an entity or group of entities judgement is required in determining whether the transaction constitutes a business combination with reference to the inputs processes and outputs of the subsidiary or subsidiary group acquired.
If it is determined that the transaction is a business combination the requirements of IFRS 3 Business Combinations IFRS 3 are applied.
In addition when a property is acquired directly the Directors have regard to the substance of the transaction and whether related processes and activities have been assumed which would represent a business.
When such an acquisition is considered to be the acquisition of a business the requirements of IFRS 3 apply as above otherwise the transaction is treated as an acquisition of a property asset in line with IAS 40.
Classification of UK Hotels as investment property The UK Hotels are held for capital appreciation and to earn rental income.
Apart from one of the properties the hotels have been let to Redefine Hotel Management Limited RHML and Redefine Earls Court Management Limited RECML on lease terms which are subject to annual review.
At each review the revised rent is set with reference to the forecast EBITDA of the hotels.
RHML and RECML run the hotels operating business and are therefore exposed to fluctuations in the underlying trading performance of each hotel under management.
They are responsible for the key decision making of the business operations and the daytoday upkeep of the properties.
The Group cumulatively holds a 30.4 per cent shareholding in RedefineBDL Hotel Group Limited RedefineBDL which in turn controls RHML and
Having considered the guidance in IFRS 10 the respective rights of each of the shareholders in RedefineBDL and the relative size of the Groups shareholding the Directors have determined that the Group has the ability to exercise significant influence over RedefineBDL.
The Group does not control RedefineBDL and hence does not control RHML or RECML.
The investment in RedefineBDL is therefore classified as an associate.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 107 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information If the Group loses control of a subsidiary the Group derecognises the assets including any goodwill and liabilities of the former subsidiary at their carrying amounts at the date control is lost derecognises the carrying amount of any noncontrolling interests in the former subsidiary at the date control is lost including amounts of other comprehensive income attributed to noncontrolling interests recognises the fair value of any consideration received reclassifies to profit or loss or transfers directly to retained earnings amounts recognised in other comprehensive income in relation to the subsidiary on the same basis as would be required if the Parent had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities recognises any investment retained in the former subsidiary at its fair value at the date when control is lost and recognises any resulting difference of the above items as a gain or loss in the income statement.
The Group subsequently accounts for any investment retained in the former subsidiary in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments IAS 39 or when appropriate in accordance with IAS 28.
For a change in the Groups interest in a subsidiary that does not result in a loss of control the Group adjusts the carrying amounts of the controlling and noncontrolling interest to reflect the changes in their relative interests.
Any difference between the value of the noncontrolling interest acquired or disposed of and the fair value of the consideration is recognised directly in equity and attributed to the equity holders of the Parent.
Transactions eliminated on consolidation Intragroup balances transactions any unrealised gains and losses or income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the Group financial statements.
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
Investment in associates and joint ventures Associates are entities over whose financial and operating policies the Group has the ability to exercise significant influence but not control and which are neither subsidiaries nor joint arrangements.
The Group classifies its interests in joint arrangements as either joint operations or joint ventures depending on the Groups contractual rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities.
When making this assessment the Group considers the structure of the arrangements the legal form of any separate vehicles the contractual terms and other facts and circumstances specific to each transaction.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are initially recorded at cost and subsequently increased or decreased each year by the Groups share of the postacquisition net profit or loss and other movements recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
The Groups share of the posttax results of the associate or joint venture reflects the Groups proportionate interest in the relevant undertaking.
The Group is not involved with the operation of the hotel management business and there are limited transactions between the two entities.
As a result the hotels are classified as investment property in accordance with IAS 40.
Classification of the Groups investment in International Hotel Properties Limited IHL at fair value through profit or loss On 14 October 2015 the Group acquired by way of private placement 3.8 million shares in the newly listed group International Hotel Properties Limited formerly International Hotel Group Limited for 3.8 million.
On the date of listing this investment represented 25.4 per cent of the entitys issued share capital and the investment was recognised as an associate of the Group under the equity method.
On 20 October 2015 the Group ceased to recognise IHL as an associate when its shareholding was diluted to 13.2 per cent and the investment was reclassified as a financial instrument at fair value through profit or loss.
At 31 August 2016 the Group held a 15.5 per cent interest in IHL.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the Groups shareholding increased by 1.7 per cent to 17.2 per cent.
Refer to Note 14 for further details on changes in the Groups ownership interests in IHL.
The degree of judgement relating to the classification as a financial instrument at fair value through profit or loss has increased given that the Group currently has representation on IHLs board of directors.
In drawing their conclusion the Directors have considered the criteria for significant influence in paragraphs 59 of IAS 28 the relative size of the Groups shareholding and the fact the Group does not have the right to appoint a director.
Having considered all the facts and circumstances the Directors believe that the designation of the Groups investment as a financial asset at fair value through profit or loss continues to be appropriate as at 31 August 2017.
Refer to Note 38 for changes to the Groups interests in IHL subsequent to the balance sheet date.
Fair value of restructured liabilities New borrowings or existing borrowings which have been substantially modified are recognised at fair value.
The determination of fair value involves the application of judgement.
The Group determines fair value by discounting the cash flows associated with the liability at a market discount rate.
The key judgement surrounds the determination of an appropriate market benchmark.
Management determine the discount rate on a loan by loan basis having regard to the term duration and security arrangements of the new liability and an estimation of the current rates charged in the market for similar instruments issued to companies of similar sizes.
This judgement is made more difficult given the bespoke nature of certain loans obtained by the
Any difference between the nominal value of the loan and its fair value equivalent will be recognised immediately in the income statement insofar as the fair value measurement is based on observable inputs.
The deemed fair value will subsequently be accreted through profit or loss over the term of the loan using the effective interest rate method.
Aviva profit share and capital appreciation rights As part of the Aviva debt restructure in 2013 Aviva the lender with security over the Groups shopping centre asset Grand Arcade Wigan had a right under the facility agreement to participate in 50 per cent of the valuation uplifts of the property in excess of the value of the drawn debt capital appreciation right.
Once the value of the property exceeded 90 million Aviva had the additional right to realise tranches of the excess valuation at any time with corresponding reductions to their right to profit share participation.
Up to and including the year ended 31 August 2016 the Group recognised a financial liability in respect of Avivas right to participate in the profits of the shopping centre.
However no provision was recognised in respect of Avivas capital appreciation right as a reliable estimate of the provision could not be made and it was not considered probable that a payment to Aviva would be required.
The contractual obligation was disclosed as a contingent liability.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the debt was again restructured and both Avivas existing capital appreciation and profit participation rights were formally extinguished.
2.4 Accounting policies Basis of consolidation Investment in subsidiary undertakings Group A subsidiary undertaking is an investee controlled by the Group.
The Group controls an investee when it has power over the investee is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Subsidiaries are consolidated in the Groups financial statements from the date on which control commences until the date that control ceases.
The
Group reassesses whether it controls a subsidiary when facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more elements of control.
The Group accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method under which the consideration transferred is measured at fair value and acquisition related costs are recognised in the income statement as incurred.
Any excess in the purchase price of business combinations over the Groups share of the fair value of the assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired is recognised as goodwill while any discount received is credited immediately to the income statement.
If it is determined that an acquisition does not constitute a business combination the transaction is accounted for as an asset acquisition and the relevant IFRSs are applied in the recognition of a group of assets and liabilities.
No goodwill arises on initial recognition but any premium paid or discount received is allocated to the individual identifiable assets and liabilities based on their relative fair values.
The Group recognises noncontrolling interests on the basis of their proportionate share in the subsidiarys identifiable net assets.
Noncontrolling interests are presented separately from the equity of the owners of the Parent on the balance sheet.
Profit or loss and total comprehensive income for the year attributable to noncontrolling interests are presented separately in the income statement and the statement of comprehensive income.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 108 Significant accounting policies continued 2.4 Accounting policies continued Basis of consolidation continued Investment in associates and joint ventures continued Goodwill arising on the acquisition of an associate or joint venture is included in the carrying amount of the investment.
When the Groups share of losses in an associate or joint venture has reduced the carrying amount to zero including any other unsecured receivables the Group does not recognise further losses unless it has incurred obligations to make payments on behalf of the associate or joint venture.
As goodwill forms part of the carrying amount of the net investment it is not recognised separately and it is not tested for impairment separately.
Instead the entire amount of the investment in an associate or joint venture is tested for impairment as a single asset where there is objective evidence that the investment may be impaired.
Reversals of impairment are recorded as an adjustment to the investment balance to the extent that the recoverable amount of the associate or joint venture increases.
Capital contributions result from the nonreciprocal transfer of resources to an associate or joint venture without a corresponding increase in the Groups equity interest.
Capital contributions are also accounted for as an increase in the Groups net investment and are subject to impairment.
Unrealised gains and losses arising from transactions with associates and joint ventures are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in those entities.
Where the Group obtains significant influence or joint control over an investment that was previously accounted for as a financial instrument under IAS 39 the Groups previously held interest is remeasured to fair value through profit or loss.
The deemed cost of the associate or joint venture is the fair value of the existing investment plus the fair value of any consideration given to achieve significant influence or joint control.
When the Group ceases to have significant influence or joint control it is accounted for as a disposal of the entire interest under the equity method with a resulting gain or loss being recognised in the income statement.
Any retained interest in the investment at the date when significant influence or joint control is lost is recognised at fair value on initial recognition of a financial asset or when appropriate treated as the deemed cost on initial recognition of an investment in an associate.
Any gain or loss on the dilution of an interest in an equity accounted investee is calculated as the difference between the carrying amounts of the investment in the equity accounted investee immediately before and after the transaction that resulted in the dilution and is recognised in the income statement.
Intangible assets Intangible assets arising on business combinations are carried at cost less impairment.
Amortisation of intangible assets is recognised in profit or loss on a straightline basis over their estimated useful life from the date that they are available for use.
Currency translation Foreign currency transactions Transactions in foreign currencies are translated at the foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated to the functional currency at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that date.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies that are stated at fair value are translated to the functional currency at the foreign exchange rates ruling at the date that the values are determined.
Foreign operations Exchange differences arising from the translation of the net investment in foreign operations are taken to the foreign currency translation reserve.
Cumulative exchange differences are subsequently released to the income statement upon disposal.
On consolidation the balance sheets of foreign subsidiaries are translated at the closing rate and the income statement and statement of comprehensive income are translated at the transaction date rates or at an average rate for the year where this is a reasonable approximation.
Revenue recognition Rental income including fixed stepped rent is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Tenant lease incentives including rentfree periods granted and cash contributions paid which are an integral part of securing leases are amortised as a reduction of rental income over the lease term.
Surrender premiums that are paid by the Group to tenants to vacate a property are also treated as lease incentives if the surrender results in an enhanced future rental income stream.
Contingent rents are recognised as they arise.
Rent reviews are recognised as income or as a reduction thereof from the date it is probable that the revised terms will be agreed.
Surrender premiums paid by the tenant to terminate a lease early are recognised immediately in the income statement.
Management fees receivable from joint ventures are recognised in other income during the year in which the services are rendered.
Performance fees are recognised when the conditions are satisfied.
Dividends from listed property investments are recognised on the date the Groups right to receive payment is established.
Dividends from subsidiary undertakings are also recognised on the date the Companys right to receive payment is established.
Interest earned on loans receivable and on cash invested is recognised on an accruals basis using the effective interest rate method.
Service charges Where the Group invoices budgeted service charges to tenants amounts received are not recognised as income as the risks in relation to the subsequent provision of actual goods and services are primarily borne by the tenants during the service charge period.
Consequently amounts received are recognised as a liability on the balance sheet and reduced by the actual service charge expenditure incurred.
Any nonrecoverable service charge expenses suffered by the Group as a result of void or capped units are included within rental expense in the income statement.
Employee benefits and sharebased payments Employee benefits such as salaries and other benefits are accounted for on an accruals basis over the period during which employees have provided services.
Bonuses are recognised to the extent that a legal or constructive obligation to employees can be measured reliably.
Sharebased incentives are provided to certain employees and Executive Directors for services rendered.
The sharebased payments are all equitysettled.
The fair value of each award granted is calculated at the grant date using the Monte Carlo and BlackScholes valuation methodologies.
The fair value is not subsequently remeasured and is recognised in the sharebased payment reserve in equity on a straightline basis over the vesting period as adjusted for the estimate of the awards that will eventually vest at each reporting date.
The corresponding compensation cost is recognised as an administrative expense over the vesting period.
At the end of the performance period a reserves transfer occurs with no further charge reflected in the income statement.
Income taxes Income tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity in which case it is recognised in other comprehensive income.
Current tax is based on taxable profit or loss for the year and is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the income statement because it excludes items of income that are not taxable or expenses that are not tax deductible.
Deferred tax is recognised using the balance sheet liability method providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and their relative tax base.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
The following temporary differences are not provided for those arising from goodwill not deductible for tax purposes those arising from the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting or taxable profit and those relating to investments in subsidiaries and joint ventures where the timing of the reversal can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 109 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilised and is reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.
Deferred tax liabilities are provided only to the extent that there are not sufficient tax losses to shield the charge.
Investment property In accordance with IAS 40 Paragraph 14 judgement may be required to determine whether a property qualifies as investment property.
The Group has developed criteria so that it can exercise judgement consistently in recognising investment property namely property held for longterm capital appreciation property owned or held under finance leases and leased out under one or more operating leases and property that is being developed for future use as investment property.
The recognition and classification of property as investment property principally assumes that the Group does not retain significant exposure to the variation in cash flows arising from the underlying operations of tenants and will recover the carrying value through continuing rental income streams and longerterm capital appreciation.
Investment properties are initially recognised at cost including directly attributable transaction costs and subsequently measured at fair value.
The portfolios are valued on a biannual basis by external independent and professionally qualified valuers having recent experience in the location and category of the property being valued.
The fair values are based on market values being the estimated amount for which the property could be exchanged on a highest and best use basis between a willing buyer and seller in an arms length transaction.
The valuations are determined by considering comparable and timely market transactions for sales and lettings and having regard for the current leases in place.
In the case of lettings this includes consideration of the aggregate net annual market rents achievable for the property and associated costs.
A yield which reflects the risks inherent in the future cash flows is applied to the net annual rents to arrive at the property valuation.
The biannual valuations of investment property are based upon estimates and subjective judgements that may vary materially from the actual values and sales prices that may be realised by the Group upon ultimate disposal.
The critical assumptions made in determining the valuations have been included in Note 12 to the financial statements.
In determining fair value the market value of the property as determined by the independent valuers is reduced by the carrying amount of tenant lease incentives and increased by the carrying amount of fixed head leases.
Gains or losses arising from changes in the fair value of investment property are included in the income statement in the year in which they arise.
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised to investment property when the expenditure incurred enhances the future economic benefits associated with the property such as enhanced future rental income capital appreciation or both.
Contributions to tenant refurbishments under lease arrangements are treated as tenant lease incentives and amortised against rental income over the term of the lease.
As the fair value model is applied property under construction or redevelopment for future use as investment property continues to be measured at fair value unless the fair value cannot be measured reliably and the property is measured at cost.
All finance costs directly associated with the acquisition and construction of a qualifying development property are capitalised during the period of active development until practical completion.
The rate applied is the actual rate payable on specific borrowings or the weighted average cost of debt of the Group for development spend that is financed out of general funds.
Acquisition and disposals of investment property are recognised when significant risks and rewards attached to the property have transferred to or from the Group.
This will ordinarily occur on exchange of contracts unless there are significant conditions pending completion.
Such transactions are recognised when these conditions are satisfied.
The profit or loss on disposal of investment property is recognised separately in the income statement and is the difference between the net sales proceeds and the opening fair value asset plus any capital expenditure during the period to disposal.
A property ceases to be recognised as investment property and is transferred at its fair value to property held for sale when it meets the criteria of IFRS 5.
Property held by the Group under longterm leases are also treated as investment property in line with IAS 40.
The Groups leasehold interests are all classified as finance leases as substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the property have transferred to the Group.
Finance leases are recognised as both an asset and a liability and are measured at the lower of fair value and the present value of any future minimum lease payments.
The finance lease obligation to the superior leaseholder is recognised within borrowings on the balance sheet.
Lease payments are apportioned between the finance charges and the capital reduction of the lease obligation so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability over the lease term.
Finance charges are charged through profit or loss as they arise.
Investment in subsidiary undertakings Company Investments in subsidiary undertakings are carried in the Companys separate financial statements at cost less impairment losses if any.
Impairment losses are determined with reference to the undertakings fair value.
Fair value is derived from a review of the EPRA adjusted net assets of Redefine International P.
Group.
Impairment reversals are recognised on a consistent basis as the original charge and do not exceed cost.
On disposal of subsidiary undertakings the difference between the net disposal proceeds and its carrying amount is recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
Financial instruments Recognition and de recognition A financial instrument is recognised when the Group or Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are derecognised when the contractual rights to the cash flows from those assets expire or when the assets are transferred to another party without retaining control or substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.
Regular way purchases and sales of financial assets are accounted for at trade date.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the obligations specified in the contract expire.
Nonderivative financial instruments Nonderivative financial instruments are recognised initially at fair value plus for those instruments not designated at fair value through profit or loss any directly attributable transaction costs.
Nonderivative financial instruments comprise investments in equity securities trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents loans and borrowings and trade and other payables.
Loan receivables and payables are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Investments at fair value through profit or loss An instrument is classified at fair value through profit or loss if it is held for trading or is designated as such upon initial recognition.
Financial instruments are designated as fair value through profit or loss if the Group or Company manages such investments and makes purchase and sale decisions based on their fair value.
Upon initial recognition attributable transaction costs are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
Financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss comprise equity securities and are measured at fair value with changes therein at each reporting date recognised in the income statement.
Fair values are determined by reference to their quoted bid price at the reporting date.
Derivative financial instruments Derivative financial instruments are held to manage interest rate risk exposures.
Derivatives are recognised initially at fair value on the date the Group or Company becomes party to the contract any attributable transaction costs are recognised in the income statement as incurred.
Derivatives are subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date and changes therein are accounted for in the income statement and presented under change in fair value of derivative financial instruments.
The Group does not apply hedge accounting.
Impairment of financial assets Financial assets not carried at fair value through profit or loss are assessed at each reporting date to determine whether there is objective evidence of impairment.
A financial asset is impaired if objective evidence indicates that a loss event has occurred and factors include adverse changes in the payment status of a debtor or issuer default or delinquency by a debtor restructuring of an amount due on terms that the Group or Company would not consider otherwise potential bankruptcy of a debtor or issuer and economic conditions that correlate with defaults or the disappearance of an active market for a security.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 110 Significant accounting policies continued 2.4 Accounting policies continued Financial instruments continued Impairment of financial assets continued An impairment loss is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount of the financial asset and the present value of the estimated future cash flows discounted at the assets original effective interest rate.
When a subsequent event objectively causes the amount of impairment loss to decrease the decrease in impairment loss is calculated on a basis consistent with the impairment charge but the carrying value after any reversal must not exceed the original carrying value.
Impairment losses and reversals are recognised in the income statement and reflected in an allowance account against loans and receivables.
Finance income on impaired interestbearing assets continues to be recognised.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances on hand cash deposited with financial institutions and shortterm call deposits.
Cash and cash equivalents are recognised at fair value and have maturities of less than three months.
Restricted cash comprises cash deposits that are restricted until the fulfilment of certain conditions.
Noncurrent assets and disposal groups held for sale A noncurrent asset or a disposal group comprising assets and liabilities is classified as held for sale if it is expected that the carrying value will be recovered principally through sale rather than through continuing use and the sale is highly probable.
The asset or disposal group must be available for immediate sale be actively marketed at a reasonable approximation to fair value and the sale must have the appropriate level of management commitment.
The sale may complete beyond a period of one year from classification so long as there is sufficient evidence of a firm commitment from both parties and the circumstances of the delay are beyond the Groups or Companys control.
Where there is commitment to a sale plan involving the loss of control of a subsidiary the loss of joint control of a joint venture or significant influence over a joint venture and the criteria set out above are met the Group classifies all the assets and liabilities of that subsidiary or the equity accounted investment in the joint venture or associate as held for sale.
This classification is appropriate regardless of whether a noncontrolling interest will be retained after the sale.
Where significant influence over an associate will not be lost only that portion of the investment for which there is a commitment to sell shall be reclassified as held for sale.
On initial classification as held for sale noncurrent assets and disposal groups are ordinarily measured at the lower of the previous carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell with any adjustments recognised in the income statement and subsequently remeasured at each reporting date.
Certain assets such as financial assets within the scope of IAS 39 and investment property in the scope of IAS 40 continue to be measured in accordance with those standards.
Gains and losses on remeasurement and impairment losses subsequent to classification as held for sale are presented within continuing operations in the income statement unless they meet the definition of a discontinued operation.
Noncurrent assets held for sale are presented separately under current assets on the balance sheet.
Comparatives are not reclassified.
Borrowings
Interestbearing borrowings are recognised initially at fair value less directly attributable transaction costs.
Any difference between the transaction price and the deemed fair value of the borrowing is treated as a gain or loss in the income statement when the determination of fair value is based on observable inputs.
Subsequent to initial recognition interestbearing borrowings are measured at amortised cost.
Any differences between cost and the redemption value as a result of transaction costs incurred or fair value adjustments are recognised in the income statement over the contractual term of the borrowings on an effective interest rate basis.
A financial liability is derecognised when it is extinguished.
This may happen when full repayment is made to the lender the borrower is legally released from primary responsibility for the financial liability or where there is an exchange of debt instruments with substantially different terms or a substantial modification to the existing terms of a debt instrument.
In the event of a substantial modification of terms any difference between the carrying amount of the original liability and the consideration paid is recognised in the income statement.
The consideration paid includes nonfinancial assets transferred and the assumption of liabilities including the new modified financial liability.
The modified borrowing is recognised initially at fair value and subsequently carried at amortised cost under the effective interest rate method.
Any costs or fees incurred are recognised as part of the gain or loss on extinguishment.
Where existing borrowings are exchanged for new or amended borrowings and the terms are not substantially different the new borrowings are recognised initially at the carrying amount of the existing borrowings.
Any costs or fees incurred adjust the carrying amount of the borrowings and are amortised over the remaining term.
Ongoing finance costs and debt servicing payments are recognised in the income statement on an accruals basis using the effective interest rate method.
Provisions capital commitments and contingent liabilities A provision is recognised if as a result of a past event the Group or Company has a present legal or constructive obligation that can be estimated reliably and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
Provisions are determined by discounting the expected cash flows to present value using an appropriate discount rate that reflects the risks specific to the liability.
Where it is not probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required or the amount cannot be estimated reliably the obligation is disclosed as a contingent liability unless the probability of outflow of economic benefits is remote.
Capital commitments are disclosed when the Group or Company has a contractual future obligation to a third party which has not been provided for at the balance sheet date.
Share capital Ordinary share capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
External costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares net of tax are shown as a deduction from any recognised share premium.
Dividends
Dividends to shareholders are recognised when they become legally payable.
In the case of interim dividends this is when the dividends are declared by the Board.
Earnings per share The Group presents basic and diluted earnings per share EPS data for its ordinary shares.
Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Diluted EPS is determined by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding adjusted for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
In line with the JSE Listing Requirements the Group also presents headline earnings per share.
Segmental reporting An operating segment is a component of the Group that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and in respect of which it may incur expenses including revenues and expenses that relate to transactions with any of the Groups other components.
An operating segments operating results are reviewed regularly by the Chief Operating Decision Maker to inform decisions about resources to be allocated to the segment and to assess its performance and for which discrete financial information is available as disclosed in Note 3.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 111 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Segmental reporting As required by IFRS 8 Operating Segments IFRS 8 the information provided to the Board which is the Chief Operating Decision Maker has been classified into the following segments UK Retail the Groups portfolio of shopping centres retail parks and other retail assets UK Commercial the Groups portfolio of offices roadside service stations and logistics distribution centres UK Hotels the Groups hotel portfolio which comprises eight hotels in Greater London and SouthEast England and one hotel in Edinburgh Scotland the Groups 30.4 per cent associate interest in RedefineBDL 5.1 per cent of which is classified as held for sale.
RedefineBDL i s an independent hotel management company engaged in developing and managing a diverse portfolio of hotels in partnership with reputable international hotel brands.
RedefineBDL also leases and manages all of the Groups hotel properties except for the Enfield Travelodge and the Groups 17.2 per cent interest in IHL a hotel and leisure focused property investment company listed on the Euro MTF Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange LuxSE and the AltX of the JSE Europe the Groups portfolio in Germany.
The portfolio is comprised of shopping centres discount supermarkets and until 1 January 2017 Governmentlet offices.
In the comparative segmental income statement the Groups results from the last legacy asset The Hague which was dis posed on 31 August 2016 are also included and Other the Groups holding and management companies that carry out the head office and centralised asset management activities of the Group.
Management information as presented to the Chief Operating Decision Maker is prepared on a proportionately consolidated basis.
Segmental reporting is therefore reported in line with management information with the Groups share of joint ventures presented linebyline.
Joint venture adjustments are disclosed to reconcile segmental performance and position to the Group financial statements.
Joint
UK UK UK Venture IFRS Segmental income statement Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Other Total adjustments Total for the year ended 31 August 2017 m m m m m m m m Continuing operations
Rental income Other income Distributions from investment at fair value Total revenue Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Other income Lossgain on revaluation of investment property Loss on revaluation of investment property held for sale 3.9     3.9  3.9 Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property held for sale Distributions from investment at fair value Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Finance income on loans to joint ventures Finance income Finance expense Other finance income and expense Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Group gain on sale of joint venture interests Joint venture loss on sale of subsidiaries Impairment of investment in associate Share of posttax profit from associate Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of joint venture interest Total per reportable segment Unallocated income and expenses Administrative costs and other fees Amortisation of intangible assets Profit before tax
Joint venture adjustments Movement of losses restricted in joint ventures Reversal of impairment of loans to joint ventures Share of posttax loss from joint ventures IFRS profit for the year 69.6  69.6 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 112 Segmental reporting continued Other income includes management fee income from joint ventures of 3.8 million on an IFRS basis of which 3.4 million relates to the net Performance Fee on disposal of joint venture interests refer to Note 5.
On a proportionate basis and for segmental reporting purposes the net Performance Fee of 1.6 million has been recognised in other income.
The Group share of the total joint venture investment management expense of 2.0 million has been reclassified from administrative costs and other fees.
The 5.6 million gain recognised by the Group and the loss of 0.7 million recognised by the joint venture relate to the share sale of the propertyowning subsidiaries of Wichford VBG Holding S. on 1 January 2017.
The net gain on sale of 4.9 million has been recognised as a single line item within the Group income statement under Net gain on sale of joint venture interests refer to Note 10.
Unallocated income and expenses are items incurred centrally which are neither directly attributable nor can be reasonably allocated to individual segments.
As detailed in Note 15 the Groups joint venture interest in 26 Esplanade No 1 Limited the Esplanade has been reduced to Nil in the financial statements in line with IAS 28.
On a proportionate basis the Groups share in the net liabilities of the Esplanade are recognised linebyline.
Movements in the losses of the Esplanade that are not recognised on an equity accounted basis during each reporting period are presented to reconcile segmental information to the IFRS statements.
Joint
UK UK UK Venture IFRS Segmental balance sheet Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Total adjustments Total as at 31 August 2017 m m m m m m m Investment property Investment at fair value through profit or loss Investment in associate Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Noncurrent assets held for sale Borrowings including finance leases Trade and other payables Segmental net assets Unallocated assets and liabilities Other noncurrent assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Net derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Trade and other payables Current tax liabilities Joint venture adjustments Joint venture noncontrolling interest Cumulative losses restricted in joint ventures Investment in joint ventures Loans to joint ventures IFRS net assets As detailed in Note 15 the Groups interest in the Esplanade has been reduced to Nil in the financial statements in line with IAS 28.
On a proportionate basis the Groups share in the net liabilities of the Esplanade are recognised linebyline.
The cumulative losses of this joint venture that the Grou p has not recognised on an equity accounted basis at the reporting date are presented to reconcile segmental information to the IFRS statements.
Joint
UK UK UK Venture IFRS Other segmental information Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Total adjustments Total as at 31 August 2017 m m m m m m m Additions to investment property during the year per reportable segment Capitalised expenditure Capitalised finance costs Acquisition of control of former joint venture
UK UK UK
Other segmental information Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Other Total adjustments Total for the year ended 31 August 2017 m m m m m m m m Intersegmental revenue and expense Management fee income Management fee expense Intersegmental revenue and expense relate to intercompany investment management fees that eliminate on consolidation.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 113 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information
UK UK UK Venture IFRS Segmental income statement Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Other Total adjustments Total for the year ended 31 August 2016 m m m m m m m m Continuing operations
Rental income Other income Distributions from investment at fair value Total revenue Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Other income Lossgain on revaluation of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of subsidiary Distributions from investment at fair value Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Gain on disposal of noncurrent assets held for sale Foreign exchange gain Finance income on loans to joint ventures Finance income Finance expense Other finance expense Gain on financial liabilities Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Impairment of investment in associate Share of posttax profit from associate Total per reportable segment Unallocated income and expenses Administrative costs and other fees Amortisation of intangible assets Profit before tax
Joint venture adjustments Movement of losses restricted in joint ventures Reversal of impairment of loans to joint ventures Share of posttax profit from joint ventures IFRS profit for the year Other income in the Other segment includes management fee income from joint ventures of 0.7 million.
Refer to Note 32 for further details.
Included in lossgain on revaluation of investment property is 22.6 million of costs incurred on the acquisition of the AUK Portfolio.
Unallocated income and expenses are items incurred centrally which are neither directly attributable nor can be reasonably allocated to individual segments.
As detailed in Note 15 the Groups interest in the Esplanade has been reduced to Nil in the financial statements in line with IAS 28.
On a proportionate basis the Groups share in the net liabilities of the Esplanade are recognised linebyline.
Movements in the losses of the Esplanade that are not rec ognised on an equity accounted basis during each reporting period are presented to reconcile segmental information to the IFRS statements.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 114 Segmental reporting continued
UK UK Venture IFRS Segmental balance sheet Retail Commercial UK Hotels Europe Total adjustments Total as at 31 August 2016 m m m m m m m Investment property Investment at fair value through profit or loss Investment in associate Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Borrowings including finance leases Trade and other payables Segmental net assets Unallocated assets and liabilities Other noncurrent assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Net derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Trade and other payables Current tax liabilities Joint venture adjustments Fair value on acquisition of joint venture interest Joint venture noncontrolling interest Cumulative losses restricted in joint ventures Investment in joint ventures Loans to joint ventures IFRS net assets As detailed in Note 15 the Groups interest in the Esplanade has been reduced to Nil in the financial statements in line with IAS 28.
On a proportionate basis the Groups share in the net liabilities of the Esplanade are recognised linebyline.
The cumulative losses of this joint venture that the Grou p has not recognised on an equity accounted basis at the reporting date are presented to reconcile segmental information to the IFRS statements.
Joint
UK UK UK Venture IFRS Other segmental information Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Total adjustments Total as at 31 August 2016 m m m m m m m Additions to investment property during the year per reportable segment Acquisition of investment property Acquisition costs Capitalised expenditure
UK UK UK Venture IFRS Other segmental information Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Other Total adjustments Total for the year ended 31 August 2016 m m m m m m m m Intersegmental revenue and expense Management fee income Management fee expense Intersegmental revenue and expense relate to intercompany investment management fees that eliminate on consolidation.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 115 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Rental income Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Gross lease payments from third parties Gross lease payments from related parties Note 32 Rental income The future aggregate minimum rents receivable under noncancellable operating leases at the balance sheet date are as follows Not later than one year Later than one year not later than five years Later than five years Other income Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Performance Fee Investment management fees from joint ventures Note 32 Insurance rebates Salary recharges Other income from related parties Note 32 Other property related income Other income The Group was responsible for the investment management of the property portfolio of the Wichford VBG Holding S. joint venture.
The Group was incentivised during the investment period by a Performance Fee dependent on the internal rate of return achieved on disposal.
The return on disposal o n 1 January 2017 resulted in a fee of 3.4 million payable from the joint venture to the Group after the deduction of certain costs.
The income has been recognised within other income and the Group share of the related expense incurred by the joint venture has been recognised within share of posttax lossprofit from joint ventures.
On a proportionate basis and for segmental reporting purposes the net Performance Fee of 1.6 million earned by the Group has been recognised in other income.
Administrative costs and other fees Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Administrative and other operating expenses Professional fees Staff costs Sharebased payments Nonrecurring investment management fees including termination fee Intragroup investment management fees Note 32 Administrative costs and other fees 15.3 10.9 7.5 6.8 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 116 Disposal of subsidiaries No subsidiaries of the Group were disposed of during the year ended 31 August 2017.
On 31 August 2016 the Group disposed of its entire shareholding in Cooperative Redefine International Real Estate UA Netherlands for a nominal consideration of 1.
The disposed subsidiary held the entire issued share capital of Redefine International Dan Haag B.
Netherlands.
The latter company is the beneficial and legal owner of The Justice Center The Hague the Groups last European noncore legacy asset.
The impact of the disposal on the Group and the net cash outflow is shown below 31 August
Carrying value of net assetsliabilities Investment property Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other payables Net liabilities disposed Consideration received Transfer of foreign currency translation to the income statement on disposal of foreign operation Gain on disposal of subsidiary Finance income and finance expense Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Finance income Finance income on bank deposits Finance income on loans to external parties Finance income on loans to subsidiary undertakings Note 32 Finance income on loans to joint ventures Note 32 Finance income on loans to other related parties Note 32 Finance income Finance expense Finance expense on secured bank loans Interest capitalised to qualifying investment property under development Amortisation of debt issue costs Accretion of fair value adjustments Release of fair value adjustment Finance lease interest Finance expense Net finance expense Other finance expense Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Aviva profit share share of earnings for the year remeasurement of financial liability Net change in fair value adjustments on substantial modification of borrowings Termination of derivative financial instruments Writeoff of unamortised debt issue costs Other nonrecurring finance expense Other finance expense The net change in fair value adjustments relates to the release of the residual fair value adjustment on extinguishment of the existing Aviva facilities and recognition of a fair value adjustment on the refinanced amalgamated facility in line with IAS 39.
See Note 21 for further information.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 117 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Net gain on sale of joint venture interests On 1 January 2017 Wichford VBG Holding S.
Wichford VBG exchanged contracts to dispose of all its propertyowning subsidiaries.
The value attributed by the purchaser to the property portfolio on which the sale was based was 106.0 million 90.6 million.
The carrying value of the portfolio was 97.6 million 83.2 million.
Net consideration for the subsidiary interests was agreed at 49.7 million 42.4 million.
The transaction completed on 13 January 2017 subject to final completion adjustments which were negligible.
The equity of the subsidiaries was acquired for nominal value and the consideration receivable was comprised of 29.4 million 25.1 million in settlement of the shareholder loans outstanding to the joint venture partners Group share 14.4 million12.5 million and 20.3 million 17.3 million in settlement of loans that had been advanced by the retained structure of Wichford VBG Finco Loans to the disposed subsidiaries Group share 9.9 million8.5 million.
The Finco Loans had previously eliminated on consolidation of the joint venture.
Cash consideration of 47.9 million 40.8 million was initially received by the joint venture after the deduction of transaction costs of 0.8 million 0.7 million by the purchaser.
In addition 1.0 million 0.8 million was deferred pending the outcome of certain conditions.
The conditions were satisfied and the deferred consideration was received in advance of the balance sheet date.
The net assets of the subsidiaries on disposal were 11.2 million 9.4 million and after adjusting for the Shareholder Loans and additional transaction costs incurred of 1.8 million 1.5 million an initial gain on sale of 6.5 million 5.7 million was recognised by the joint venture.
The Group share of this gain was 3.2 million 2.8 million.
The Group recognised a total gain of 4.9 million after the recycling of cumulative foreign currency translation gains of 2.2 million to the income statement and the deduction of 0.1 million of Group transaction costs.
The Directors believe that the recycling of the translation reserve is appropriate as the retained Wichford VBG structure has only residual cash to settle final working capital balances at 31 August 2017.
The Finco Loans originated during the Wichford VBG restructuring in September 2012 when a financing vehicle of the retained structure acquired the residual bank debt from the existing lender for nominal value.
Loan notes of 1 Finco Loan Notes were issued to the joint venture partners by the vehicle to finance the acquisition of the Finco Loans.
Under the terms of the Finco Loan Notes any termination payments received under the Finco Loans would be payable to the Finco Loan Note holders after settlement of the Performance Fee refer to Note 5 and any interest outstanding so that surplus cash could be repatriated efficiently to the joint venture partners.
Following the disposal of the Finco Loans a loss was therefore recognised in the financial statements of the joint venture on settlement of the Finco Loan Notes Group share 3.9 million3.5 million and a corresponding gain was recognised by the joint venture partners.
The net impact of the Finco Loan Note settlement is Nil in the Group financial statements.
For presentation purposes and to reflect the substance of the transaction all gains and losses incurred by both the Group 5.6 million gain and the joint venture on an equity accounted basis 0.7 million loss as a result of the disposal are included within one line in the income statement Net gain on sale of joint venture interests.
The table below illustrates the financial impact of the transaction on the joint venture and on the Group on a total basis eliminating the effect of the Finco Loan Note settlement for simplicity.
Carrying value of net assetsliabilities Investment property Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents
Loans from joint venture partners Derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Trade and other payables Net assets disposed by joint venture Settlement of loans from joint venture partners Adjusted net assets disposed by joint venture Cash consideration received Additional transaction costs incurred Foreign currency adjustment on settlement Gain on sale of subsidiaries attributable to joint venture Elimination of joint venture partners interest Gain on sale of joint venture interests attributable to Group Group cost of disposal Transfer of foreign currency translation to the income statement on disposal of joint venture interests Net gain on sale of joint venture interests Attributable to Joint venture Group share
Total cash proceeds received by the Group at the balance sheet date on disposal were 22.1 million including the receipt of the Performance Fee of 3.4 million refer to Note 5.
In the statement of cash flows the Performance Fee has been presented under operating activities and the balance of 18.7 million has been presented under investing activities.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 118
Tax recognised in the income statement Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Current income tax Income tax in respect of current year Adjustments in respect of prior years Deferred tax On fair value of investment property On accelerated capital allowances Tax chargecredit for the year recognised in the income statement There was no tax recognised in equity or other comprehensive income during the year 31 August 2016 Nil.
Reconciliation
The tax rate for the year is lower than the average standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.58 per cent 31 August 2016 20 per cent.
The differences are explained below Group Company 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Profitloss before tax Profitloss before tax multiplied by standard rate of corporation tax Effect of Revaluation of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of subsidiary Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Debt fair value adjustments Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Income not subject to UK income tax Nonresident landlord tax attributable to noncontrolling interest Group relief utilised Losses utilised Unutilised losses carried forward Other taxable income Impact of foreign tax Expenses not deductible for tax Adjustments in respect of prior years Intragroup transactions Settlement of loans Reversal of impairment of loan REIT exempt distributions Tax chargecredit for the year recognised in the income statement In the reconciliation above for the year ended 31 August 2017 the effective tax rate of the Group was 5.3 per cent 31 August 2016 12.8 per cent.
The enactment of Finance No.
2 Act 2015 and Finance Act 2016 has reduced the main rate of corporation tax from 20 per cent to 19 per cent with effect 1 April 2017 with a further reduction to 17 per cent from April 2020.
On 4 December 2013 the Group converted to a UKREIT.
As a result the Group does not pay UK Corporation Tax on the profits and gains from qualifying rental business in the UK provided certain conditions are met.
Nonqualifying profits and gains of the Group continue to be subject to corporation tax.
The Directors intend the Group to continue as a REIT for the foreseeable future.
As a result deferred tax is no longer recognised on temporary differences relating to the UK property rental business which is within the REIT structure.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 119 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Investment property
UK Retail Commercial UK Hotels Europe Total Freehold Leasehold
Opening carrying value at 1 September 2016 Capitalised expenditure Capitalised finance costs Acquisition of control of former joint venture Note 30 Disposals through the sale of property Transfer to noncurrent assets held for sale Note 20 Head lease movements Lossgain on revaluation of investment property Foreign exchange movement in foreign operations IFRS carrying value at 31 August 2017
Noncurrent assets held for sale Note 20 Minimum payments under head leases Note 21 Tenant lease incentives Note 18 Market value of Group portfolio at 31 August 2017 Joint ventures Share of joint venture investment property Note 15 Market value of total portfolio at 31 August 2017 on a proportionately consolidated basis
UK Retail Commercial UK Hotels Europe Total Freehold Leasehold
Opening carrying value at 1 September 2015 Additions from acquisition of property Acquisition costs Capitalised expenditure Disposals through the sale of property Disposals through the sale of subsidiary Note 7 Disposal of head leases Lossgain on revaluation of investment property Foreign exchange movement in foreign operations IFRS carrying value at 31 August 2016
Minimum payments under head leases Note 21 Tenant lease incentives Note 18 Market value of Group portfolio at 31 August 2016 Joint ventures Share of joint venture investment property Note 15 Market value of total portfolio at 31 August 2016 on a proportionately consolidated basis Included within the Europe segment at 31 August 2017 is property under development of 23.4 million 31 August 2016 18.5 million.
Additions from acquisitions and disposals through the sale of property in UK Commercial have been grossed up to reflect the acquisition and subsequent sale of 16 Grosvenor Street as part of the AUK transaction.
The tables above present both segmental and market value investment property information prepared on a proportionately consoli dated basis.
Properties that have been classified as held for sale in the current year are also included so that the market value of the total portfolio can be determined.
This format is not a requirement of IFRS and is for informational purposes as it is used in reports presented to the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 120 Investment property continued
Judgement may be required to determine whether a property qualifies as an investment property.
Investment property comprises a number of retail and commercial properties in the UK and Europe that are leased to unconnected third parties.
In addition the hotel portfolio is held for capital appreciation and to earn rental income.
The hotels have been let to RHML and RECML with the exception of Travelodge Enfield to separately manage the operating business for a fixed rent which is subject to annual review.
The review takes into account the forecast EBITDA when setting the revised rent for each hotel.
As detailed in the key judgements and estimates in Note 2 aside from the Groups associate interest in RedefineBDL and the receipt of rental income Redefine International is not involved in the hotel management business and there are limited transactions between Redefine International RHML and RECML.
As a result the Directors consider it appropriate to classify the hotel portfolio as investment property in line with IAS 40.
Valuation
The carrying amount of investment property is the market value of the property as determined by appropriately qualified independent valuers and adjusted for minimum payments under head leases and tenant lease incentives.
Valuations are based on what is determined to be the highest and best use.
When considering the highest and best use a valuer will consider on a property by property basis and in limited circumstances in aggregation with other assets its actual and potential uses which are physically legally and financially viable.
Where the highest and best use differs from the existing use the valuer will consider the cost and the likelihood of achieving and implementing this change to determine an appropriate valuation.
Fees paid to valuers are based on arms length fixed price contracts.
The fair value of the Groups property for the year ended 31 August 2017 was assessed by independent and appropriately qualified valuers in accordance with the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors RICS standards and IFRS 13.
The valuations are performed by Strutt and Parker LLP for the UK Shopping Centres BNP Paribas Real Estate for the Esplanade and Savills for rest of the portfolio.
The valuations are reviewed internally by senior management and presented to the Audit and Risk
The presentation includes discussion around the assumptions used by the external valuers as well as a review of the resulting valuations.
Valuation inputs The fair value of the property portfolio has been determined using either a discounted cash flow or a yield capitalisation technique whereby contracted and market rental values are capitalised at a market rate.
The resulting valuations are crosschecked against the net initial yield and the fair market values per sqft of comparable recent market transactions.
The valuation techniques described above are consistent with IFRS 13 and use significant unobservable inputs.
Valuation techniques can change at each valuation round depending on prevailing market conditions and the propertys highest and best use at the reporting date.
The Group considers that all of its investment property falls within Level 3 as defined by IFRS 13 refer to Note 31.
There has been no transfer of property within the fair value hierarchy during the year.
The table below summarises the key unobservable inputs used in the valuation of the Groups property portfolio including the Groups share of property held by joint ventures at 31 August 2017 and 31 August 2016 Weighted Weighted Average average average
Market Lettable rent lease net initial Net initial market rent value area per sqm length yield yield per sqm 31 August 2017 m sqm m yrs % % range UK Retail UK Commercial UK Hotels
1513.1 688584 Joint ventures UK Commercial
Total
1538.7 701693 Weighted Weighted Average average average
Market Lettable rent lease net initial Net initial market rent value area per sqm length yield yield per sqm 31 August 2016 m sqm m yrs % % range UK Retail UK Commercial UK Hotels
1388.1 575898 Joint ventures UK Commercial
Total
1529.0 681907 There are interrelationships between the unobservable inputs as they are determined by market conditions an increase in more than one input could impact on the valuation.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 121 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Committed expenditure The Group was contractually committed to expenditure of 16.5 million for the future development and enhancement of investment property at 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 15.8 million.
Disposals
The Group disposed of four assets from the UK Commercial portfolio and a single unit from the UK Retail portfolio during the year realising a net gain after disposal costs of 9.2 million 31 August 2016 3.2 million.
As at 31 August 2017 net proceeds of 54.9 million had been received by the Group 31 August 2016 38.8 million.
Sales Disposal Tenant Net sales Carrying Gain on proceeds costs incentives proceeds value disposal 31 August 2017 m m m m m m 201 Deansgate Manchester Exchange House Watford 1A Parliament Square Edinburgh Delta 900 Swindon Single unit  Priory Retail Park Merton Commercial property price risk The Board draws attention to the risks associated with commercial property investments.
Although over the longterm property is considered a low risk asset investors must be aware that significant short and mediumterm risk factors are inherent in the asset class.
Investments in property are relatively illiquid and usually more difficult to realise than listed equities or bonds and this restricts the Groups ability to realise value in cash in the shortterm.
Investment in subsidiary undertakings 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Opening balance at 1 September
Redemptions
Deferred consideration Settlement of amounts owing from subsidiary undertakings in consideration for shares Reclassification to trading amounts owing from subsidiary undertakings Carrying value at 31 August An impairment assessment of the Companys investment in subsidiary undertakings is performed annually with reference to the EPRA net assets of the Group.
An impairment charge of Nil was recognised during the year 31 August 2016 Nil.
Investment at fair value through profit or loss The following table details the movement in the Groups investment in International Hotel Properties Limited designated at fair value through profit or loss 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Opening balance at 1 September Transfer from investment in associate Note 16
Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Closing balance On 14 October 2015 the Group acquired by way of private placement 3.8 million shares in the newly listed International Hotel Properties Limited formerly International Hotel Group Limited for 3.8 million.
This acquisition represented 25.4 per cent of IHLs issued share capital and the shareholding was recognised as an investment in associate under the equity method.
On 20 October 2015 the Group acquired 3.1 million additional shares for 3.1 million as part of a 13.0 million private placement by IHL diluting the Groups interest to 13.2 per cent.
Significant influence over the operations of IHL was deemed to have ceased from this date and the shareholding was reclassified from investment in associate to investment at fair value through profit or loss Refer to Note 16.
On 31 March 2016 the Group acquired an additional 1.5 million shares in IHL for 1.5 million by way of a 7.0 million private placement and thereby increasing its interest to 15.3 per cent.
On 20 April 2016 IHL acquired RBDL Capital Managers Limited from RedefineBDL for consideration of 1.0 million which was settled in the form of 1.0 million shares in
RedefineBDL distributed these shares in relative proportion to its shareholders.
The Group received 254084 shares.
On 7 February 2017 as part of the loan settlement with 4C UK Investments Limited 4C Investments the Group obtained 1.0 million shares in IHL Refer to Note 32.
The contractual value attributed to these shares was 1.0 per share and the fair value of these shares on transfer was 0.95 per share.
The shares were recognised at fair value and increased the Groups investment in IHL by 1.7 to 17.2 per cent.
There were no subsequent changes to the Groups interests in IHL prior to year end.
As at 31 August 2017 the Group held 9656834 shares of IHLs 56 million issued shares 31 August 2016 8656834 at a fair value of 8.5 million 31 August 2016 7.9 million and the Directors have determined that the classification of IHL as an investment at fair value through profit or loss continued to be appropriate.
Refer to key judgements and estimates in Note 2.3 for further information on the classification of IHL at the balance sheet date.
Refer to Note 38 for changes in the Groups interests in IHL subsequent to the balance sheet date.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 122 Investment in and loans to joint ventures 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Investment in joint ventures Opening balance at 1 September Acquisition of control of former joint venture Loss on disposal of joint venture interests Note 10 Share of posttax lossprofit from joint ventures Foreign currency translation Closing balance 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Loans to joint ventures Opening balance at 1 September Increase in loans to joint ventures Acquisition of control of former joint venture Disposal of loan to joint venture Repayment of loans by joint ventures Reversal of impairment of loans to joint ventures Foreign currency translation Closing balance Carrying value of interests in joint ventures Joint venture interests During the year ended 31 August 2017 the Groups material interests in joint ventures which are presented in the tables of this note included the following i 49 per cent interest in Wichford VBG Holding S. and Cologne Germany.
The joint venture disposed of its propertyowning subsidiaries on 1 January 2017 as detailed below ii 50.5 per cent interest in RI Menora German Holdings S. and Kaiserslautern Germany.
Notwithstanding the economic shareholding the contractual terms provide for joint control and so the Company does not control the entity iii 50 per cent interest in Leopard Germany Holding 1 S.
CEL Portfolio 2 Limited and Co.
KG.
Leopard Germany Property Ed1 Ed2 Ed3 and Ed4 Leopard Germany Property Me 1 and Me 2 S.
Ciref Berlin 1 Limited and Leopard Germany Property Ed2 GmbH and Co.
KG a joint venture with R edefine Properties Limited RPL the Companys largest shareholder.
These companies collectively known as the Leopard Portfolio hold 66 retail properties in Germany comprising a mix of standalone supermarkets foodstore anchored retail parks and cash and carry stores.
The Group disposed of its joint venture interests in the Leopard Portfolio on 26 April 2017 as detailed below and iv 50 per cent interest in the Esplanade a joint venture with Rimstone Limited which owns an office building in St.
Helier Jersey.
The Groups interests in joint venture entities are in the form of an interest in the share capital of the joint venture companies and loans advanced to the joint venture entities.
RI Menora German Holdings S. and Wichford VBG Holding S. the year end of the joint venture partner Menora Mivtachim.
Wichford VBG Holding S.
On 1 January 2017 Wichford VBG Holding S. exchanged on the sale of its four German office assets.
The disposal was structured as a share sale of the joint ventures propertyowning subsidiaries.
The joint venture recognised a net loss on disposal of these subsidiaries of 1.4 million Group share 0.7 million after settlement of the Finco Loans Notes.
The Group however recognised a net gain on disposal of 4.9 million including cumulative foreign currency translation of 2.2 million.
See Note 10 for further details.
Leopard Portfolio On 6 April 2017 the Group entered into a conditional acquisition agreement with RPL to acquire 88 per cent of RPLs equity interest and all RPLs shareholder loan interests in the Leopard Portfolio.
Shareholder approval was subsequently obtained for this related party transaction at an Extraordinary General Meeting on 25 April 2017 and the Leopard Portfolio became a controlled subsidiary group on completion on 26 April 2017 but with economic effect from 1 March 2017.
The Groups joint venture equity and loan interests were derecognised on loss of joint control and the acquisition of control.
The carrying value of the Groups net joint venture interests in the Leopard Portfolio at the date of disposal were 44.3 million 37.7 million.
See Note 30 for further details.
The cumulative foreign currency translation difference on the Groups net investment in Leopard of 2.0 million has been recycled to the income statement on effective disposal of the joint venture in accordance with IAS 28.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 123 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Interest in joint ventures not recognised Under the equity method the Esplanade was carried at Nil in the Groups financial statements at 1 September 2016 and remains at Nil at 31 August 2017.
This investment is in a net liability position with the cumulative losses exceeding the cost of the Groups investment.
The Group has ceased to recognise further losses beyond the original cost of this joint venture and loans advanced have been fully impaired in line with IAS 28.
The Group share of cumulative losses amounted to 0.7 million at 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 1.6 million.
On a proportionate basis and for segmental reporting purposes the Groups interest in the Esplanade is recognised linebyline.
Refer to the segmental information presented in Note 3.
Summarised financial information The summarised financial information of the Groups joint ventures in addition to reconciliations to the amounts presented in the financial statements are set out below Wichford RI Menora VBG German Joint venture Holding Holdings Leopard partners Proportionate
S.
Portfolio Esplanade Total interest Total 31 August 2017 m m m m m m m Percentage ownership interest 49% 50.5% 50% 50% Summarised income statement Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Administrative costs and other fees Net operating expenseincome Loss on revaluation of investment property Loss on sale of subsidiaries Finance expense on loans from joint venture partners Finance expense Other finance income Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Lossprofit before tax
Lossprofit and total comprehensive expenseincome Reconciliation to IFRS Elimination of noncontrolling and joint venture partners interests Movement in losses restricted in joint ventures Group share of joint venture results Presented in Group income statement as Reversal of impairment of loans to joint ventures Loss on disposal of joint venture interests Share of posttax loss from joint ventures Summarised balance sheet Investment property Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total assets External borrowings Loans from joint venture partners Derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Trade and other payables Total liabilities Noncontrolling interests Net assetsliabilities Reconciliation to IFRS Elimination of joint venture partners interests Loan to joint ventures Interest in joint ventures not recognised Cumulative losses restricted Carrying value of interests in joint ventures Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 124 Investment in and loans to joint ventures continued Summarised financial information continued Wichford RI Menora VBG German Joint venture Holding Holdings Leopard partners Proportionate
S.
Portfolio Esplanade Total interest Total 31 August 2016 m m m m m m m Percentage ownership interest 49% 50.5% 50% 50% Summarised income statement Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Other income Administrative costs and other fees Net operating income Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Finance expense on loans from joint venture partners Finance expense Other finance expense Gainloss on financial liabilities Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Profitloss before tax
Profitloss and total comprehensive incomeexpense Reconciliation to IFRS Elimination of noncontrolling and joint venture partners interests Movement in losses restricted in joint ventures Group share of joint venture results Presented in Group income statement as Impairment reversalimpairment of loans to joint ventures Share of posttax profit from joint ventures Summarised balance sheet Investment property Derivative financial instruments Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total assets External borrowings Loans from joint venture partners Derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Trade and other payables Total liabilities Noncontrolling interests Net assetsliabilities Reconciliation to IFRS Elimination of joint venture partners interests Fair value on acquisition of joint venture interest Loan to joint ventures Interest in joint ventures not recognised Cumulative losses restricted Carrying value of interests in joint ventures Included within administrative costs and other fees of Wichford VBG is the Performance Fee expense of 3.4 million payable to the Group as investment manager on disposal of the property portfolio.
Presented within Net gain on sale of joint venture interests in the income statement.
Loans to joint ventures include the opening balance any advances or repayments and foreign currency movements during the year.
Cumulative losses restricted represent the Groups share of losses in the Esplanade which exceed the cost of the Groups investment.
As a result the carrying value of the investment is Nil in accordance with the requirements of IAS 28.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 125 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Investment in associate 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Opening balance at 1 September
Transfer to investment at fair value through profit or loss Note 14 Share of posttax profit from associate Distributions from associate Net impairment of investment in associate Carrying value of the Groups net investment in associate On 14 October 2015 the Group acquired by way of private placement 3.8 million shares in the newly listed IHL for 3.8 million.
On the date of listing this represented 25.4 per cent of the entitys issued share capital and the investment was classified as an associate on initial recognition.
On 20 October 2015 the Groups interest was diluted to 13.2 per cent and reclassified as an investment at fair value through profit or loss refer to Note 14.
On 30 August 2016 the Group settled amounts previously advanced to RedefineBDL by way of an equity contribution of 6.0 million.
The equity contribution did not result in a further issue of shares to the Group or increase the Groups percentage interest in the associate.
The equity contribution has been recognised in other reserves in the underlying financial statements of RedefineBDL.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the Groups cumulative investment in RedefineBDL increased from 25.3 to 30.4 per cent.
On 7 February 2017 the Group acquired an additional 5.1 per cent interest in RedefineBDL for 1.3 million to partially settle a loan advanced to 4C Investments.
Refer to Note 32.
This portion of the Groups investment has been classified as held for sale on initial recognition as the shares were acquired exclusively with a view to subsequent resale.
Refer to Note 20.
The table above presents movements in the Groups existing 25.3 per cent interest in RedefineBDL only.
Distributions from the associate for the year ended 31 August 2017 of 1.2 million 31 August 2016 2.3 million were comprised of cash distributions only 31 August 2016 0.3 million of the total distribution related to the distribution in specie of 254084 shares in IHL.
Following an internal impairment assessment and on receipt of an independent valuation of RedefineBDL the Directors considered that the recoverable amount of the Groups net investment in RedefineBDL was 9.4 million at 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 10.2 million.
The independent valuation was determined on a valueinuse basis but was also crosschecked to market comparables.
Using a discount rate range of 11.5  12.5 per cent an enterprise value range of 33.5  40.5 million was attributed to the investment with a midpoint valuation of 37.0 million Group share 9.4 million.
This has resulted in an impairment charge of 0.5 million 31 August 2016 3.2 million.
Summarised financial information The summarised financial information of RedefineBDL in addition to the amounts presented in the financial statement are set out below 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 m m Percentage ownership interest 25.3% 25.3% Summarised income statement
Other income
Profit from operations
Profit for the year Elimination of third party interest Group share of results Presented as Share of posttax profit Impairment adjustment Summarised balance sheet Noncurrent assets Intangible asset Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total assets Current liabilities Total liabilities Net assets Elimination of third party interests Share of net assets attributable to the Group Recoverable amount of excess net investment in associate Carrying value of the Groups net investment in associate 9.4 10.2 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 126 Intangible assets 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Opening balance at 1 September
Closing balance Intangible assets were recognised on the acquisition of Redefine International Management Holdings Limited Group RIMH and represented the fair value of the advisory agreements acquired by the Group.
The value attributed to the contracts between RIMH and third parties including joi nt ventures of the Group and the noncontrolling interests was 1.9 million.
The intangible asset is being amortised on a straightline basis over the remaining term of the contracts which have an average life of eight years.
Trade and other receivables Group Company
31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m
Tenant lease incentives Loans to external parties Letting costs Total noncurrent trade and other receivables
Amounts receivable from subsidiary undertakings Note 32 Amounts receivable from related parties Note 32 Consideration outstanding on disposal of investment property held for sale Loans to external parties Rent receivable Prepayments and accrued income Tenant lease incentives Other receivables Total current trade and other receivables Total trade and other receivables Prior year trade and other receivables have been represented to correctly classify certain receivables as noncurrent and ensure consistency with the current year presentation.
Refer to Note 2.2.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 2.1 million has been advanced to an external party to partfinance a development project in Kingston Upon Thames Surrey.
The loan is due to mature on 1 December 2017 but the borrower has the option to extend the loan to 29 December 2018.
Unpaid interest is to be rolled to the principal loan balance periodically 31 August 2017 0.1 million.
Total tenant lease incentives of 7.2 million 31 August 2016 4.7 million have been deducted from investment property in determining fair value at the balance sheet date.
Refer to Note 12.
Cash and cash equivalents Group Company 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Unrestricted cash and cash equivalents Restricted cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents At 31 August 2017 cash and cash equivalents to which the Group did not have instant access amounted to 0.7 million 31 August 2016 3.3 million.
The restricted cash is held on deposit in Germany under an hereditable building right agreement for the property at Ingolstadt.
The comparati ve restricted cash was held with Aviva in relation to the shopping centre developments at Byron Place Seaham Birchwood Warrington Weston Favell and proposed developments at Grand Arcade Wigan.
This cash was used in partprepayment of the debt on restructuring refer to Note 21.
The Groups share of total cash and cash equivalents including its share of joint venture cash at 31 August 2017 was 53.4 million 31 August 2016 34.3 million with a further 10.0 million of undrawn committed facilities available 31 August 2016 23.0 million.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 127 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Noncurrent assets held for sale UK UK UK Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Total
Investment property Opening balance at 1 September 2016 Transfers from investment property Note 12 Loss on revaluation
Investment in associate Opening balance at 1 September 2016
Share of posttax profit Closing balance at 31 August 2017 All noncurrent assets held for sale fall within Level 3 as defined by IFRS 13 refer to Note 31.
Accordingly there has been no transfer within the fair value hierarchy over the year.
Investment property held for sale During the year ended 31 August 2017 ten properties were reclassified as held for sale six of which remained classified as such at the reporting date.
Four of these assets are being actively marketed and management are committed to a plan for their sale.
It is considered highly probable that the carrying value of these assets will be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use within the next twelve months.
On 16 September 2016 the Group exchanged contracts for the future disposal of a UK Commercial office in 2 Duchess Place Edgbaston for 1.6 million.
The purchaser has the right to call completion at any point up to 1 April 2018.
As there is a firm commitment from the purchaser and the Group to complete the transaction and the delay in completion is outside of the Companys control the asset has also been classified as held for sale at 31 August 2017.
The Group disposed of four held for sale assets from the UK Commercial portfolio and one German property during the year realising a net gain after disposal costs of 1.5 million.
As at 31 August 2017 net proceeds of 40.9 million had been received by the Group as the Brckmuhl property sale had only exchanged at the balance sheet date and 0.2 million of disposal costs had been accrued.
Disposals
Sales Disposal Tenant Net sales Carrying Gainloss proceeds costs incentives proceeds value on disposal 31 August 2017 m m m m m m The Observatory Chatham Woodlands Bedford London Road High Wycombe Brckmuhl Germany The Group exchanged on the disposal of the House of Fraser department store in Hull post year end refer to Note 38.
Investment in associate held for sale On 7 February 2017 as part of the settlement of the loan outstanding from 4C Investments refer to Note 32 the Group acquired 659 shares in RedefineBDL for an attributed value of 1942 per share.
This represented 5.1 per cent of the issued share capital of RedefineBDL.
As part of the settlement agreement 4C Investments has the right to buy back the shares at the transfer price of 1.3 million at any time on or before 31 January 2018 subject to written notice.
If this right is not exercised the remaining shareholders of RedefineBDL will be offered the shares in proportion to their shareholding at the transfer price.
It is considered highly probable that the value of the investment will be recovered through resale on or before 31 January 2018.
The investment has been classified as held for sale on initial recognition and at 31 August 2017.
The Directors have determined that the value inherent in the right to reacquire the shares is not material.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 128 Borrowings including finance leases 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Noncurrent
Bank loans Less unamortised debt issue costs Less fair value adjustments Aviva profit share Other external loans Finance leases Total noncurrent borrowings including finance leases
Bank loans Less unamortised debt issue costs Less fair value adjustments Other external loans Finance leases Total current borrowings including finance leases Total borrowings including finance leases Bank loans 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 Carrying Nominal Fair Carrying Nominal Fair Value Value Value Value Value Value m m m m m m Noncurrent liabilities Bank loans Less unamortised debt issue costs Less fair value adjustments Total noncurrent bank loans Current liabilities Bank loans Less unamortised debt issue costs Less fair value adjustments Total current bank loans Total IFRS bank loans Joint ventures Share of joint ventures bank loans Share of joint ventures unamortised debt issue costs Total bank loans on a proportionately consolidated basis Cash and cash equivalents Share of joint venture cash and cash equivalents Net debt on a proportionately consolidated basis The table above presents bank loans cash and cash equivalents and net debt information prepared on a proportionately consolidated basis.
This format is not a requirement of IFRS and is presented for informational purposes only as it is used in reports presented to the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 129 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information The Groups bank loans are secured over investment property of 1484.1 million 31 August 2016 1383.0 million and are carried at amortised cost.
On a proportionately consolidated basis bank loans are secured over investment property of 1509.7 million 31 August 2016 1523.9 million.
The Group has reduced the nominal value of drawn debt on a proportionately consolidated basis during the year to 842.2 million 31 August 2016 850.6 million following a number of successful refinancings in November 2016 the facility held against West Orchards Coventry was restructured after the repayment of 5.2 million which reduced the balance outstanding to 11.9 million and extended the maturity to 2021.
The restructuring was not considered a significant modification and no extinguishment of the existing loan was therefore required in December 2016 and January 2017 the Group drew down on funds from the revolving credit facility RCF secured against the AUK Portfolio and repaid loans previously held with AIB Group UK p.
5.4 million and Commerzbank AG 9.7 million.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the Group also sold eight properties secured against the AUK facility and applied 40.0 million of sale proceeds against the RCF.
Net movements on the drawn facility for the year are 10.5 million Wichford VBG disposed of its propertyowning subsidiaries including associated bank debt with DG Hyp Group share 23.5 million effective 1 January 2017.
See Notes 10 and 15 in April 2017 the Group refinanced 167.8 million of existing debt facilities secured over four of its UK Shopping Centre assets with Aviva.
Following a prepayment of 21.7 million the four facilities were amalgamated into one carrying a fixed rate of interest of 5.52 per cent previous range 5.7  6.4 per cent.
The restructure qualifies as a substantial modification  the existing facilities have been derecognised and the refinanced debt has been recognised at fair value in April 2017 the Group acquired control of the previously held joint venture interest in the Leopard Portfolio and the Group assumed bank debt with Berlin Hyp AG and BayernLB of 73.6 million at rates of 1.3  2.9 per cent.
See Note 30 for further information the Group refinanced its HSH Nordbank facility secured over the CMC Shopping Center Altona Hamburg effective 28 April 2017 with the facility being extended to February 2024.
Following a prepayment of 5.5 million the nominal value of debt outstanding was reduced to 37.9 million.
The refinancing was not considered a significant modification and no extinguishment of the existing loan was therefore required in June 2017 the Group completed the refinancing of three facilities held with BayernLB in the RI Menora joint venture.
This included a prepayment of 1.7 million Group share 0.9 million of which 1.3 million Group share 0.7 million was paid in June and the remainder was paid post year end in September 2017.
The facilities have been extended to 2024 and carry fixed rates of interest from 1.69  1.72 per cent and in August 2017 the Group agreed extensions for two BayernLB facilities secured against the German OBI properties due to mature in October 2017.
Under the amended agreements both loans will now run to December 2022 and carry fixed interest rates of 1.59  1.62 per cent.
Fair value disclosures The nominal value of floating rate borrowings is considered to be a reasonable approximation of fair value.
The fair value of fixed rate borrowings at the reporting date has been calculated by discounting cash flows under the relevant agreements at a market interest rate for similar debt instruments.
The market interest rate has been determined having regard to the term duration and security arrangements of the relevant loan and an estimation of the current rates charged in the market for similar instruments issued to companies of similar sizes.
With the exception of the Aviva debt refinanced during the year the Group considers that all bank loans including the Groups share of joint venture bank loans at a total carrying value of 690.9 million fall within Level 3 as defined by IFRS 13 at the reporting date refer to Note 31.
The Aviva debt was recognised at fair value on refinancing in April 2017.
This resulted in a fair value adjustment of 14.3 million as the refinanced debt was considered to have been negotiated on offmarket terms.
The fair value was determined with reference to observable inputs and was classified as Level 2 on initial recognition.
The carrying value of the Aviva debt at 31 August 2017 being 131.6 million is still considered by the Group to be a reasonable approximation of fair value and therefore falls within Level 2.
All bank loans at 31 August 2016 were considered Level 3.
The maturity of Group bank loans gross of unamortised debt issue costs and fair value adjustments is as follows 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 m m Less than one year Between one year and five years More than five years Certain borrowing agreements contain financial and other covenants that if contravened could alter the repayment profile.
Aviva profit share As part of the Aviva debt restructure in 2013 Aviva retained the right to participate in 50 per cent of the income generated by Grand Arcade Shopping Centre Wigan after all costs expenses and interest.
The profit share participation right was recognised as a financial liability initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost in prior years.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the debt was again restructured and following a break cost payment of 5.5 million to terminate the existing facility the Group was released from the historic profit arrangement with Aviva.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 130 Borrowings including finance leases continued Finance leases Obligations under finance leases at the reporting date are as follows 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 m m Minimum lease payments under finance lease obligations Not later than one year Later than one year not later than five years Later than five years Less finance charges allocated to future periods Present value of minimum lease payments Present value of minimum finance lease obligations Not later than one year Later than one year not later than five years Later than five years Present value of minimum lease payments Finance lease obligations relate to the Groups leasehold interests in investment property.
Finance leases are effectively secured obligations as the rights to the leased asset revert to the lessor in the event of default.
The discount rates used in calculating the present value of the min imum lease payments range from 1.8 to 6.3 per cent.
Derivative financial instruments The Group enters into interest rate swap and interest rate cap agreements to manage the risks arising from the Groups operations and its sources of finance.
Interest rate swaps and caps are employed by the Group to manage the interest rate profile of financial liabilities.
In accordance with the terms of the majority of bank debt arrangements the Group has entered into interest rate swaps to convert the rates from floating to fixed which has eliminated exposure to interest rate fluctuations.
Likewise interest rate caps are used to limit the downside exposure to significant changes to the low interest rates currently prevailing in the market.
It is the Groups policy that no economic trading in derivatives is undertaken.
31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Non current derivative assets Interest rate cap Interest rate swaps Non current derivative liabilities Interest rate swaps Net derivative financial instruments The Group holds interest rate cap assets at rates of 0.4 and 3.0 per cent maturing in April 2020 and November 2021 respectively.
The interest rate swap assets are held at a rate of 0.4 per cent maturing in September 2020.
The interest rate swap liabilities have maturities from September 2018 to November 2021 and the rates range from 0.4 to 2.0 per cent.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 131 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Deferred tax The table below presents the recognised deferred tax liability and movement during the year Fair value of Accelerated investment capital property allowances Total
Opening balance 1 September 2015 Incomeexpense for the year recognised in the income statement Opening balance 1 September 2016 Additions on acquisition of control of joint venture Expense for the year recognised in the income statement Foreign currency translation Closing balance at 31 August 2017 Net deferred tax assets not recognised at 31 August 2017 amounted to 0.2 million 31 August 2016 7.3 million.
Trade and other payables Group Company
Restated
31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Amounts payable to subsidiary undertakings Note 32 Amounts payable to related parties Note 32 Rent received in advance Trade payables Accrued interest VAT payable
Other payables Trade and other payables Current tax liabilities of 2.4 million Group and 1.3 million Company that were previously presented within trade and other payables at 31 August 2016 have been separately presented on the face of the balance sheet.
Refer to Note 2.2.
Share capital and share premium Group and Company
Number of capital
At 31 August 2016 ordinary shares of 8 pence each 3000000000 240.0 At 31 August 2017 ordinary shares of 8 pence each 3000000000 240.0 Share Share Number of capital premium Issued called up and fully paid shares m m At 31 August 2015 1474331331 117.9 395.0 Scrip dividend  issued December 2015 21235556 1.7 9.5 Share placement  issued February 2016 270588236 21.7 87.4 Scrip dividend  issued June 2016 28443527 2.3 10.2 At 31 August 2016 1794598650 143.6 502.1 Scrip dividend  issued December 2016 17141172 1.3 5.3 Scrip dividend  issued June 2017 16320324 1.3 4.4 At 31 August 2017 1828060146 146.2 511.8 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 132 Share capital and share premium continued In October 2015 the Company declared a second interim dividend of 1.65 pence per share for the six months ended August 2015 and offered shareholders an election to receive either a cash dividend or a scrip dividend by way of an issue of new Redefine International shares credited as fully paid up.
The Company received election forms from shareholders holding 699.1 million ordinary shares of 8 pence each representing a 47.4 per cent take up by shareholders in respect of which 21.2 million scrip dividend shares were issued in December 2015.
In February 2016 the Company completed a placing of 270.6 million new ordinary shares of 8 pence each for an aggregate nominal value of 21.7 million.
The placing generated proceeds of 109.1 million net of costs.
In April 2016 the Company declared an interim dividend of 1.625 pence per share for the six months ended 29 February 2016 and offered shareholders an election to receive either a cash dividend or a scrip dividend by way of an issue of new Redefine International shares credited as fully paid up.
The Company received election forms from shareholders holding 907.4 million ordinary shares of 8 pence each representing a 51.4 per cent take up by shareholders in respect of which 28.4 million scrip dividend shares were issued in June 2016.
In October 2016 the Company declared a second interim dividend of 1.575 pence per share for the six months ended 31 August 2016 and offered shareholders an election to receive either a cash dividend or a scrip dividend by way of an issue of new Redefine International shares credited as fully paid up.
The Company received election forms from shareholders holding 489.1 million ordinary shares of 8 pence each representing a 27.3 per cent take up by shareholders in respect of which 17.1 million scrip dividend shares were issued in December 2016.
In April 2017 the Company declared an interim dividend of 1.3 pence per share for the six months ended 28 February 2017 and offered shareholders an election to receive either a cash dividend or a scrip dividend by way of an issue of new Redefine International shares credited as fully paid up.
The Company received election forms from shareholders holding 522.2 million ordinary shares of 8 pence each representing a 28.8 per cent take up by shareholders in respect of which 16.3 million scrip dividend shares were issued in June 2017.
Reserves
Reverse acquisition reserve The reverse acquisition reserve of 134.3 million arose on the reverse acquisition of Wichford P.
International Holdings Limited RIHL in August 2011 and reflected the difference between the capital structure of the Company as the legal acquirer and RIHL as the accounting acquirer at the date of the transaction.
On 28 July 2017 the capital of RIHL was reduced by way of a capital reduction and transferred to retained earnings.
On consolidation this capital reduction has resulted in the release of 134.3 million from the reverse acquisition reserve which has also been transferred to the retained earnings of the Group.
Other reserves Sharebased payment reserve The sharebased payment reserve at 31 August 2017 of 3.2 million 31 August 2016 2.2 million arises from conditional awards of shares in the Company made to certain employees and the Executive Directors.
The awards will vest on the third anniversary of the grant subject to certain performance conditions being achieved over the vesting period.
Other reserves Other reserves of 1.0 million 31 August 2016 1.0 million arose from the acquisition of subsidiaries.
Foreign currency translation reserve The foreign currency translation reserve at 31 August 2017 of 23.4 million 31 August 2016 10.8 million represents exchange differences arising from the translation of the Groups net investment in foreign operations including both subsidiary and joint venture interests.
4.2 million of cumulative translation gains were transferred to the income statement during the year on disposal of joint venture interests 31 August 2016 3.6 million on disposal of subsidiary.
2.2 million related to the disposal of the propertyowning subsidiaries of Wichford VBG and 2.0 million related to the disposal of the Leopard joint venture.
Noncontrolling interests 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Opening balance at 1 September Comprehensive incomeexpense for the year Share of profitloss for the year Foreign currency translation on subsidiary foreign operations Changes in ownership interest in subsidiaries Reclassification of noncontrolling interest shareholder loans to liabilities Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests Recognition of noncontrolling interests on acquisition of control of former joint venture Acquisition of noncontrolling interest Note 28 Repayment of noncontrolling interest shareholder loans Total noncontrolling interests 21.8 33.6 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 133 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information The following table summarises the financial information relating to the Groups only subsidiary that has a material NCI RHHL before any intragroup eliminations.
Represented
31 August 2017 31 August 2016
Other
Redefine individually Total non Redefine individually Total non Hotel Holdings immaterial controlling Hotel Holdings immaterial controlling Limited subsidiaries interest Limited subsidiaries interest m m m m m m Principal place of business
United
Kingdom
Kingdom
Country of incorporation
BVI
Percentage ownership interest 17.52% 28.95% Summarised balance sheet Investment property and other noncurrent assets Current assets Noncurrent liabilities Current liabilities Elimination of tax paid wholly attributable NCI Adjusted net assets NCI share of adjusted net assets Tax attributable to NCI Carrying amount of NCI Summarised statement of comprehensive income
Profitloss for the year Profitloss attributable to NCI Other comprehensive income attributable to NCI Dividends paid to NCI Summarised cash flow statement Cash inflow from operating activities Cash outflow from investing activities Cash outflow from financing activities Net increase in cash and cash equivalents Profitloss attributable to NCI at 31 August 2016 included a nonresident landlord tax charge of 0.4 million which was fully attributable to the minority shareholders of RHHL.
Transactions with noncontrolling interests On 1 June 2016 Ciref Europe Limited a subsidiary of the Group acquired the noncontrolling interests in its subsidiaries CEL Portfolio 1 Ltd and Co.
KG and Chelvey Holdings Limited of 20.0 and 33.0 per cent respectively from Ellis Ventures Limited.
Consideration for this transaction was 2.3 million 2.7 million including the acquisition of shareholder loans for 1.9 million 2.2 million.
A loss of 0.2 million on acquisition of the noncontrolling interest was recognised directly in equity.
At 31 August 2016 4C Investments was a noncontrolling shareholder of RHHL with an 11.43 per cent equity interest 1938 shares in the issued share capital.
The Group had a loan balance outstanding from 4C Investments refer to Note 32 for which a share charge was created in favour of the Group over 4C Investments entire shareholding in RHHL.
The total loan balance outstanding of both principal and interest was 14.2 million on maturity at 31 December 2016.
In the absence of repayment the Group exercised its security over the shares.
On 7 February 2017 the 1938 shares formally transferred to the Group for an agreed transfer price of 6295 per share valuing the total shareholding at 12.1 million.
The carrying value of the noncontrolling interest on transfer was 12.7 million and as a result a gain of 0.4 million has been recognised directly in equity after transaction costs.
4C Investments has the right to reacquire the RHH shares on or before 31 January 2018 at the transfer price of 12.1 million.
The exercise of this right is considered improbable and the Directors are satisfied that there is no material value attributable to the option.
The remaining noncontrolling interest in RHHL 17.52 per cent has formally waived the preemptive right to acquire its relative proportion of the shares on 31 January 2018.
Dividends from these shares have been payable to the Group since the transfer and 4C Investments has no representation on the board of RHHL during the option period.
On acquisition of control of the Leopard Portfolio the noncontrolling interests proportionate share 6 per cent of the identifiable net assets of 0.7 million was recognised debit balance.
31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Carrying amount of noncontrolling interest acquired Ellis Ventures Limited 4C Investments Consideration paid to noncontrolling interest Transfer value attributed to noncontrolling interest net of transaction costs Increasedecrease in equity attributable to equity holders of the Parent 0.4 0.2 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 134 Cash generated from operations Group Company Year ended Year ended Year ended Year ended 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 Continuing operations Note m m m m Cash flows from operating activities Profitloss before tax Adjustments for Straight lining of rental income Fair value of sharebased payments Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Loss on revaluation of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of subsidiary undertakings Distributions from investment at fair value Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Amortisation of intangible asset Gain on disposal of other noncurrent assets held for sale Foreign exchange gain Finance income Finance expense Other finance expense Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Net gain on sale of joint venture interests Net impairment of joint ventures and associate interests 1516 0.1 0.6 Share of posttax lossprofit from joint ventures Share of posttax profit from associate 1620 1.1 1.7 Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of joint venture interest Intragroup transactions Settlement of loans Reversal of impairment of loan
Loss on disposal of investment at fair value Gain on disposal on subsidiary Foreign exchange gain on loans advanced Changes in working capital Changes in trading loans to and from subsidiary undertakings Cash generated from operations Acquisition of subsidiaries On 6 April 2017 the Group reached a conditional agreement to acquire the controlling interest in the Leopard Portfolio previously held as a joint venture with RPL refer to Note 15.
Shareholder approval was subsequently received on 25 April 2017 and the transaction completed on 26 April 2017 but with economic effect from 1 March 2017.
Aggregate consideration paid to RPL was 49.0 million 41.9 million and allocated as follows 0.3 million 0.3 million for the equity interests acquired and 48.7 million 41.6 million for the shareholder loans acquired.
Including transaction costs the total cash outflow in respect of the acquisition was 42.1 million.
On completion the Group obtained control of the Leopard Portfolio.
The Group has become exposed to the variable returns of the portfolio and now has the continuing ability to affect those returns by directing its activities.
The Group has therefore consolidated the Leopard Portfolio on a linebyline basis from 1 March 2017 with the resulting elimination of intragroup shareholder loans.
The transaction was not considered a business combination having regard to associated processes acquired and has therefore been recognised as an asset acquisition.
The net assets of Leopard on acquisition were 87.2 million 74.5 million.
The carrying value of the Groups existing joint venture interest which was derecognised on loss of joint control was 44.3 million 37.7 million.
The premium paid to RPL on acquisition of 6.8 million 5.9 million including transactions costs has been solely allocated to investment property as it was not separately identifiable.
The carrying value of the Leopard property portfolio on 1 March 2017 was 175.5 million 149.9 million and as a result the total amount recognised as an addition on consolidation was 182.3 million 155.8 million.
Refer to Note 12.
The noncontrolling interest being 6 per cent of the equity of the Leopard Portfolio has been recognised on the basis of its proportionate share in the identifiable net assets on completion and share of results to the reporting date.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 135 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Fair value of financial instruments Basis for determining fair values The Group measures fair values using the following fair value hierarchy that reflects the significance of the inputs used in making the measurements.
Level 1 quoted market price unadjusted in an active market for an identical instrument.
Level 2 valuation techniques based on observable inputs either directly i. as prices or indirectly i. derived from prices.
This category includes instruments valued using quoted market prices in active markets for similar instruments quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are considered less than active or other valuation techniques where all significant inputs are directly or indirectly observable from market data.
Level 3 valuation techniques using significant unobservable inputs.
This category includes all instruments where the valuation technique includes inputs not based on observable data and the unobservable inputs have a significant effect on the instruments valuation.
This category includes instruments that are valued based on quoted prices for similar instruments where significant unobservable adjustments or assumptions are required to reflect differences between the instruments.
The fair value of financial instruments that are traded in active markets is based on quoted market prices or dealer price quotations.
For all other financial instruments the Group uses valuation techniques to arrive at a fair value that reflects a price that would have been determined by willing market participants acting at arms length at the reporting date.
For common and simple financial instruments such as overthecounter interest rate swaps and caps the Group uses widely recognised valuation models for determining the fair value.
The models use only observable market data and require little management judgement which reduces the uncertainty associated with determination of fair values.
For other financial instruments the Group determines fair value using net present value or discounted cash flow models and comparisons to similar instruments for which market observable prices exist.
Varying degrees of judgement are required in the determination of an appropriate market benchmark.
Assumptions and inputs used in valuation techniques include riskfree and benchmark interest rates credit spreads and other premia used in estimating discount rates foreign currency exchange rates and expected price volatilities and correlations.
Availability of observable market prices and inputs vary depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on specific events and general conditions in the financial markets.
The tables below present information about the Groups financial instruments carried at fair value as of 31 August 2017 and 31 August 2016
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 value
31 August 2017 Financial assets Investment at fair value Note 14 Derivative financial assets Note 22 Financial liabilities Derivative financial liabilities Note 22 31 August 2016 Financial assets Investment at fair value Note 14 Derivative financial assets Note 22 Financial liabilities Derivative financial liabilities Note 22 The investment in IHL has been categorised as a Level 1 investment and priced using quoted prices in an active market the AltX of the JSE.
Derivative financial instruments have been categorised as Level 2 as although they are priced using directly observable inputs the instruments ar e not traded in an active market.
As stated in Note 12 and 20 respectively the Group considers investment property and noncurrent assets held for sale to be categorised as Level 3.
As stated in Note 21 the Group considers all bank loans to be categorised as Level 3 with the exception of the Aviva debt which is categorised as Level 2.
The carrying values of loans to joint ventures trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents finance leases and trade and other payables are considered to be a reasonable approximation of fair value.
Related party transactions Related parties of the Group include associate undertakings joint ventures Directors and key management personnel connected parties the major shareholder Redefine Properties Limited RPL as well as entities connected through common directorships.
Related parties of the Company also include directly and indirectly held subsidiary undertakings.
All intragroup Company transactions and balances eliminate on consolidation.
Group Company 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Revenue transactions Group Rental income
Amounts received from RedefineBDL as a result of lease agreements in place between the Group RHML and RECML wholly owned subsidiaries of RedefineBDL.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 136 Related party transactions continued Group Company 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Other income International Hotel Properties Limited Joint ventures Leopard Portfolio Wichford VBG Holding S.
RI Menora German Holdings S.
Distributions from investments at fair value International Hotel Properties Limited Finance income International Hotel Properties Limited 4C UK Investments Limited Joint ventures Leopard Portfolio Wichford VBG Holding S.
RI Menora German Holdings S.
Total revenue transactions Group Revenue transactions Company Administrative costs and other fees Redefine International Group Services Limited Finance income Redefine Cyprus Limited Settlement of loans Ciref Europe Limited Cooperative Redefine International Real Estate UA Wichford Alpha Limited Wichford Beta Limited Wichford Delta Limited Wichford Gamma Limited Wichford Zeta Limited Reversal of impairment of loan Redefine International Management Holdings Limited
Redefine Hotels Edinburgh Limited Everton Shopping Centres S.
Redefine International Management Holdings Limited Loss on disposal of investment at fair value Redefine Share Investments Limited Gain on disposal of subsidiary undertaking Wichford Zeta Limited Foreign exchange gain of loans advanced Ciref Europe Limited Total revenue transactions Company Capital transactions Group Investment property capitalised expenditure Project monitoring fee to RedefineBDL  construction works Investment at fair value through profit or loss International Hotel Properties Limited shares acquiredtransferred at cost 1.0 8.7  8.7 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 137 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Group Company 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Investment in associate Transfer price of 4C UK Investments Limiteds interests in RedefineBDL Capital contribution to RedefineBDL Dividends received from RedefineBDL Noncontrolling interests Transfer price of 4C UK Investments Limiteds interests in RHHL Total capital transactions Group Capital transactions Company Investment in subsidiary undertakings  settlement of balances outstanding in consideration for shares and redemption of shares Redefine AUK Limited Cash advanced to acquire AUK property portfolio Capitalisation of Wichford Zeta Limited assigned loan on disposal Capitalisation of Wichford North Street Limited assigned loan Redefine International Holdings Limited Redefine Waterside Leeds Limited Redefine Share Investments Limited Everton Shopping Centres S.
Total capital transactions Company Related party transactions with Equity Holders of the Parent Redefine Properties Limited  capital raise Redefine Properties Limited  underwriting fee Redefine Properties Limited  cash dividends Redefine Properties Limited  scrip dividends Total related party transactions with Equity Holders of the Parent Related party balances Group Loans to joint ventures Leopard Portfolio Wichford VBG Holding S.
RI Menora German Holdings S.
Trade and other receivables RI Menora German Holdings S.
Leopard Portfolio Wichford VBG Holding S.
4C UK Investments Limited
International Hotel Properties Limited Trade and other payables Wichford VBG Holding S.
Total related party balances Group Related party balances Company Trade and other receivables Redefine International Holdings Limited Everton Shopping Centres S.
Redefine Share Investments Limited Leopard Holding UK Limited Wichford Property General Partner Redefine International Management Holdings Limited 87.1 29.6 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 138 Related party transactions continued Group Company 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 m m m m Trade and other payables Redefine International Management Holdings Limited Redefine AUK Holdings Limited Redefine Cyprus Limited Redefine North Street Limited Wichford Edgbaston Limited Redefine Waterside Leeds Limited Total related party balances Company 4C UK Investments Limited On 7 February 2017 the Company exercised its security against a loan advanced to 4C Investments that had matured.
In settlement of the 14.2 million balance outstanding the following investments were transferred to the subsidiaries of the Group 4C Investments noncontrolling interest in RHHL for a transfer price of 12.1 million Note 28 4C Investments shareholding in RedefineBDL for a transfer price of 1.3 million Note 20 and 4C Investments shareholding in IHL for a transfer price of 1.0 million Note 14.
As the total transfer price for the shares was 14.4 million 0.2 million cash was paid back by the Group to 4C Investments.
The treatment on initial recognition of the transferred shares is explained in the referenced notes.
On the same date the Group entered into a lockup agreement with 4C Investments whereby the latter has the right to buy back the transferred shares in RHHL and RedefineBDL on or before 31 January 2018 at the transfer price.
Under the terms of the lockup agreement the Group cannot dispose of the transferred shares 4C Investments must be notified of material transactions and any dividends declared by RHHL and RedefineBDL will be payable to the Group.
4C Investments is controlled by Bashir Nathoo.
Bashir Nathoo was a Director of RHHL and RedefineBDL but resigned from his directorships with immediate effect on transfer of the shares.
Redefine Properties Limited During the year ended 31 August 2016 the Group paid Redefine Properties a fee of 2.5 million in consideration for the financial guarantee to support the AUK Portfolio acquisition by underwriting up to 70.0 million in the capital raise.
On completion Redefine Properties was allocated 81373179 shares representing 30.07 per cent of the total placing and this equated to an aggregate amount of 34.6 million of the total funds raised.
At 31 August 2017 Redefine Properties held a 29.52 per cent interest in the issued share capital of the Company.
Directors
Nonexecutive Directors and Executive Directors represent key management personnel.
The remuneration paid to Nonexecutive Directors for the year ended 31 August 2017 was 0.4 million 31 August 2016 0.3 million which represents Directors fees only.
The remuneration payable to Executive Directors for the year ended 31 August 2017 was 2.7 million 31 August 2016 1.8 million representing salaries benefits and bonuses.
4.9 million contingent share awards were issued to Executive Directors during the year 31 August 2016 5.0 million.
The IFRS 2 sharebased payment charge associated with the cumulative contingent share awards to the Executive Directors was 0.9 million 31 August 2016 1.1 million for the year.
The table below shows Directors dealings in shares for the period 1 September 2015 to 31 August 2017 Number of Price per ordinary ordinary shares share
Date of Transaction Transaction acquired acquired Marc Wainer 4 December 2015 Scrip dividend 3052 Bernie Nackan 4 December 2015 Scrip dividend 559 Mike Watters 23 February 2016 Private placing 352941 Adrian Horsburgh 23 February 2016 Private placing 10000 Marc Wainer 23 February 2016 Private placing 195000 Gavin Tipper 23 February 2016 Private placing 100000 Robert Orr 23 February 2016 Private placing 23529 Marc Wainer 6 June 2016 Scrip dividend 3819 Bernie Nackan 6 June 2016 Scrip dividend 587 Adrian Horsburgh 25 November 2016 Scrip dividend 347 Bernie Nackan 25 November 2016 Scrip dividend 682 Stephen Oakenfull 27 February 2017 Share acquisition 50000 Adrian Horsburgh 27 February 2017 Share acquisition 50000 Donald Grant 27 February 2017 Share acquisition 50000 Adrian Horsburgh 26 June 2017 Scrip dividend 1842 Bernie Nackan 26 June 2017 Scrip dividend 619 36.2p Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 139 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Sharebased payments Group and Company 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 Sharebased payment reserve m m Opening balance at 1 September Sharebased payment expense in the year Closing balance at 31 August The Companys sharebased payments are all equitysettled and comprise the LongTerm Performance Share Plan PSP for Executive Directors and the LongTerm Restricted Stock Plan RSP for employees.
In accordance with IFRS 2 the fair value of equitysettled sharebased payments to employees is determined at the grant date.
The expense is recognised on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on estimates of the number of shares that are expected to vest at each reporting date with a corresponding credit to the sharebased payments reserve.
The Company engages external advisers to determine the fair value of each award at the grant date who use the Monte Carlo and BlackScholes models in their valuations.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the total IFRS 2 charge recognised in the income statement in relation to the PSP awards was 0.9 million 31 August 2016 1.1 million.
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the total IFRS 2 charge recognised in the income statement in relation to the RSP awards was 0.1 million 31 August 2016 0.1 million.
LongTerm Performance LongTerm Restricted Share Plan Stock Plan Conditional share awards 000stel 2016 Awards brought forward 8371 6250 780 Awarded during the year 4919 4971 1095 861 Lapsed during the year 3400 2850 Forfeited during the year Awards carried forward 9890 8371 1407 780 Exercisable at 31 August Shares outstanding under each scheme are to be issued for nominal consideration provided performance conditions are met.
As at 31 August 2017 1.3 million PSP awards and 0.7 million RSP awards were considered to be dilutive 31 August 2016 0.2 million and 0.5 million respectively.
Full disclosure of the PSP award scheme granted to the Executive Directors is given on pages 88 and 89 of the Annual Report.
LongTerm Performance Share Plan Subsequent to shareholder approval on 23 January 2017 and with effect from 1 September 2016 PSP performance conditions were revised to include nonmarket based objectives in addition to market based objective.
This followed a review by the Remuneration Committee of the existing remuneration policy to better align the awards with the Companys strategic objectives and shareholder interests.
The revised PSP awards authorise the Remuneration Committee to make grants of PSP shares with a face value of up to 200 per cent of the salary of Executive Directors.
The awards are subject to a threeyear vesting period and to the following performance conditions 50 per cent of the award will vest dependent on underlying distributable earnings per share.
25 per cent of the award will vest upon attaining earnings per share comparable with the immediately preceding financial year with 100 per cent vesting achieved for average annual outperformance of CPI during the performance period of 1 per cent 25 per cent of the award will vest dependent on the relative total property return of the Companys UK assets in comparison to the IPD UK All Property Index.
25 per cent of the award will vest once performance reaches that of the benchmark with 100 per cent vesting achieved for 2 per cent outperformance and 25 per cent of the award will vest dependent on the Companys Total Shareholder Return TSR equalling or exceeding the TSR relative to that of each of the members of the FTSE EPRAREIT Developed Europe Index the Index.
25 per cent of the award will vest for median performance with 100 per cent vesting achieved for upper quartile performance.
On 25 January 2017 4.9 million shares were granted for the performance period from 1 September 2016 to 31 August 2019.
The share price on 1 September 2016 was 39.0 pence and the fair value on the grant date was 1.2 million assuming maximum vesting over the performance period.
The former PSP scheme authorised the Remuneration Committee to make grants of PSP shares with a face value of up to 250 per cent of the salary of Executive
These remaining outstanding awards are subject to a threeyear vesting period and to the following performance conditions 50 per cent of the award will vest dependent on the TSR equalling or exceeding the TSR relative to that of each of the members of the Index and 50 per cent of the award will vest dependent on the Companys TSR relative to that of the members of a bespoke comparator group the Comparator Group.
Vesting is on the same sliding scale for both of these conditions  25 per cent for median performance and 100 per cent for upper quartile performance with 0 per cent vesting below a median performance.
The following outstanding awards were granted under the former PSP remuneration scheme On 3 February 2015 3.4 million shares were granted for the performance period from 1 September 2014 to 31 August 2017.
The share price on 1 September 2014 was 52.4 pence and the fair value on the grant date was 0.9 million.
Performance during the period was determined to be below median and therefore all awards lapsed on 31 August 2017.
On 28 October 2015 5.0 million shares were granted for the performance period from 1 September 2015 to 31 August 2018.
The share price on 1 September 2015 was 52.2 pence and the fair value on the grant date was 1.5 million.
LongTerm Restricted Stock Plan Awards of RSPs to certain employees are subject to a threeyear vesting period and to performance measures evenly balanced between corporate performance objectives and personal performance objectives.
The performance conditions of RSP awards were also revised effective 1 September 2016.
50 per cent of the award will vest dependent on corporate targets being the same as those conditions set out above for the PSP under both the revised and existing remuneration policies and with the same relative weighting.
50 per cent of the award will vest dependent on personal objectives linked to average performance grades achieved over the threeyear vesting period.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 140 Sharebased payments continued LongTerm Restricted Stock Plan continued On 3 December 2015 0.9 million shares were granted to employees under the old RSP scheme for the performance period 1 September 2015 to 31 August 2018.
The share price on 1 September 2015 was 52.2 pence and the fair value on the date of grant was 0.3 million.
On 25 January 2017 1.1 million shares were granted to employees under the revised RSP scheme for the performance period from 1 September 2016 to 31 August 2019.
The share price on 1 September 2016 was 39.0 pence and the fair value on the grant date was 0.3 million assuming maximum vesting over the performance period.
Fair value of sharebased payments For the marketbased performance conditions the effect of the performance conditions is incorporated into the grant date fair value of the award.
No subsequent adjustment to the charge can be made to reflect the outcome of the performance test.
Adjustments can be made for estimated and actual leavers who forfeit their awards during the vesting period.
The probability of meeting market based performance conditions is required to be incorporated into the calculation of fair value.
The Monte Carlo model has therefore been used to value the element of the Awards with a TSR performance condition.
The remaining nonmarket based performance conditions have been valued using a BlackScholes model.
It was necessary to make a number of assumptions to calculate the fair value under both models.
Reference was made to the Companys LSE listing in developing share price volatility dividend yield riskfree rate and index correlation assumptions.
The table below sets out the assumptions made Award year Award year
2017 % 2016 %
Riskfree rate Dividend yield Correlation of the comparator group companies Correlation of the Index companies The fair value calculation under the revised PSP award scheme assumes 28.2 per cent 2016 53 per cent of the face value will be awarded at the date of grant relative to the Index.
Financial risk management The Group is exposed to the following financial risks through its operations Credit risk Liquidity risk and Market risk.
In common with all other businesses the Group is exposed to risks that arise from its use of financial instruments.
The following quantitative and qualitative disclosures describe the Groups objectives policies and processes for measuring and managing these risks and the Groups management of capital.
The Groups risk management policies require the identification and analysis of the risks faced by the Group the setting of appropriate risk limits and controls and the monitoring of risks and adherence to limits.
Risk management policies and systems are reviewed regularly and adjusted to reflect changes in market conditions and the Groups activities.
The Groups Board of Directors has responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Groups risk management framework.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly affecting the Groups flexibility and ability to maximise returns.
The Group Audit Committee oversees managements compliance with the Groups risk management policies and procedures and reviews the adequacy of the risk management framework in relation to the risks faced by the Group.
There are no significant concentrations of risk and there has been no significant change during the financial year or since year end to the types of financial risks faced by the Group or the Groups approach to the management of such risks.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The carrying amount of financial assets represents the Groups maximum credit risk exposure.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date was
31 August 31 August 2017 2016 m m Loans to joint ventures Derivative financial instruments Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents The above tables exclude prepayments and accrued income letting costs and tenant lease incentives which are not exposed to credit risk.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 141 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Cash and cash equivalents and derivative financial instruments Credit risk arises on the Groups undrawn commitments its holding of assets such as cash and cash equivalents and deposits with banks or financial institutions and its derivative financial instruments.
However the Group limits such exposure by investing in liquid deposits with material counterparties that have a credit rating of A A2 or above from Standard and Poors or Moodys except where specific exemptions are granted by the Board.
Group
2017 2016 31 August 31 August Credit Credit 2017 2016
Rating Rating m m
NatWest
Berlin Hyp
Aviva
RBS
Baa3 Ba1  4.0
The Group actively monitors its credit exposure to each counterparty and in dealing with high quality reputable and longestablished institutions management do not expect any counterparty will fail to meet its obligations.
Trade and other receivables The Group is also exposed to credit risk from lease contracts in relation to its property portfolio.
This risk is actively managed by the asset and property managers who continuously monitor and work with tenants anticipating and wherever possible identifying and addressing risks prior to default.
If there is objective evidence that the Group may not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the lease concerned a specific impairment is made.
The Group also makes a general provision of 25 per cent against all receivables 120 days or more past due that have not been specifically impaired.
Rent receivables exposed to credit risk were less than 0.1 per cent of total assets at 31 August 2017 31 August 2016 less than 0.1 per cent.
The credit risk associated with rent receivables is considered to be low owing to the longterm nature and diversity of the Groups tenancy agreements.
The Group has set a mediumterm target of a 95 per cent collection rate within seven days.
The Groups rent collection rate at 31 August 2017 was 94.3 per cent.
Other receivables including loans to external parties and consideration outstanding on disposal of investment property are secured and therefore they are also considered to be of low credit risk.
Included in trade and other receivables subject to credit risk are debtors with the following age profile 2017 2016 Gross Impairment Recoverable Gross Impairment Recoverable m m m m m m Not past due Past due 0  120 days Past due  over 120 days Loans to joint ventures The credit risk associated with loans to joint ventures is the risk that the loans advanced may not be recoverable.
As at 31 August 2017 the recognised loan to joint ventures relates to the loan advanced to RI Menora German Holdings S.
This joint venture group is in a net asset position and has serviced all of its payment obligations to date under the terms of the loan.
The Group is also responsible for the investment management of the joint venture and therefore has oversight of working capital and can manage cash flow requirements.
The recoverability of the loan is considered low risk.
The Group has also advanced a loan of 3.3 million to the Esplanade.
This investment is in a net liability position with the cumulative losses exceeding the cost of the Groups investment due to the fair value losses that have arisen on derivative financial instruments.
The Group has therefore fully impaired the loan advanced in line with the requirements of IAS 28.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups working capital and debt servicing obligations.
There is a risk that the Group will encounter difficulties in meeting its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Groups approach to managing liquidity is to ensure as far as possible that there will always be sufficient resources to meet its liabilities when due under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Groups reputation.
Liquidity risk is actively managed by the Groups finance department.
Bimonthly management receive and review rolling threemonth cash flow projections to ensure that there is sufficient headroom in the nearterm to meet ongoing operational requirements and upcoming capital commitments.
In addition management regularly receive and review rolling threeyear cash flow and loan balance projections as part of the Groups forecasting process.
At the balance sheet date these projections indicated that the Group had sufficient liquid resources to meet its obligations under all reasonably expected circumstances.
The monitoring of liquidity is also assisted by the quarterly review of covenants imposed by financial institutions such as loantovalue and interest covenant ratios.
Loans are renegotiated in advance of any potential covenant breaches insofar as the factors are within the control of the Group.
The Board will ensure during periods of increased market uncertainty that sufficient cash resources are available for potential loan repayments or cash deposits as may be required by financial institutions.
The Groups loan facilities and other borrowings are also spread across a range of banks and financial institutions so as to minimise any potential concentration of risk.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 142 Financial risk management continued Liquidity risk continued The tables below set out the contractual maturities of financial liabilities based on the undiscounted obligations to make interest payments and to repay the principal
Carrying Contractual 6 Months 6 to 12 1 to 2 2 to 5 than 5 Amount Cash Flows or Less Months Years Years Years
31 August 2017 Financial liabilities Bank and other loans Finance leases Trade and other payables Tax liabilities Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps 31 August 2016 Financial liabilities Bank and other loans Aviva profit share Finance leases Trade and other payables Tax liabilities Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps Market risk Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as foreign exchange rates interest rates and equity prices will affect the Groups income or the value of its investments in financial instruments.
The objective of market risk management is to manage and control market risk exposures within acceptable parameters while optimising the return on risk.
Since the UK referendum on European membership there has been a change in the potential scale and likelihood of volatility in all aspects of market risk with softening yields volatility in currency and equity markets and increased inflationary expectations experienced.
Refer to the Groups Principal Risk disclosures on pages 16 and 17 for further information.
The Group enters into derivative financial instruments in the ordinary course of business and incurs financial liabilities in order to manage market risks.
The Board of Directors receives reports on a quarterly basis with regards to currency exposures as well as interest rate spreads and takes the necessary steps to hedge and limit the risk the Group is exposed to.
The Group does not apply hedge accounting.
Currency risk The Group operates internationally and is exposed to currency risk primarily with respect to the Euro EUR.
Foreign exchange risk arises from the Groups exposure to monetary assets and liabilities and net investments in foreign operations recognised in EUR.
The Groups income from incomeproducing rental properties is denominated in the same currencies as the loans that are financing those properties.
The Groups investments in foreign subsidiaries and joint ventures are not hedged as the currency positions are considered to be longterm in nature.
Foreign exchange risk also arises on the payment of the Groups dividend to its JSE shareholders in South African Rand ZAR biannually.
The Group enters into forward rate contracts in advance of settlement of the dividends to mitigate this risk.
The carrying amount of the Groups foreign denominated assets and liabilities are as follows 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Assets
EUR
ZAR
Liabilities
EUR
The following exchange rates were applied during the year Average rate Year end ratetel 2016
ZAR
17.031 21.127 16.820 19.333 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 143 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Sensitivity analysis A five percent strengthening in the GBP exchange rate against the EUR at year end would have decreased equity by 9.9 million 31 August 2016 7.0 million and profit by 0.6 million 31 August 2016 1.4 million.
A five percent weakening in the GBP exchange rate against the EUR at year end would have had the equal but opposite effect.
This analysis assumes that all other variables remain constant.
Interest rate risk The Groups exposure to the risk of changes in market interest rates relates primarily to the Groups longterm debt obligations with floating interest rates.
The Group uses interest rate derivatives to mitigate its exposure to interest rate fluctuations.
At the year end as a result of the use of interest rate swaps and caps the majority of the Groups borrowings were at fixed interest.
Fixedcapped Floating Fixedcapped Floating 31 August 31 August 31 August 31 Augusttel 2016 Group proportionately consolidated m m m m Nominal value of Group bank loans Nominal value of joint venture bank loans Derivative impact Interest rate protection % The table above is presented on a proportionately consolidated basis.
The detail included is not a requirement of IFRS and is presented for informational purposes only as it is used in reports presented to the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker for monitoring interest rate risk.
The Group targets interest rate protection against 75 per cent or more of external debt.
The Groups EPRA earnings has limited exposure to interest rate fluctuations until the repayment dates of the loans for which the interest rate swaps and caps have been arranged.
Refer to Note 22 for further details on the Groups interest rate swap and cap agreements.
Capital structure and management The Group manages its capital to ensure that it will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to shareholders through the optimisation of the balance between its net debt and capital.
The Boards policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor creditor and market confidence and to sustain future development of the business.
The Group manages the capital structure and takes reasonable steps in light of changes in the economic conditions and the risk characteristics of its underlying business and assets.
The key ratios used to monitor the capital structure of the Group as presented in the following table are the loantovalue and the interest cover ratios 31 August 31 August 2017 2016 Group proportionately consolidated Note m m
Net debt Investment property 12 1538.7 1529.0 Loantovalue % Interest cover Net rental income Net finance expense Interest cover times The tables above are presented on a proportionately consolidated basis.
The ratios are not a requirement of IFRS and are presented for informational purposes only as they are used in reports presented to the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker for monitoring the Groups capital structure.
The Groups mediumterm target is that the loantovalue ratio is between 4550 per cent and the interest cover is above three times.
The Board also monitors both the demographic spread of shareholders as well as the return on capital which the Group defines as total shareholders equity excluding noncontrolling interests and the dividends paid to ordinary shareholders.
In order to improve its capital structure the Company may issue new shares sell assets to reduce debt refinance existing borrowings and adjust the amount of any distribution of dividends.
At the 2015 AGM the Company received the necessary authorisation from shareholders to purchase its own shares on the market subject to such shares being cancelled immediately upon acquisition.
The timing of purchases will depend on market conditions and purchase and sale decisions will be made on a transaction by transaction basis by the Board of Directors.
No share purchases took place during the year.
The Group does not have a defined share buyback plan.
The level of the Companys borrowings in terms of its Articles of Association shall not at any time without the previous sanction of an ordinary resolution of the Company exceed ten times the aggregate of i the amount paid up on the issued share capital of the Company and ii the total of capital and revenue reserves.
The Companys dividend policy is to distribute the majority of its earnings available for distribution in the form of dividends to shareholders.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 144 Earnings per share Earnings per share is calculated on the weighted average number of shares in issue and the profit attributable to shareholders.
31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Profit attributable to equity holders of the Parent Group adjustments Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Loss on revaluation of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of subsidiary Loss on revaluation of investment at fair value Amortisation of intangible assets Gain on disposal of other noncurrent asset held for sale Remeasurement of financial liability Net change in fair value adjustments on substantial modification of borrowings Other refinancing costs Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Gain on sale of joint venture interests Net impairment of joint ventures and associate interests Capital gains tax refund on disposal of Swiss properties Deferred tax Joint venture adjustments Lossgain on revaluation of investment property Loss on sale of subsidiaries Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Elimination of joint venture unrecognised profitslosses Noncontrolling interest adjustments Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments Impairment of investment in associate Deferred tax EPRA earnings Company adjustments Accretion of fair value adjustments Foreign currency movements Underlying earnings rebased Discontinued Company adjustments Distributable earnings Number of ordinary shares millions Weighted average 1809.9 1637.2 Dilutive effect of contingently issuable share awards under the LongTerm Performance Share Plan Dilutive effect of contingently issuable share awards under the LongTerm Restricted Stock Plan Diluted weighted average 1811.9 1637.9 Earnings per share pence
Diluted
EPRA earnings per share pence Diluted EPRA earnings per share pence Underlying earnings per share rebased pence Distributable earnings per share pence Dividend per share pence First interim dividend per share pence Second interim dividend per share pence The Group has ceased to recognise the Esplanade in the IFRS statements as the cumulative losses of the joint venture exceed the cost of the Groups investment refer to Note 15.
This adjustment eliminates the restricted losses for the year attributable to the Esplanade.
The calculation of underlying earnings was revised during the year ended 31 August 2017 to align to the EPRA earnings metric as adjusted for foreign exchange and debt fair value movements only.
The Directors consider this to be a more appropriate measure of recurring earnings that provides better alignment to operational cash flow.
Additional distributable and other nonrecurring adjustments made in prior years have now been discontinued and are presented on an aggregate basis within Discontinued Company adjustments above.
The calculation of prior year rebased underlying earnings has been disclosed for informational and comparative purposes.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 145 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Headline earnings per share is calculated in accordance with Circular 22015 issued by the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants SAICA a requirement of the Groups JSE listing.
This measure is not a requirement of IFRS.
31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Profit attributable to equity holders of the Parent Group adjustments Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Loss on revaluation of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of investment property Gain on disposal of investment property held for sale Gain on disposal of subsidiary Gain on disposal of other noncurrent assets held for sale Gain on sale of joint venture interests Net impairment of joint venture and associate interests Transfer of foreign currency translation on disposal of joint venture interests Deferred tax Joint venture adjustments Lossgain on revaluation of investment property Loss on sale of subsidiaries Deferred tax Elimination of joint venture unrecognised losses Noncontrolling interest adjustments Gainloss on revaluation of investment property Impairment of investment in associate Deferred tax Headline earnings attributable to equity holders of the Parent Number of ordinary shares millions Weighted average 1809.9 1637.2 Diluted weighted average 1811.9 1637.9 Headline earnings per share pence
Diluted
The Group has ceased to recognise the Esplanade in the IFRS statements as the cumulative losses of the joint venture exceed the cost of the Groups investment refer to Note 15.
This adjustment eliminates the restricted losses for the year attributable to the Esplanade.
Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued for the year ended 31 August 2017 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 146 Net asset value per share 31 August 31 August 2017 2016
Net assets attributable to equity holders of the Parent Group adjustments Fair value of derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Joint venture adjustments Fair value of derivative financial instruments Elimination of unrecognised derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Noncontrolling interest adjustments Fair value of derivative financial instruments Deferred tax EPRA NAV Group adjustments Fair value of derivative financial instruments Excess of fair value of debt over carrying value Deferred tax Joint venture adjustments Fair value of derivative financial instruments Elimination of unrecognised derivative financial instruments Deferred tax Noncontrolling interest adjustments Fair value of derivative financial instruments Deferred tax EPRA NNNAV Number of ordinary shares millions In issue 1828.1 1794.7 Dilutive effect of contingently issuable share awards under the LongTerm Performance Share Plan Dilutive effect of contingently issuable share awards under the LongTerm Restricted Stock Plan
1830.1 1795.4 Net asset value per share pence
Diluted
EPRA diluted NAV per share pence EPRA diluted NNNAV per share pence The Group has ceased to recognise the Esplanade in the IFRS statements as the cumulative losses of the joint venture exceed the cost of the Groups investment refer to Note 15.
This adjustment eliminates the derivative financial instruments attributable to the Esplanade from the proportionate adjustment s.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 147 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Contingencies guarantees and commitments A subsidiary of the Group Redefine Australian Investments Limited is undergoing a review by the Australian Tax Office in respect of its calculation of Capital Gains Tax arising on the disposal of securities in Cromwell Property Group during 2013 2014 and 2015.
No tax assessment notice has been received and dialogue between the Company and the Australian Tax Office is ongoing.
The Directors remain of the view having sought advice from reputable tax agents and advisers that their filing position remains correct.
At 31 August 2017 the Group was contractually committed to expenditure of 16.8 million 31 August 2016 15.8 million of which 16.5 million was committed to the future development and enhancement of investment property.
At 31 August 2017 the Company was contractually committed to expenditure of 0.3 million 31 August 2016 Nil.
The Company has also provided wholly owned or controlled subsidiary undertakings with a commitment to provide continued financial support should the need arise.
Subsequent events On 15 September 2017 the proposed scheme of arrangement to increase the Groups interest in IHL to 50 per cent received IHL minority shareholder approval.
The scheme was approved by the British Virgin Island Court on 12 October at which time it became unconditional.
The transaction is expected to complete in early November 2017 with IHL delisting shortly afterwards.
On 19 September 2017 the Group exchanged contracts to dispose of the House of Fraser department store in Hull for 11.0 million.
The sale is due to complete on 14 November 2017.
Dividends
During the year ended 31 August 2017 the second interim dividend of 1.575 pence per share for the halfyear ended 31 August 2016 was distributed as well as the interim dividend of 1.3 pence per share for the six month period ended 28 February 2017.
Both dividends were settled partly in cash and partly through the issue of scrip dividends.
The Board has declared a second interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 August 2017 of 1.3 pence per share.
Payment will be made on Monday 18 December 2017 to shareholders on the register on Friday 1 December 2017.
A scrip alternative will again be offered.
Approval of financial statements The financial statements were approved by the Board on 26 October 2017.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 148 Other information EPRA property analysis Portfolio summary
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % UK Retail UK Commercial UK Hotels Total UK
Total
Wholly owned Held in joint ventures proportionate 25.6 1.7 1.7 6.4 6.4 6.6 6.4 100.0 52.2 UK Retail
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % UK Shopping Centres UK Retail Parks UK Other Retail UK Retail UK Commercial
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % UK Offices  Greater London UK Offices  Regions UK Offices UK Distribution and Industrial UK Automotive UK Commercial UK Hotels
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % Greater London and UK South
RBDL Leased Hotels London Enfield Travelodge UK Hotels
Annualised
EPRA
EPRA
Market gross rental EPRA topped Reversionary occupancy value income ERV NIY up yield yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m m m % % % yrs % % German Shopping Centres German Supermarkets and Retail Parks 239.0 17.6 17.1 6.3 6.3 6.7 7.2 98.4 97.9
420.3 27.0 27.7 5.4 5.4 6.2 6.4 98.8 96.7 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 149 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information EPRA NIY UK UK UK Retail Commercial Hotels Europe Total m m m m m Investment property  wholly owned 1513.1 Investment property  held in joint ventures Market value of total portfolio 1538.7 Allowance for estimated purchasers costs Grossed up property portfolio valuation 1644.8 Triple net rent Impact of expiration of rentfree periods Topped up triple net rent EPRA NIY % EPRA toppedup NIY % EPRA capital expenditure analysis UK UK UK Total Joint Group Retail Commercial Hotels Europe IFRS ventures total 31 August 2017 m m m m m m Capital expenditure on likeforlike portfolio Capitalised finance costs Capital expenditure UK UK UK Total Joint Group Retail Commercial Hotels Europe IFRS ventures total 31 August 2016 m m m m m m Capitalised acquisition costs Capital expenditure on likeforlike portfolio Capital expenditure Capital expenditure on the likeforlike portfolio includes UK Retail UK Shopping Centres 0.9 million 31 August 2016 2.0 million expenditure on the phased redevelopment to modernise Weston Favell Shopping Centre Northampton which completed during the year and 0.6 million 31 August 2016 0.6 million on general improvement works across the rest of the shopping centres UK Retail Parks and Other Retail 1.4 million on several expansion schemes across UK Retail Parks 31 August 2016 0.4 million.
0.6 million on the redevelopment of Albion Street Derby to combine the basement ground first and second floors of three existing units into a single modern space to accommodate TK Maxx UK Commercial Distribution and Industrial 0.4 million on the refurbishment of vacant space at Severalls Industrial Estate Colchester and 0.3 million on the refurbishment of a unit at Camino Park Crawley in advance of letting to DFS Trading Limited
0.3 million on the refurbishment of several office spaces in advance of successful relettings 31 August 2016 0.3 million UK Hotels 2.9 million 31 August 2016 0.7 million on the 12room extension of the Holiday Inn Express Southwark.
During the year ended 31 August 2016 1.1 million was also spent on the extension of the Travelodge Hotel Enfield and
11.9 million 31 August 2016 2.5 million on the redevelopment of the existing shopping centre in Ingolstadt Germany.
0.3 million was also spent on the first phase of the food court refurbishment in the Berlin shopping centre.
During the year ended 31 August 2016 0.2 million was also incurred on general improvement works across the Premium Portfolio.
Acquisition costs incurred on the acquisition of the AUK portfolio during the prior year amounted to 22.6 million primarily SDLT.
Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 150 Other information EPRA property analysis continued Top 20 assets
EPRA
EPRA
Market % of gross rental EPRA topped occupancy As at value portfolio by Area income ERV NIY up yield WAULT by ERV Indexed 31 August 2017 m market value m m m % % yrs % % Wigan Grand Arcade
SchlossStrassen Center 84.0 5.5 18868 4.6 4.5 4.6 4.6 5.6 98.9 89.2
Weston Favell
Bahnhoff Altona London Harrow St Georges
Charing Cross Road Crawley Camino Park Distribution Centre Banbury Banbury Cross Retail Park London Watford The Arches Retail Park Bridgwater Express Park Distribution Centre Top ten assets London Southwark Holiday Inn Express
DoubleTree by Hilton London Merton Priory Retail Park Warrington Birchwood 31.5 2.0 34614 2.7 3.0 6.6 7.0 14.6 94.6 2.8 London Earls Court Holiday Inn Express London Limehouse Holiday Inn Express London Royal Docks Holiday Inn Express Coventry West Orchards 23.7 1.5 19522 3.1 3.5 6.6 8.7 7.7 98.1 Ingolstadt City Arkaden 23.4 1.5 12217 0.6 1.9 0.4 0.8 3.7 100.0 100.0
Queens Drive Retail Park 23.0 1.5 10596 1.8 1.7 7.2 7.2 5.7 100.0 Top 20 assets Top ten tenants Annualised % gross rental of total Number of income gross rental units held Ranking Tenant Portfolio Sector m Income by tenant 1 Edeka Europe Discount and value 2 UK Government bodies UK Commercial Government associated 3 BandQ Plc UK Retail Home and DIY 4 Tesco Stores Ltd UK Retail Groceries 5 Netto Europe Groceries 6 REAL SB  Warenhaus GmbH Europe Groceries 7 Royal Mail UK Commercial Services 8 Primark UK Retail Fashion 9 OBI Europe Home and DIY 10 Debenhams UK Retail Department store 24.6 91 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 151 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Other information Five year recordtel 2014 2013 Summarised Group income statement m m m m m Rental income Rental expense Net rental income Other income Administrative costs and other fees Net operating income Net fair value gainslosses on investment property and assets held for sale Net gains on disposal of investment property and assets held for sale Gainloss on disposal of subsidiaries Gain on extinguishmentacquisition of debt Net lossgain on disposal of investment Other items Profit from operations Net finance costs Other items
Profit after tax Representedtel 2014 2013 Summarised Group balance sheet m m m m m
Investment property Other noncurrent assets Current assets Total assets 1624.6 1538.8 1226.8 1183.3 1062.7
Noncurrent liabilities Current liabilities Total liabilities Net assets Summarised Group statement of cash flows m m m m m Cash flows from operating activities Cash flows from investing activities Cash flows from financing activities Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents Other key metricstel 2014 2013 Shares in issue millions 1828.1 1794.7 1474.3 1296.1 968.0 EPRA earnings per share pence Basic NAV per share pence EPRA NAV per share pence Weighted average cost of debt % Weighted average debt maturity years Loan to value % 51.3 53.4 51.8 55.8 56.8 Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 152 Annualised gross rental income Annualised gross rent generated by the asset at the balance sheet date which is made up of the contracted rent including units that are in rentfree periods and estimates of turnover rent
Aegon UK property portfolio
Aviva Commercial Finance Limited
The Board of Directors of Redefine International
Brexit
Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty gives any European Union member the right to withdraw from the EU and outlines the procedure for doing so.
On
29 March 2017 Article 50 was triggered by the UK Government following the vote to leave in June 2016 the EU referendum which is colloquially referred to as Brexit and must be concluded by March 2019
British Virgin Islands
Consumer Price Index Discontinued Company adjustments Items previously added back to arrive at distributable earnings for example debt issue costs and sharebased payment charges
Earnings Before Interest Tax Depreciation and Amortisation
European Public Real Estate Association EPRA earnings Earnings from operational activities as defined by EPRAs Best Practice guidelines EPRA NAV European Public Real Estate Association Net Asset Value EPRA NIY European Public Real Estate Association Net Initial
The annualised rental income based on the cash rents passing at the balance sheet date less nonrecoverable property operating expenses divided by the gross market value of the property EPRA NNNAV European Public Real Estate Association Triple Net Asset Value EPRA occupancy Occupancy expressed as a percentage of ERV representing a measure of let space EPRA toppedup initial yield Net initial yield adjusted for the expiration of rentfree periods or other incentives
Earnings per share
The estimated market rental value of lettable space which could reasonably be expected to be obtained on a new letting or rent review
European Union EUR or Euro Euro the lawful common currency of participating member states of the European Monetary Union GBP Pound or Sterling Great British Pound the legal currency of the UK
Global Property Research
Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark
International Accounting Standards Board
International Financial Reporting Standards
International Hotel Properties Limited formerly International Hotel Group Limited Indexed leases A lease with rent review provisions which are dependent upon calculations with reference to an index such as the consumer price index or the retail price index
Investment Property Databank
Internal rate of return
JSE Limited licensed as an exchange and a public company incorporated under the laws of South Africa and the operator of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange
Key Performance Indicators Lease incentives Any incentives offered to occupiers to enter into a lease.
Typically the incentive will be an initial rentfree period or a cash contribution to fit out or similar costs
Likeforlike
Likeforlike income Income generated by assets which were held by the Group throughout both the current and comparable periods for which there has been no significant development which materially impacts upon income and used to illustrate change in comparable income values Likeforlike property Property which has been held at both the current and comparative balance sheet dates for which there has been no significant development and used to illustrate change in comparable capital values
The London Stock Exchange Loantovalue or LTV The ratio of net debt divided by the market value of investment property.
Calculated on a proportionate share of value basis
The Luxembourg Stock Exchange
Net Asset Value
Noncontrolling interest Net debt Total nominal value of bank borrowings less cash and cash equivalents
Revolving Credit Facility Redefine International RDI RI PLC the Company or the Group Redefine International P.
RedefineBDL or RBDL RedefineBDL Hotel Group Limited Redefine Properties or RPL Redefine Properties Limited a company listed on the JSE and a 29.52 per cent shareholder of the Company
Redefine Earls Court Management Limited Reversionary yield The anticipated yield to which the initial yield will rise or fall once the rent reaches the ERV
Revenue per available room
Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors
Redefine International Holdings Limited
Redefine International Management Holdings Limited
Redefine Hotel Holdings Limited
Redefine Hotel Management Limited
South Africa
South African Institute of Chartered Accountants
United Kingdom
A UK Real Estate Investment Trust.
A REIT must be a publicly quoted company with at least threequarters of its profits and assets derived from a qualifying property rental business.
Income and capital gains from the property rental business are exempt from tax but the REIT is required to distribute at least 90 per cent of those profits to shareholders.
Tax is payable on nonqualifying activities of the residual business Underlying earnings rebased The calculation of underlying earnings was revised during the year ended 31 August 2017 to align to the EPRA earnings metric as adjusted for foreign exchange gains and debt fair value accretion charges only
Weighted average unexpired lease term Other information Glossary Designed and produced by site Registered office Merchants House 24 North Quay
Isle of Man IM1 4LE Corporate head office 33 Regent Street London SW1Y 4NE Isle of Man administrator IQE Limited Merchants House 24 North Quay
Isle of Man IM1 4LE UK joint financial advisers and corporate brokers Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET
Morgan Cazenove 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf London E14 5JP South African corporate adviser Java Capital Proprietary Limited 6A Sandown Valley Crescent Sandton 2196
South Africa PO Box 2087 Parklands 2121 JSE sponsor Java Capital Trustees and Sponsors Proprietary Limited 6A Sandown Valley Crescent Sandton 2196
South Africa PO Box 2087 Parklands 2121 Legal adviser to Isle of Man law Simcocks Advocates Limited Ridgeway House Ridgeway Street
Isle of Man IM99 1PY Legal adviser to English law CMS Cameron McKenna Nabarro Olswang LLP Registration number OC 78 Cannon Street London EC4N 6AF UK transfer secretaries Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU South African transfer secretaries Computershare Investor Services Proprietary Limited Rosebank Towers 15 Biermann Avenue
Johannesburg 2196 South Africa PO Box 61051 Marshaltown 2107
KPMG
1 Harbourmaster Place
Dublin 1
Property valuers Savills Advisory Services Limited 33 Margaret Street London W1G 0JD Savills Advisory Services GmbH Taunusanlage 19 60325 Frankfurt
Strutt and Parker 13 Hill Street London W1J 5LQ BNP Paribas Real Estate Jersey Limited BNP Paribas House Anley Street Jersey JE2 3QE Offices and advisers Printed on Splendorgel Extra White an FSC mixed sources paper manufactured using pulp from well managed forests at a mill accredited with EMAS and ISO 14001 environmental standards.
Printed by CPI Colour who are ISO 14001 certified CarbonNeutral and FSC chain of custody certified.
The inks used are vegetable oil based.
RDI REIT P. formerly Redefine International P.
Annual Report 2017 RDI REIT P.
