GBGI
Annual Report GBGI Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report 01 Highlights 02 Chairmans statement
04 Chief Executive Officers statement
07 Chief Financial Officers review
Governance
10 Board of Directors 12 Directors report 13 Corporate governance statement 17 Audit Committee report 19 Directors remuneration report 21 Directors statement Financial Statements 22 Independent auditors report 23 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 24 Consolidated statement of financial position 25 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 26 Consolidated cash flow statement 27 Notes to the consolidated financial statements Corporate Information 66 Company information
GBGI leads the way in providing international employee benefits GBGI is one of the largest independent fully integrated providers of international benefits in the world.
In 2017  we celebrated our 36th year of serving the needs of expatriates thirdcountry nationals and local nationals.
GBGI operates under the following brands GBG Insurance Limited  Insurance entity domiciled in Guernsey Channel Islands Global Benefits Group Inc.
GBG  Managing General Underwriter based in California in the United States Because of our unique underwriting platform GBG can offer a multitude of insurance products  including medical life income replacement and travel to individuals and groups of any size practically anywhere in the world.
As globalisation of the worlds economy continues to accelerate GBG maintains its position as a market leader in developing customised products that are desperately needed by international and multinational companies.
View our website at site GBGI Annual Report 2017 01 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Key performance indicators Profit before income tax 2016 10.7m Total revenue 2016 108.2m
2016 12.3m Gross written premiums 2016 153.6m Net written premiums 2016 77.7m YoY Growth in GWP 19.4% 2016 9.2% The entire issued ordinary share capital of GBGI was admitted to trading on AIM a market operated by the London Stock Exchange on 22 February 2017.
The Company raised gross proceeds of 32.0 million before expenses by way of a placing of 21.3 million new ordinary and existing treasury shares at a placing price of 150 pence per ordinary share.
Global Benefits Group and AXA have agreed to engage in a global strategic partnership and will work together to enter new highgrowth IPMI markets and segments.
The Group continued to produce robust sales in the Latin America IPMI individual market and set the stage to increase group business and enter new regions for the next fiscal year.
The TieCare International brand landed its largestever group medical insurance account and maintained its presence as a dominant player in the international educational employee benefits segment.
The incorporation of GBG Assist and the acquisition of QHM established new revenue streams for the Group in the international customer service claims processing and network provider segments.
GBGs London office hired a new head of its Life and Disability initiative to increase sales and distribution channels in this profitable vertical product line.
GBG China reorganised its management structure to better position itself for improved product and service offerings for the next fiscal year.
GBGI Annual Report 2017 02 Strategic Report
Chairmans statement
Overview
I am delighted to introduce the maiden Annual Report and Accounts for GBGI for the year ending 30 June 2017.
It has been a landmark year for the Company having achieved a successful AIM listing in February 2017.
This report covers the performance of the Groups pre listing parent Saxton Lane from 1 July 2016 to 21 February 2017 and GBGI Limited from 22 February 2017 to 30 June 2017.
Building on our proven growth track record the Group grew gross written premiums to in excess of 183.5 million for the first time in its history with revenue for the year growing over 23 percent.
This performance has been achieved against the demanding backdrop of preparing the business for its admission to AIM and the consequent transition of the business to comply with the highgovernance and ethical standards of the QCA Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies.
Over the past year we have delivered a strong financial performance further strengthening our balance sheet and declaring a maiden dividend.
Progressive change Reflecting on 2017 I am pleased with the significant strides made by GBGI.
We have delivered on our business plans and have continued to distribute and underwrite medical life and disability and travel insurance across over 120 jurisdictions worldwide.
The completion of our AIM listing earlier this year was a landmark event for the business.
The funds raised have improved an already robust capital position with our solvency coverage ratio standing at 150.4 percent at 30 June 2017 and A.
Best the ratings agency upgrading its outlook on GBGIs Financial Strength rating in July 2017.
The positive reputational benefits from the listing have already been felt in terms of commercial momentum.
Bill Ward NonExecutive Chairman GBGI Annual Report 2017 03 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Strategic and operational evolution During the year we further diversified our business by risk product distribution partner and geography.
We expanded our business into the Georgia region via an investment with a local operator whilst strengthening origination relationships worldwide.
Our strategic reinsurance agreement with AXA concluded in March 2017 offers both a fundamentally strong risk partner and a commercial arrangement which will allow us to open up material new growth avenues.
Good progress has already been made on this front.
Operationally we have been focused on adapting our business for current and future growth investing in decentralising operations and augmenting our IT infrastructure to enable operational effectiveness.
Our aim is quite simply to offer the best possible levels of customer service enabling high retention levels and future referrals from our distribution partners.
Controlling our value chain via integrated operations is key and we support our policyholders via a global network of offices providing medically trained 247 support.
The Board and governance The corporate governance environment of the business has undergone significant change during the year in keeping with the requirements of being public and recognising the size and scope of the business today.
In addition to my appointment as NonExecutive Chairman the Group welcomed Anne Gunther Murray Wood and David Gibson as NonExecutive Directors effective from admission to AIM in February 2017.
In July 2017 the Board welcomed Doug Trussler as a new NonExecutive Director and representative of our long term shareholder Bison
To better align with our business model we also have changed the Companys yearend date to 31 December from 30 June.
That means our next Annual Report will be due out early in the second quarter of calendar year 2018.
Dividend
The profitability of our business combined with the strength of our solvency position have allowed us to declare a maiden dividend in line with our stated policy.
We have proposed a final dividend of 0.06 for the year to 30 June 2017 and looking forward we intend to adopt a progressive dividend policy.
Outlook
As I close my first financial year as Chairman we are pleased with the significant progress we have made.
We are well positioned to build on our momentum as we look forward into 2018.
We have a proven business model strong financial profile and a drive to deliver sustainable growth that is underpinned by prudent underwriting which gives us confidence in our ability to deliver enhanced shareholder returns for the future.
I would like to thank my fellow board members the senior leadership team and all colleagues across the business for their contribution to a year of strategic evolution.
It is their knowledge skills and professionalism that delivers for customers and shareholders and it is my privilege as Chairman to work alongside them.
Bill Ward NonExecutive Chairman 21 November 2017 Building on proven sustainable growth the Group achieved a milestone this year of over 183.5 million gross written premiums.
GBGI Annual Report 2017 04 Strategic Report
Chief Executive Officers statement
The year to 30 June 2017 was transformative for GBGI with the strategic progress made by the business over the years reflected in a successful listing on AIM in February 2017.
The Group has successfully carved out a differentiated niche in the global benefits market offering the global reach of the multinational insurers combined with the flexibility and customer responsiveness of local brokers and managing agents.
This differentiated proposition underpinned by our international network of distribution partners has propelled the ongoing growth of the business.
We are careful to ensure that the levels of customer service exceed expectations and by operating across the value chain we seek to maintain close control over the service.
Over the past year we have benefitted from our focus on niche markets underserved by our competitors and remain the only insurer quoted on the London Stock Exchange that derives all of its revenues from the international medical life disability and travel insurance markets.
Strong financial performance Gross written premiums GWP grew 19.4 percent to 183.5 million driven by moderate rate increases and growth in policy count.
An increase in the business we retain on balance sheet underpinned by our consistent loss ratio track record drove higher net earned premiums up 29.3 percent to 91.4 million.
Overall net revenues grew 24.2 percent to 134.3 million.
Our commitment to delivering underwriting profit to our reinsurers enabled by the quality of our underwriting operations and data history led to continued strong insurance profits for the year.
With the business growing rapidly we are focused on ensuring the appropriate level of investment in the operational infrastructure of the business.
Investment in operations including in staffing levels and training led to the expense ratio increasing to 29.6 percent FY 2016 28.6 percent.
This investment in growth will enable our growth plans to be undertaken from a position of platform strength.
EBITDA in the year was 13.6 million a growth of 10.6 percent during the year.
Profit before tax increased 29.8 percent to 13.9 million FY 2016 10.7 million.
Profit attributable to the Group after tax increased 29.8 percent to 13.5 million FY 2016 10.4 million.
Bob Dubrish
Chief Executive Officer GBGI Annual Report 2017 05
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our underlying basic EPS was 0.18.
This is a strong performance achieved against a backdrop of the successful IPO project.
It is pleasing to deliver good returns for our shareholders whilst allowing for future investment and growth.
A more detailed commentary can be found in the Chief Financial Officers review on pages 07 to 09.
A landmark year The year to 30 June 2017 marked a number of important strategic milestones for the business.
The Group was admitted to trading on AIM in February 2017.
We increased our global reach by adding territories and deepening our operations in existing territories.
We built out our managed service offering a new revenue stream for us and underpinned our risk profile via our strategic reinsurance agreement with AXA.
Admission to AIM Our admission to AIM was an important milestone for the business.
GBGI was originally founded in 1981.
The
Group has evolved in this time growing in a controlled manner and establishing an international footprint without incurring a global fixed cost base.
Obtaining a public listing was important for us on a number of different levels not least via the 32 million of capital raised to support expansion opportunities but more fundamentally as recognition that GBGI is a leader of standing and substance in the international benefits market.
The listing has improved our corporate governance procedures and transparency of performance and position factors welcomed by our regulator ratings agency and commercial partners.
Finally we were able to welcome new shareholders onto the register and I look forward to maintaining a close dialogue with our shareholders going forward.
Maximising our reach In April 2017 we announced a new strategic partnership with a new Georgiabased insurance company.
This new business JSC Risk Management and Insurance Company will target corporate insurance sectors both in Georgia and across Central and Eastern Europe.
Whilst GBGI is already active in over 120 jurisdictions we continually assess and conduct due diligence in territories where we are not currently active to determine if its appropriate for shareholders to allocate resources and capital.
Im pleased with the progress made in Georgia and it is a market demonstrating real potential.
In addition to entering new regions we also seek where appropriate to maximise opportunities in existing markets.
The Group reaffirmed its position in Latin America and the Caribbean as a leader in the IPMI International Private Medical Insurance market.
In 2017 the Group experienced solid revenue growth and profitability in the region its largest geographical market.
Building upon our established brand and track record GBGI has expanded its product footprint targeting the corporate market in particular.
We can clearly see the opportunities for further product and territory penetration in Latin America and we will seek to deliver on these opportunities whilst delivering a consistently high level of service to customers.
New income streams Extending the product offering also presents a strategic growth opportunity and the Group acquired Quality Health Management QHM a Floridabased third party administration TPA firm in January 2017 as a complement to its GBG Assist business.
The latter was launched in July 2016 providing worldwide customer support with access to assistance on a wide range of medical services from basic enquiries to emergency medical situations 24 hours a day and in over 180 different languages.
Whilst GBG Assist services Group customers it also offers its services to third parties under the QHM brand.
The business has performed very well in its first year of operation and offers tangible growth opportunities with low capital input.
Strategic partnership with AXA In Q4 2016 the business signed a strategic partnership agreement with the global insurer AXA.
AXA is now the sole quota share reinsurance provider for the business.
In addition to a fundamentally sound balance sheet position AXA also presents GBGI with a number of new business opportunities notably by providing access to fronting arrangements broadening the Groups footprint.
Im pleased to report that the partnership has started to yield positive results and is testament to GBGIs standing in the market.
The listing on AIM has improved our corporate governance procedures and transparency of performance and position factors welcomed by our regulator ratings agency and commercial partners.
GBGI Annual Report 2017 06 Strategic Report TieCare International The Groups educational division continued to perform well cementing its positioning as a market leader in its segment.
In the fiscal year TieCare hit a new high in annual premium 27.1 million after completing its largest international school account sale.
The division currently works with more than 150 international educational groups a record for the Group.
TieCare works primarily with U. portfolio in 2018.
Benefitting from underwriting excellence Over recent periods the business has sought to leverage its underwriting approach agility and proven track record by retaining more of the risk it writes on balance sheet.
In the year to 30 June 2017 we retained c.
84 percent of the medical life and disability business we wrote.
Our underwriting performance is such that this has been a significant driver of profit growth with our underwriting result contributing significantly to our operating profit.
We are careful to maintain the diversified nature of the book by both distributor and geography and we envisage a stable retention level of 84 percent looking forward.
Commitment to our customers The foundations of our business have been built on ensuring we always deliver the highest levels of customer service.
Our claims services are often needed at times of stress and hardship and we remain committed to ensuring our customers are supported and cared for wherever in the world they may be.
The growth of our inhouse GBG Assist operations and our acquisition of QHM are testament to our investment in and commitment to ensuring the best possible outcomes for our customers.
Regulation and compliance Our view is that the regulatory oversight across all our markets will continue to evolve.
We monitor and evolve our risk and compliance activities to ensure we operate effectively and correctly.
Our people As GBGI has expanded we have welcomed many new colleagues.
Our aim is to attract and retain the best talent.
We now have some 302 colleagues and a culture that prioritises diligent resultsdriven and collegial working practices.
I would like to thank all our colleagues for their efforts during the year and subsequently.
Outlook
As increased globalisation and migration foster the longterm growth of the international benefits insurance sector we have a number of strategic initiatives in place to build on our position.
We see the opportunity to expand our Life and Disability business and have recently hired a new vertical leader for this product.
We continue our expansion plans in the student travel and shortterm medical markets which demonstrate strong demand characteristics.
We are very well placed to leverage our flexible international operating base and strong funding position to continue to write profitable business.
We approach 2018 and beyond with confidence in our ability to continue to deliver for our shareholders.
Summary
We will continue to enhance our position as a leading provider of global benefits insurance globally.
We start FY 2018 from a position of strength.
We have a proprietary network of multiyear relationships with distributors worldwide proven underwriting capability and performance and the balance sheet strength to grow the business whilst maintaining our dividend policy.
We are continuing to invest in the operations of the business to ensure we can deliver on our growth aspirations in an efficient compliant manner.
Our
Bob Dubrish
Chief Executive Officer
21 November 2017
Chief Executive Officers statement
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Chief Financial Officers review
Delivering financial performance This is GBGIs maiden set of annual results since listing on AIM in February this year and I am delighted to report a strong financial performance and robust financial position from which to grow the business in 2018 and beyond.
These results once again demonstrate the excellent progress we have made in developing our business over the years from an agency model through to a full service integrated insurer writing profitable insurance business across 120 jurisdictions.
Gross written premiums GWP increased 19.4 percent from 153.6 million to 183.5 million net revenues increased 24.2 percent from 108.2 million to 134.3 million and our profit after tax was 13.7 million FY 2016 10.4 million.
We further strengthened our balance sheet in the period via ongoing profitability and the equity capital raised at the time of our IPO.
This further strengthening was recognized by A.
Best as it upgraded its outlook on our Financial Strength rating to B Good in July 2017.
Our solvency position at 30 June 2017 stands at c.
150.4 percent Trading highlights million 12 months to 30 June 2017 12 months to 30 June 2016 Gross written premiums 183.5 153.6 Total revenue 134.3 108.2 Total net claims and other expenses 121.3 96.1 EBITDA 13.6 12.3 Operating income 13.0 12.0 Profit before tax 13.9 10.7
The Groups earnings before interest depreciation and amortisation EBITDA grew 10.6 percent for the year from 12.3 million in FY 2016 to 13.6 million in FY 2017.
This increase is reflective of the Groups continuing ability to deliver operating income.
Year ended 30 June million EBITDA calculation 2017 2016 Operating income 13.0 12.0 Depreciation and amortisation 0.6 0.3 Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer Prescribed Capital Requirement using the solvency model supplied by the Guernsey Financial Services Commission GFSC.
GBGI Annual Report 2017 08 Strategic Report Income statement Gross written premiums GWP We delivered strong growth in GWP during the year.
GWP for the fiscal year to 30 June 2017 was 183.5 million growth of 19.4 percent over the prior year period.
Medical remains the primary product line for the business representing some 86 percent of GWP in the year Inclusive of Travel.
Performance in Travel up 143.4 percent to 24.1 million was very encouraging whilst our high return Life and Disability continued to deliver profitable growth increasing to 24.4 million.
Year ended 30 June million Product 2017 2016 Medical 134.4 120.0 Life and disability 24.4 23.4 Travel 24.1 9.9 Specialty 0.6 0.3 Total GWP 183.5 153.6
Our medical insurance products include a variety of group and individual plans with a range of benefits and levels of cover including emergency evacuation maternity cover dental cover wellness programmes and preexisting conditions.
Total Medical GWP grew 12 percent in the year ended 30 June 2017 to 134.4 million FY 2016 120.0 million as a result of premium growth across nearly all our geographic regions.
Life and disability Our life insurance products are typically annually renewable term life policies although a small number of policies with slightly longer terms up to 18 months may be written.
Term life benefits are set at either a fixed sum or as a multiple of the insureds salary.
We also write both longterm and shortterm disability products with benefits typically set as a proportion of the insureds salary.
Total Life and Disability GWP grew 4 percent in the year ended 30 June 2017 to 24.4 million FY 2016 23.4 million.
Travel
We continued to experience strong growth in Travel with growth in the core business supplemented by the addition of student based travel insurance products.
Travel GWP was 24.1 million a 143.4 percent increase over the prior year FY 2016 9.9 million.
Net written premiums NWP NWP grew 36.0 percent in the year ended 30 June 2017 to 105.7 million FY 2016 77.7 million.
The growth in NWP reflects both growth in GWP and higher risk retention.
Higher retention levels has been a contributing factor behind the growth in our profitability and reflects the consistency of our underwriting performance over a sustained period the quality of our underwriting process and our rich data histories.
Looking forward we expect retention levels to stabilise broadly around 60 percent for the next two policy years.
Total revenue Total revenues grew 24.1 percent to 134.3 million in the year 2017 reflecting the overall growth of GWP across the medical products platform and the increased levels of retention of that premium.
Commission and Fees income grew 14.4 percent to 42.9 million marginally lower than GWP growth but in line with expectations.
Expenses
Year ended 30 June million 2017 2016 Net claims 47.3 37.5 Administrative expenses 39.8 31.0 Commission expense 34.2 27.7 Net claims were 47.3 million a 26.0 percent increase over the prior year but within the relevant range when compared against the Groups increased level of retained risk premium.
In general the Companys overall medical risk underwriting results for policy year 2016 the major policy year that impacts the FY 2017 financial results are producing profitability that is in line with our expectations.
Although still early in the measurement period the policy year 2017 medical underwriting results show an improving trend compared with the previous policy year.
The underwriting results for life and disability continue to deliver excellent profitability in line with the results from prior years.
Administrative expenses were 39.8 million increasing 28.4 percent from 31.0 million in FY 2016.
The increase in administrative expenses was driven by the continued investment in GBGIs operational platform and associated infrastructure certain oneoff expenses and IPO related expenses.
The expense increases were offset to some degree by improved operational cost management processes that were implemented in the first half of the fiscal year.
Chief Financial Officers review continued GBGI Annual Report 2017 09 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Commission expenses increased 23.5 percent from 27.7 million to 34.2 million broadly in line with the growth in retained risk premium and in line with our expectations.
Profitability
Group operating income increased by 8.4 percent to 13.0 million FY 2016 12.0 million driven by growth in our insurance book increased risk retention levels the excellent underwriting results and the impact of the implementation of enhanced internal cost management processes.
Profit before tax increased 29.8 percent to 13.9 million FY 2016 10.7 million.
Profit attributable to the Group increased 29.8 percent to 13.5 million FY 2016 10.4 million.
Earnings per share Earnings per share EPS was 0.18 calculated with reference to post tax profit of 13.5 million and weighted average number of shares in issue of 73643652.
Dividend
In line with our stated policy we have proposed a maiden final dividend at 30 June 2017 of 0.06 per share.
Our stated dividend policy is that the annual dividend will be a certain percentage of the distributable profit with one third paid as an interim dividend and two thirds as a final dividend.
Given the timing of our listing in February 2017 GBGI did not pay an interim dividend but instead will be paying a final dividend of two thirds of 60 percent of the distributable profits for the financial year ending 30 June 2017.
Balance sheet Net assets and working capital Net assets at 30 June 2017 were 58.4 million 30 June 2016 28.2 million with growth driven by the combined effect of growth in GWP cash generation IPO related restructuring and equity raise.
Net cash The Groups operating activities continue to be highly cash generative and during FY 2017 cash inflow from operating activities was 14.0 million.
The business is prudently financed in keeping with the commercial demands of our business.
Net cash at 30 June 2017 was 76.2 million reflecting the operating performance in addition to the impact of the IPO proceeds.
Insurance liabilities and reserves Total gross insurance liabilities as at 30 June 2017 of 118.9 million comprises 79.0 million of unearned premiums which are deferred to be recognised in subsequent periods 30 June 2016 65.1 million and outstanding claims liabilities of 39.8 million 30 June 2016 40.7 million.
Unearned premiums increased 21.4 percent from the prior period due to timing of booked premium and the overall increase in GWP.
Outstanding claim liabilities was approximately even to the prior period reflecting timing and overall improvements in the underwriting result.
The provisioning for outstanding claims liabilities is an area of significant judgment as it estimates the cost required to settle all unpaid claims both reported and incurred but not reported IBNR at the balance sheet date.
The Group manages this risk by applying a consistent reserving methodology to each of its product areas and measuring actual loss amounts against the reserves quarterly.
In addition the Group engages an independent third party to review the reserves and reserve methodologies annually.
Reinsurance contracts The Group uses excess of loss and quota share reinsurance arrangements to prudently manage its risk exposure therefore protecting its solvency and underwriting capability.
Excess of loss reinsurance is designed to prevent large claims from having a material impact on performance whilst our quota share arrangements allow us to benefit from our underwriting excellence without having to fully allocate capital to back the policy underwritten.
In recent periods we have actively sought to increase our risk retention levels as our consistent underwriting performance gives us confidence that we are able to generate excellent underwriting returns.
Overall our proven approach to risk structuring is to maximise return whilst reducing volatility risk caused by the accumulation of losses and large individual claims.
Reinsurance assets comprising reinsurers share of outstanding claims liabilities decreased 5.4 percent year on year to 22.7 million at 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 24.0 million due to the Groups increased risk retention levels.
Reinsurance assets have been impacted by our strategic decision to retain more of the risk across all of our product areas.
However we anticipate that we will maintain our current risk retention levels into the near future.
Solvency
The solvency position of the Group at 30 June 2017 was strong with solvency coverage of approximately 150.4 percent at 30 June 2017.
This provides a strong capital position for the business going forward and gives us confidence in our ability to meet our stated dividend policy.
Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer 21 November 2017 10
GBGI Annual Report 2017 Board of Directors Bill Ward NonExecutive Chairman Bill has over 30 years of experience in the healthcare and health insurance sector.
Bill was formerly COO of Bupas Global Health Insurance businesses Managing Director of Bupa International and CEO of Cigna Europe.
Bill is founder and CEO of Lime White Advisory Limited and is currently a Senior Advisor at the Boston Consulting Group for their worldwide healthcare and insurance practices.
His independent NonExecutive experience includes Al Noor Hospitals Group PLC which was a FTSE 250 company.
Bill is a NonExecutive Director of Ingenica Solutions Limited.
Bill is Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators ACIS qualified.
Bob Dubrish
Chief Executive Officer
Bob has over 35 years of experience in the financial services sector with a track record in leading and building high growth businesses.
He joined the Group in February 2015 and was formally appointed as a Director of the Company on 26 January 2017.
He is responsible for the dayto day management of the
Bob was formerly the president of the wholesale division of New Penn Financial of Shellpoint Partners LLC and senior vice president at LoanDepot
Bob was also founder and Director of Option One Mortgage Corporation Option One until 2008.
Option One was founded as a whollyowned subsidiary of Plaza Home Mortgage
Financial Group in 1995.
It was subsequently bought by HandR Block in 1997.
At
Option One Bob oversaw its growth to one of the largest nonbank mortgage companies in the U.
Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer Eric has 30 years of experience of financial management across insurance healthcare and manufacturing sectors.
He joined the Group as Chief Financial Officer in November 2011 and is responsible for finance operations and administration of the
Eric was formally CFO of Marina Medical Billing Service Inc. in Washington D.
Prior to this he held various senior financial management positions including CFO of TriStar Electronics International Inc.
Pressure Systems Inc.
Andy Thorburn Director of Strategic
Andy has over 30 years of experience in the financial services sector.
He joined the Group in 1999 as Chief Marketing Officer and was promoted to President in 2001 CEO in 2005 and Executive Chairman in 2015.
Andy had previously founded a specialised insurance agency in New
After managing its initial growth Andy completed an acquisition and subsequent merger that resulted in the establishment of the Copeland Companies.
As the senior marketing officer for the new entity Andy oversaw its continued growth and the Copeland Companies was subsequently acquired by the Travelers Insurance Company in 1985.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Anne Gunther Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Anne has over 40 years of experience in financial services in the UK with executive experience across all sectors including insurance broking and wealth management.
Anne is also currently NonExecutive Director of AIMquoted Mattioli Woods plc Masthaven Bank Limited and Water Plus
Anne was formerly CEO of both Standard Life Bank and Standard Life Healthcare a Director of Standard Life Wealth and was previously a Director of Cooperative Bank plc.
In her NonExecutive career Anne has chaired audit risk and remuneration committees in both the charitable and commercial sectors.
Anne is a Chartered Banker and Associate of Chartered Institute of Bankers U.
Administration from Warwick Business School.
David Gibson NonExecutive Director David founded Molokai Partners LLC in 2007.
Molokai Partners is a private investment firm that acts as investment adviser to Finbars controlling trust.
Previously David was a Partner at Socratic Fund Management LP and Managing Director at Tremblant Capital LP.
He started his career at William
Davids current directorships include Solarsilicon Recycling Services LLC Clinical Research Laboratories LLC Rockets Sports Group LLC and XSi International
David earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in History from
Lawrence University.
Douglas Trussler NonExecutive Director Douglas Trussler is a Partner and CoFounder of Bison Capital Asset Management LLC and the manager of various Bison Capital investment funds managing in excess of 800 million of institutional capital.
Previously he was at Windward Capital Partners LP and Credit Suisse First Boston.
He has extensive experience in investing in growth companies and supporting entrepreneurial management teams to build longterm value.
Murray Wood NonExecutive Director Murray has over 20 years of experience in the financial services sector.
Murray was formerly Global Head of Insurance Solutions at Japanese bank Nomura where he was responsible for making principal investments in life insurance related opportunities globally.
As part of this role Murray set up Nomura Re to allow Nomura to participate in reinsurance transactions with insurance clients.
Prior to that Murray was European Head of Insurance Solutions at Lehman Brothers in London where he focused on European clients and Director of Insurance Solutions at Barclays
Murrays early career in finance focused on providing mergers acquisitions and capital management advisory services to European insurance companies.
Governance
GBGI Annual Report 2017 Directors report The Directors present the Annual Report of GBGI Limited GBGI or the Company for the year ended 30 June 2017.
Principal activities and business review GBGI is a leading integrated provider of international benefits insurance operating globally across over 120 jurisdictions.
Trading principally as Global Benefits Group or GBG the Group distributes and underwrites medical life and disability and travel insurance with a client base that spans multinational corporations expatriates local high net worth Individuals international schools non profit organisations and international students.
GBGI is a fully integrated insurance group providing services from policy sales to claims administration and servicing and is committed to delivering high levels of customer service.
GBGI is incorporated in Guernsey.
Further information on the Groups activities is contained in the Chief Executive Officers Statement on pages 04 to 06.
A review of the business during the financial year is contained in the Chairmans Statement Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officers Report on pages 02 to 09.
Directors
The Directors in office at the date of this report are as follows William Bill Ward NonExecutive Chairman Robert Bob Dubrish Chief Executive Officer Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer Andrew Andy Thorburn Director of Strategic Planning Anne Gunther Senior Independent NonExecutive
David Gibson NonExecutive Director Douglas Trussler NonExecutive Director Murray Wood NonExecutive Director Their biographies are shown on pages 10 to 11.
Directors remuneration The Remuneration Report is set out on pages 19 to 20.
Directors interests in shares The interests of Directors in shares of the Company are disclosed in the Remuneration Report on pages 19 to 20.
Going concern Having made appropriate enquiries and considering the Groups forecasts the Directors consider that the Group has sufficient resources to continue for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Financial Statements.
Auditor
The Auditor BDO USA LLP has expressed its willingness to continue to act as the Companys auditor and resolutions for its appointment and for the Directors to determine its remuneration will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Annual General Meeting The Companys Annual General Meeting will take place in Guernsey on Tuesday 19 December 2017 at 1100am at The Old Government House Hotel St Anns Place St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 2NU.
On behalf of the Board William Bill Ward Robert Bob Dubrish
Chief Executive Officer
21 November 2017 21 November 2017 13 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Corporate governance statement The Company was incorporated in Guernsey under the Companies Guernsey Law 2008 as a noncellular company limited by shares and has been listed on the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock Exchange AIM since 22 February 2017.
The Board is committed to achieving high standards of corporate governance integrity and business ethics.
The
Board has taken into consideration the QCA Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies produced by the Quoted Companies Alliance the QCA Code and has taken steps to apply the principles of the QCA Code in so far as it can be applied practically given the size of the Group its stage of development and the nature of its operations.
The QCA Code adopts key elements of the U.
Corporate
Governance Code as well as other relevant guidelines and applies these to the needs and particular circumstances of small and midsize quoted companies on a public market.
The Board of Directors The Board comprises eight Directors an independent NonExecutive Chairman two independent NonExecutive Directors two nonindependent NonExecutive Directors and three Executive Directors the Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer and Director of Strategic Planning.
All Director biographies can be found on pages 10 to 11.
The Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer and Director of Strategic Planning were in office during the whole of the year ended 30 June 2017 as were Murray Wood and David Gibson.
William Bill Ward and Anne Gunther have been in office since the Companys admission to AIM on 22 February 2017.
Subsequent to the year end Bison Capital Equity Partners IIIB L.
Bison Capital exercised its right under the Relationship Agreement dated 20 February 2017 to appoint a NonExecutive Director to the Board.
Douglas Trussler was appointed on 24 July 2017.
The Board is collectively responsible for the effective and longterm success of the Company.
It agrees the strategic direction and governance structure to achieve the long term success of the Company and deliver shareholder value.
The Boards full responsibilities are set out in a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Board.
Chairman and Senior Independent Director The Chairman William Bill Ward is deemed by his fellow Directors to be independent and to have no conflicting relationships with the Company.
Anne Gunther has been appointed by the Board as the Senior Independent Director of the Company.
She provides a channel for any shareholder concerns regarding the Chairman Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer.
Chairmans duties The Chairman is responsible for providing leadership for the Board and ensuring its effectiveness in all aspects of its role and ensuring Directors have sufficient resources available to them to fulfil their statutory duties.
The
Chairman is responsible for running Board meetings ensuring there is sufficient challenge from NonExecutive Directors and maintaining a particular focus on strategic issues.
The Chairman promotes a culture of openness and debate by facilitating the effective contribution of NonExecutive Directors in particular and by encouraging a constructive relationship between Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
Board members are encouraged to openly and constructively challenge proposals made by executive management.
Board agendas are reviewed and agreed to in advance to ensure that each Board meeting utilises the Boards time most efficiently.
Robert Bob Dubrish Chief Executive Officer is charged with leading the daytoday management of the Group.
The role of the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer are separate with a distinct division of responsibilities to protect the independence of the Chairman and his role leading the Board.
Governance
GBGI Annual Report 2017 Corporate governance statement continued Board operation The Directors meet at regular scheduled Board meetings held at least six times a year.
Additional meetings are arranged as necessary.
During the year ended 30 June 2017 and since the Companys admission to AIM the number of Board meetings attended by each Director was as follows Director Attended William Bill Ward NonExecutive Chairman 66 Robert Bob Dubrish Chief Executive Officer 36 Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer 66 Andrew Andy Thorburn Director of Strategic Planning 56 Anne Gunther Senior Independent Non Executive Director 66 David Gibson NonExecutive Director 56 Murray Wood NonExecutive Director 56 Douglas Trussler 33 As announced to the market on 24 February 2017 Mr.
Dubrish was absent from the Company earlier in the year due to illness and therefore was unable to attend all Board meetings in 2017.
Appointed with effect from 24 July 2017.
The Board is aware of the other commitments and interests of its Directors and effective procedures are in place to deal with any conflicts of interest which may arise.
Any changes to these commitments and interests are reported to the Board at the earliest opportunity.
The Board receives information prior to each meeting.
A formal agenda and Board papers are produced for each meeting and Board members are given a sufficient period of time to review these prior to meetings taking place.
The Board delegates authority to its Committees to carry out certain tasks on its behalf so that it can operate efficiently and give an appropriate level of attention and consideration to relevant matters.
The composition and role of each Committee is summarised on pages 15 to 16.
Independence of Directors The Board has reviewed the independent status of each individual Director and the Board as a whole.
William Bill Ward provided compliance and governance advice relating to the Companys IPO process.
The Board did not feel that his independence was compromised.
David Gibson and Douglas Trussler have material relationships with the Companys shareholders FINBAR GBG Holdings Limited and Bison Capital respectively.
They are therefore deemed by the Company to be nonindependent NonExecutive Directors.
The NonExecutive Directors both independent and nonindependent contribute a wide range of skills and experience to the Board.
Each NonExecutive Director brings individual character and judgment to bear on strategic matters and the performance of the Company.
Board evaluation An evaluation of the effectiveness and performance of the Board and its Committees will be conducted on an annual basis.
Election of Directors In accordance with the Companys Articles of Incorporation each Director shall retire from office at each Annual General Meeting AGM of the Company and offer himherself for reappointment by Shareholders.
Accordingly all Directors shall stand for reelection at the forthcoming AGM.
The Board is satisfied that it maintains an effective and appropriate balance of skills to reflect the Companys business its AIM listing and its stage of development.
The Board is also satisfied that it has suitable levels of experience and independence to allow the Directors to discharge their duties and responsibilities effectively.
The
Board believes that all Directors continue to make effective and important contributions to the Companys success and that Shareholders should support their reelection.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Board Committees The Board has established the following Committees Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Regulatory and Compliance Committee The terms of reference of the Committees are available on the Companys website httpssite
The number of Committee meetings attended by each Director since admission to AIM in their capacity as members of each Committee is as follows
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Regulatory and
Committee
Attended Attended Attended Attended William Bill Ward NonExecutive Chairman  33 22 Robert Bob Dubrish Chief Executive Officer    13 Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer    33 Andrew Andy Thorburn Director of Strategic Planning    23 Anne Gunther Senior Independent NonExecutive Director 55 33 22 David Gibson NonExecutive Director 45 Murray Wood NonExecutive Director 55 33 12 33 Doug Trussler was appointed post yearend on 24 July 2017 and is not a member of any Committee.
Outside of statutory membership of the above Committees the Chairman in agreement with the Chairs of each Committee encourages all Board Directors to attend any Committee meeting as observers as appropriate.
Audit Committee Chairman Anne Gunther Members Murray Wood and David Gibson In compliance with the QCA Code all members of the Audit Committee have extensive relevant financial experience.
The Audit Committee has the primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls and ensuring that the financial performance of the Group is properly measured and reported on.
It receives and reviews reports from the Executive team and Senior Management and auditor relating to interim and annual accounts and the accounting and internal control systems in use throughout the Group.
The Audit Committee will meet at least twice a year and will have unrestricted access to the Companys auditor BDO USA LLP.
The ultimate responsibility for the review and approval of the annual report accounts and the halfyearly reports remains with the Board.
The report from the Audit Committee is set out on pages 17 to 18.
Remuneration Committee Chairman Anne Gunther Members William Bill Ward and Murray Wood The Remuneration Committee is responsible for reviewing the performance of the executive Directors and makes recommendations to the Board on matters relating to their remuneration and terms of employment.
The
Remuneration Committee will also make recommendations to the Board on proposals for the granting of share options and other equity incentives pursuant to any share option scheme or equity incentive scheme in operation from time to time.
The remuneration and terms and conditions of appointment of the NonExecutive Directors of the Company will be set by the Board.
The report from the Remuneration Committee is set on pages 19 to 20.
Governance
GBGI Annual Report 2017 Corporate governance statement continued Nomination Committee Chairman William Bill Ward Members Anne Gunther and Murray Wood The objective of the Nomination Committee is to review the structure size and composition including the skills knowledge experience and diversity of the Board taking into account the Companys current requirements and future development and to make recommendations to the Board with regard to any changes.
The Nomination Committee will also give consideration to succession planning for the Board and will be responsible for identifying and nominating for the approval of the Board candidates to fill board vacancies as and when they arise.
Following review the Nomination Committee was satisfied that the composition of the Board remained appropriate.
Whilst the Company does not have a specific diversity policy in place diversity is one of the factors that will be taken in consideration when appointing new Directors.
An evaluation of the effectiveness and performance of the Board and its Committees will be carried out on an annual basis via leadership from the Nomination Committee.
Regulatory and Compliance Committee Chairman Murray Wood Members Eric Dickelman Robert Bob Dubrish and Andrew Andy Thorburn The Regulatory and Compliance Committee has responsibility for implementing the regulatory and compliance enhancement programme and to monitor any and all of the Groups compliance issues and where required will report their findings to the GBGI Board.
Internal controls The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
This system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement loss and the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Groups system of internal controls includes an ongoing process of identifying monitoring and managing risks by Management who ensure that adequate systems processes and controls are in place.
In addition the Board carries out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company.
Shareholder engagement The Company is committed to ensuring there is effective communication with Shareholders on matters such as governance and strategy so that the Board understands the views of Shareholders on these issues and so that Shareholders receive a balanced and consistent view of the Companys performance.
Communication will primarily be through the AGM which provides an opportunity for Shareholders to meet and ask questions of Directors and
The Board works closely with the Companys Nominated Advisor Canaccord Genuity Limited to ensure appropriate and effective ongoing dialogue with investors and to coordinate and deliver investor roadshows as appropriate.
A range of corporate information is also available to Shareholders investors and the public on the Companys website siteAboutGBGInvestors.
Major shareholder agreements As disclosed within the Companys Initial Public Offering document the Company entered into a Relationship Agreement with Bison Capital on 20 February 2017.
The principal purpose of the Relationship Agreement is to ensure that the Company is capable at all times of carrying on its business independently of Bison Capital and its associates.
Detail of this agreement can be found within the Companys admission document dated 22 February 2017 and no changes have been made to this agreement since that date.
Related parties transactions Upon admission to the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange on 22 February 2017 the Company published within its Listing document details of the related party transactions in existence up to and including the date of admission being 22 February 2017.
There are no additional related party transactions within the meaning of the AIM Rules that are required to be disclosed under the accounting standards applicable to the Company to which the Company was a party during the period of the historical financial information and up to the date of this report.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Audit Committee report The Board has delegated responsibility to the Audit Committee to oversee the financial reporting of the Group including the finance function internal control and risk management and the effectiveness of the audit process.
The Audit Committee provides independent oversight of the senior management team and the external auditor BDO USA LLP.
It regularly reports to the Board on the execution of its duties and responsibilities.
The membership of and attendance at Audit Committee meetings is set out on page 15.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee is Anne Gunther.
All members of the Audit Committee have extensive recent and relevant financial experience as demonstrated within their individual biographies on pages 10 to 17.
The Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer and other Board members may attend Audit Committee meetings by invitation and other members of the senior management team may attend as required.
The Audit Partner and appropriate representatives from the Companys external auditor are invited to attend meetings on a regular basis.
Role of the Audit Committee The principal duties of the Audit Committee which reports its findings to the Board are to monitor the integrity of the Companys financial reporting and significant financial accounting processes policies and judgments review the content of the Annual Report and audited financial statements and advise on whether it is fair balanced understandable and provides the information necessary for Shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The ultimate responsibility for reviewing and approving the annual and halfyearly reports and financial statements remains with the Board monitor the effectiveness and oversee the implementation and maintenance of the Companys internal controls and risk management framework and systems review the Groups risk assessment processes and capability of identifying and managing new risks advise the Board on the Groups risk strategy risk policies and current risk exposures consider annually the effectiveness of the internal audit function consider and make recommendations to the Board to be put to Shareholders at the AGM in relation to the appointment reappointment and removal of the Companys external auditor and advise the Board on the terms of engagement and remuneration of the external auditor and monitor its independence.
The Audit Committee works closely with the Chief Financial Officer and senior management team to ensure that the Audit Committee is provided with the necessary information it requires to discharge its duties.
The Audit Committees meeting agendas are based on annual reporting requirements and other ad hoc issues that arise during the course of the year.
Matters considered during the year The Audit Committee met three times since admission and four times post yearend until the date of this report.
At those meetings the Audit Committee has done the following Decided to change the accounting reference date from 30 June to 31 December Decided to create an internal audit function at the GBGI corporate level Decided to produce audited financial statements for the consolidated Company for the year ended 30 June 2017 Developed the Companys Risk Appetite and Risk Matrix Reviewed the GIL solvency calculations for compliance to Guernsey regulatory requirements Internal controls and risk management Finance function overview Review of financial statements including for key subsidiaries where appropriate Discussed transfer pricing and capitalisation matters within the Group Discussed provisioning for the regional operations Reviewed audit plan and fees and external audit services Reviewed external auditors report to the Committee Decided to recommend the reappointment of BDO USA LLP as the Companys external auditor and to authorise the remuneration of the same and Considered of the effectiveness of the audit process.
Governance
GBGI Annual Report 2017 The Audit Committee has reviewed analysed and challenged the significant assumptions within the audited financial statements with an independent mindset.
It has considered the application of materiality the Auditors assessment of risks of material misstatements if any and how management has responded to the audit.
No significant accounting issues have been identified during the period.
In relation to going concern the Audit Committee has considered the financial forecasts prepared for the period of more than one year subsequent to the date of signing of the financial statements.
The Group must operate within its available cash resources to meet its liabilities as they fall due.
The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the effectiveness of the external audit process it undertakes a review of the audit plan and the audit results report.
It also has the opportunity to meet with the external auditor without management present.
The Audit Committee makes recommendations to the Board on the reappointment remuneration and terms of engagement of the Auditor.
Any concerns with the effectiveness of the external audit process would be reported to the Board.
The Audit Committee assessed the performance of the Auditor in respect of the Annual Report.
No concerns were raised in respect of the year ended 30 June 2017.
The Audit Committee has satisfied itself that safeguards were in place to protect the objectivity and independence of the Auditor.
Generally it is the approach of the Audit Committee not to use the Auditor for nonaudit work.
Following the consideration of the above matters and its detailed review the Audit Committee was of the opinion that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for Shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Terms of reference The Audit Committee keeps its terms of reference under review and makes recommendations for changes to the
The full terms of reference are available on the Companys website at httpssiteAboutGBG
Anne Gunther Chairman of Audit Committee 21 November 2017 Audit Committee report continued 19 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration report The report includes details of the Directors remuneration during the year ended 30 June 2017.
Remuneration Committee The members of the Remuneration Committee and its role are set out on page 15.
Directors interests in shares At 30 June 2017 and as of the date of this report the following Directors held interests in the Ordinary shares of the Company.
Director
Number of
William Bill Ward 66666 Andrew Andy Thorburn 26100462 Save as disclosed in this table none of the Directors have any interest in the share capital of the Company or of any of its subsidiaries whether beneficial or nonbeneficial and neither does any member of his or her family within the meaning set out in the AIM rules.
Executive Directors service contracts and payments for loss of office As set out in Companys Admission document dated 22 February 2017 Robert Bob Dubrish Eric Dickelman and Andrew Andy Thorburn entered into employment agreements with GBG Inc dated 17 February 2017 to serve as Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer and Director of Strategic Planning respectively with an associated notice period of 90 days from either party.
NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment The Companys NonExecutive Directors are not committed by service contracts to the Company and are engaged by letters of appointment.
These provide for three months written notice of termination by either party at any time with no predetermined amounts of compensation.
Annual remuneration of Directors In accordance with AIM Rule 19 the annual remuneration earned for each Director for the year ended 30 June 2017 is shown below.
Director
Annual
Remuneration
Fee or NonExecutive Directors William Bill Ward Chairman 120000 Anne Gunther Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee Chair 65000 Murray Wood 52500 David Gibson 40000 Douglas Trussler 47600
Annual
Remuneration
Fee
Executive Directors Bob Dubrish Chief Executive Officer 325000 Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer 250000 Andy Thorburn Director of Strategic Planning 300000 Appointed upon GBGIs admission to AIM on 22 February 2017.
Remuneration shown on prorata basis Appointed postyear end on 24 July 2017 Based upon employment agreement with GBG Inc.
All Directors are also entitled to be repaid all reasonable travelling hotel and other expenses incurred during the course of hisher duties as a Director.
Share options On 20 February 2017 the Company granted options to acquire 2328900 Ordinary Shares to certain Directors and employees of and consultants to the Group conditional upon and with effect from Admission the Initial Option
The Initial Option Awards are not subject to any performance or other conditions other than continued employment by the Group.
The Initial Option Awards will vest in three equal tranches on the first second and third anniversaries of the date of Admission and may be exercised at the Placing Price from the time of vesting until ten years following Admission when any unexercised options will lapse.
The Remuneration Committee has been established and future options will have appropriate performance incentives attached to them.
Governance
GBGI Annual Report 2017 The interests of the Directors and the Groups persons discharging managerial responsibilities in the Initial Option Awards are as follows Name Role Number of Initial Option Awards Exercise Price Robert Dubrish Chief Executive Officer 297500 150 pence Eric Dickelman Chief Financial Officer 238000 150 pence Save as set out above no Director has any option over or warrant to subscribe for any shares in the Company.
Payments for loss of office There have been no payments made to any Director for loss of office during the year ended 30 June 2017.
Approved and signed on behalf of the Board.
Anne Gunther Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 21 November 2017 Directors remuneration report continued 21 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Directors statement We are pleased to submit this Annual Report to the members of the Company together with the audited financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2017.
In our opinion The financial statements set out on pages 23 to 26 are drawn up so as to give a true and fair view of the Groups financial position as of 30 June 2017 in accordance with Companies Guernsey Law 2008 and with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union At the date of this statement there are reasonable grounds to believe the Group will be able to pay its debts as and when they fall due Pursuant to section 249 of the Companies Guernsey Law 2008 in the case of each of the persons who are Directors at the time the report is approved so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and heshe has taken all the steps he ought to have taken as a Director to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
The Board of Directors has on the date of this statement authorised these financial statements for issue.
On behalf of the Board William Bill Ward
21 November 2017 22 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Independent auditors report Board of Directors GBGI Limited We have audited the accompanying consolidated financial statements of GBGI Limited and its subsidiaries which comprise the consolidated statements of financial position as of 30 June 2017 and the related consolidated statements of comprehensive income changes in equity and cash flows for the year then ended and the related notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Managements responsibility for the financial statements Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union this includes the design implementation and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
Auditors responsibility Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements.
The procedures selected depend on the Auditors judgment including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements whether due to fraud or error.
In making those risk assessments the Auditor considers internal control relevant to the entitys preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entitys internal control.
Accordingly we express no such opinion.
An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In our opinion the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly in all material respects the financial position of GBGI Limited and its subsidiaries as of 30 June 2017 and the results of their operations and their cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union.
Los Angeles California 21 November 2017 BDO USA LLP a Delaware limited liability partnership is the U. member of BDO International Limited a U. part of the international BDO network of independent member firms.
BDO is the brand name for the BDO network and for each of the BDO Member Firms.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income For the year ended 30 June 2017
Income
Gross premiums written 4 183488 153592 Outward reinsurance premiums 4 77787 75895 Net premiums written 105701 77697 Change in the gross provision for unearned premiums 4 12723 3859 Change in the provision for unearned premiums reinsurers share 4 1616 3161 Change in net provision for unearned premiums 14339 7020 Earned premiums net of reinsurance 91362 70677 Commission and fees 7 42949 37491 Total revenue 4 134311 108168 Claims incurred net of reinsurance Claims paid  gross amount 86461 71303 reinsurers share 39655 42320 Net claims paid 46806 28983 Change in the provision for outstanding claims gross amount 813 4614 reinsurers share 1292 3939 Change in net provision for claims 479 8553 Net claims 13 47285 37536 Administrative expenses 12 39794 30958 Commission expense 8 34233 27653 Total net claims and other expenses 121268 96147 Operating income 12999 12021 Investment income 5 287 63 Other expenseincome 6 1076 690 Finance costs 9 427 660 Profit before income tax 13937 10734 Income tax creditexpense 15 265 317 Profit after income tax 13670 10417 Total comprehensive income after tax 13670 10417 Profit and total comprehensive income after tax attributable to Owners of the Group 13459 10370 Noncontrolling interests 211 47 Basic and diluted earnings per share for profit attributable to the equity holders of the Group during the year 16 0.18 0.16 The accompanying notes form an integral part of this consolidated financial information.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Consolidated statement of financial position As at 30 June 2017
ASSETS
Intangible assets 17 8644 5946 Property plant and equipment 18 867 1074 Investments 10 249 Reinsurers share of technical provisions 23 50582 50258 Tax assets 15 90 267 Trade and other receivables 20 100758 80065 Deferred acquisition costs on unearned premium 8 15099 14847 Cash and cash equivalents 21 76221 53818 Total assets 252510 206275
Insurance liabilities 23 118875 105751 Other insurance liabilities 24 51383 50031
Redeemable Preferred Stock 26 250 250 Class D shares 26  5500 Deferred tax liabilities 15 1208 1088 Trade and other payables 29 22356 15429 Tax liabilities 15 Total liabilities 194072 178049 Net assets 58438 28226
Called up share capital 27 88 34 Share premium 44580 22105 Capital redemption reserve 28 1467 11993 Retained earnings 14800 17854 Attributable to the equity holders of the parent 58001 28000 Noncontrolling interests 437 226 Total equity 58438 28226 The accompanying notes form an integral part of this consolidated financial information.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the year ended 30 June 2017 Called up share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
At 30 June 2016 34 22105 11993 17854 28000 226 28226 Distribution to Class B and Class C common shareholders   16513 16513  16513 Shares exchanged and converted to ordinary shares in reorganisation 33 12026 11993 Shares repurchased for repayment of note receivable   1467  1467  1467 Shares issued in current period 21 39522   39543  39543 Cost of issuance of equity shares  5151   5151  5151
Profit and total comprehensive income    13459 13459 211 13670 Total equity as at 30 June 2017 88 44580 1467 14800 58001 437 58438 Called up share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
At 30 June 2015 34 11993 7484 Profit and total comprehensive income Total equity as at 30 June 2016 34 11993 17854 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Consolidated cash flow statement For the year ended 30 June 2017
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before taxation 13935 10734 Adjustments for Sharebased payments 11 130 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 12 301 227 Amortisation of intangible assets 12 313 59 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment 12 99 Finance costs 9 427 660 Operating profit before working capital changes 15205 11680 Changes in working capital Increase in other receivables 16697 9700 Increase in gross insurance liabilities 13124 8678 Increasedecrease in other liabilities 2648 771 Increasedecrease in reinsurers share of technical provisions 324 7102 Cash generated from operations 13956 16989 Income taxes paid 32 Net cash generated from operating activities 13988 16989 Cash flows from investing activities Purchases of property and equipment 18 193 632 Purchase of intangibles 17 2213 1772 Purchase of investments 10 249 Purchase of business net of cash acquired 32 882 Net cash used in investing activities 3537 2404 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid to holders of Class D shares 9 427 660 Proceeds from the issuance of Ordinary shares 27 12379 Net cash usedgenerated by financing activities 11952 660 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 22403 13925 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period 53818 39893 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period 21 76221 53818 The accompanying notes form an integral part of this consolidated financial information.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements Accounting policies a General information GBGI Limited GBGI or the Group was incorporated as Saxton Lane Company Limited in Guernsey in 2008 and is a multiple line insurance group writing substantially all lines of expatriate medical insurance products and long term liability insurance products.
GBGI is a Guernsey corporation located at Level 5 Mill Court La Charroterie St.
Peter Port Guernsey GY1 1EJ.
Its registration number is 48728.
The financial statements represents the consolidated financial statements for the Group for each of the full two years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016.
The consolidated financial statements has been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and IFRC Interpretations issued by the International Accounting Standards Board as adopted by the European Union.
The financial statements has been prepared using the historical cost convention.
Outstanding claims liability and reinsurance and other recoveries are carried at Managements best estimate of the amounts at which these will be settled based on the information currently available to them.
These policies have been consistently applied to all periods presented.
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgment of complexity or areas where assumptions or estimates are significant are disclosed in note 2 below.
The presentation currency of the financial statements is U.
Dollars rounded to the nearest thousands 000 unless otherwise indicated.
The Groups functional currency is U.
Dollars.
The presentation and functional currency of the Group and its subsidiaries is deemed to be U.
Dollars. c Going concern The Directors have prepared a cash flow forecast covering a period extending beyond 18 months from the financial statements presented as at 30 June 2017.
The Directors have taken into account the historical positive cash flows growth in business and the inherent risks and uncertainties facing the business and have derived forecast assumptions that are the Directors best estimate of the future development of the business.
For these reasons they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that would result from the going concern basis of preparation being inappropriate.
The new International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and International Standards IAS and amendments detailed below are not mandatory until the effective dates stated.
Early adoption is permitted where the standards has been endorsed by the EU.
Title Effective date IFRS9 Financial instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS15 Revenue from contracts with customers 1 January 2018 IFRS16 Leases 1 January 2019 IFRS17 Insurance Contracts 1 January 2021 The Group will apply the standards detailed above for the reporting periods beginning on the effective dates set out above.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies continued New standards interpretations and amendments not yet effective The following new standards interpretations and amendments which are not yet effective and have not been adopted early in this financial statements will or may have an effect on the Groups future financial statements IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 endorsed by the EU.
IFRS 9 is a replacement for IAS 39 Financial Instruments and covers three distinct areas.
Phase 1 contains new requirements for the classification and measurement of financial assets and liabilities.
Phase 2 relates to the impairment of financial assets and requires the calculation of impairment on an expected loss basis rather than the current incurred loss basis.
Phase 3 relates to less stringent requirements for general hedge accounting.
The Group performed a highlevel impact assessment of all three aspects of IFRS 9.
This preliminary assessment is based on currently available information and may be subject to changes arising from further detailed analyses or additional reasonable and supportable information being made available to the Group in the future.
Overall the Group expects no significant impact on its balance sheet and equity except for the effect of applying the impairment requirements of IFRS 9.
The group plans to defer the application of IFRS 9 until the earlier of the effective date of the new insurance contracts standard of 1 January 2021 applying the temporary exemption from applying IFRS 9 as introduced by the amendments.
Amendments to IFRS 4 Applying IFRS 9 Financial Instruments with IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts In September 2016 the IASB issued amendments to IFRS 4 to address issues arising from the different effective dates of IFRS 9 and the upcoming new insurance contracts standard.
The amendments introduce two alternative options for entities issuing contracts within the scope of IFRS 4 notably a temporary exemption and an overlay approach.
The temporary exemption enables eligible entities to defer the implementation date of IFRS 9 for annual periods beginning before 1 January 2021 at the latest.
An entity may apply the temporary exemption from IFRS 9 if i it has not previously applied any version of IFRS 9 before and ii its activities are predominantly connected with insurance on its annual reporting date that immediately precedes 1 April 2016.
The overlay approach allows an entity applying IFRS 9 to reclassify between profit or loss and other comprehensive income an amount that results in the profit or loss at the end of the reporting period for the designated financial assets being the same as if an entity had applied IAS 39 to these designated financial assets.
An entity can apply the temporary exemption from IFRS 9 for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
An entity may start applying the overlay approach when it applies IFRS 9 for the first time.
The Group performed an assessment of the amendments and reached the conclusion that its activities are predominantly connected with insurance as at 30 June 2017 .
The Group intends to apply the temporary exemption in its reporting period starting on 1 July 2018.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 endorsed by the EU sets out to clarify the principles of revenue recognition and establish a single framework for revenue recognition.
This standard replaces the previous standard IAS 11 Construction Contracts IAS18 Revenue and revenue related IFRICs.
The Group expects to apply IFRS 15 fully retrospective.
Given insurance contracts are scoped out of IFRS 15 the Group expects the main impact of the new standard to be on the accounting for income from investments.
The Group does not expect the impact to be significant.
IFRS 16 Leases effective annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 endorsed by the EU sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases for both parties to a contract i. the customer lessee and the supplier lessor.
IFRS 16 completes the IASBs project to improve the financial reporting of leases and replaces the previous leases Standard IAS 17 Leases and related Interpretations.
The impact of this new standard on the Group is still being considered.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Accounting policies continued Amendments to IFRS 4 Applying IFRS 9 Financial Instruments with IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts continued IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts effective annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2021 sets out the requirements that a company should apply in reporting information about insurance contracts it issues and reinsurance contracts it holds.
IFRS 17 supersedes IFRS 4.
IFRS 17 will provide comprehensive guidance on accounting for insurance contracts and investment contracts with discretionary participation features.
For general insurance contracts IFRS 17 will introduce mandatory discounting of loss reserves expected to be paid in more than one year as well as risk adjustment for which confidence level equivalent disclosure will be required.
Further IFRS 17 is expected to have a significant impact on accounting for life insurance contracts as well as on the presentation of insurance contract revenue in the financial statements.
The impact of this new standard on the Group is still being considered.
The consolidated financial statements incorporates the assets and liabilities of all entities controlled by the Group as at 30 June 2017 and 2016 and the results of all controlled entities for the financial years then ended.
Control is the power over the investee exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and the ability to use its power over the investee to affect the amount of the investors returns.
The effects of all transactions between controlled entities are eliminated in full.
Noncontrolling interests in the results and equity of the controlled entities are shown separately in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and consolidated statement of financial position.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method when control of an entity of business is obtained.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the fair value of the assets given equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred or assumed at the date of exchange.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date irrespective of the extent of any noncontrolling interest.
The excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If the cost of acquisition is less than the fair value of the net assets of the controlled entity acquired the difference is recognised directly in profit or loss.
Noncontrolling interests in an acquiree are recognised at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the acquirees net identifiable assets.
A contract is recognised as an insurance contract if it transfers significant insurance risk.
Such contracts may also transfer financial risk.
Insurance risk is transferred to the Group where it agrees to compensate a policyholder if a specified uncertain event other than those caused by changes in a financial variable such as interest and foreign exchange rates adversely affects the policyholder.
All of the Groups insurance products are classified as insurance contracts.
The results are determined on an annual basis whereby the incurred cost of claims commission and related expenses are charged against the earned proportion of premiums net of reinsurance as follows i Premiums written Premiums written relate to business incepted during the year together with any additional premiums arising on insurance contracts recognised in prior years.
Written premiums include estimates of premiums due but not yet receivable or notified to the Group less allowance for cancellations.
Premiums are stated net of taxes collected on behalf of third parties.
Unearned premiums represent the proportion of premiums written that relate to periods of insurance coverage to be provided in periods subsequent to the reporting date.
Unearned premiums are earned as revenue over the period of the contract on a time apportionment basis unless there is a marked unevenness in the incidence of risk over the period covered by the insurance.
In these cases premiums are recognised based on the assessed incidence of risk.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies continued f Insurance contracts continued iii Acquisition costs Acquisition costs which represent commissions due to internal employees and third party brokers for the sale of insurance policies are deferred and amortised over the period in which the related premiums are earned.
Claims incurred comprise claims and related expenses paid in the year and changes in the provisions for outstanding claims including provision for claims incurred but not reported and related expenses together with any adjustments to claims outstanding from previous years.
Provision is made at the reporting date for the estimated cost of claims incurred but not settled at the reporting date including the cost of claims incurred but not yet reported to the Group.
Although the Group takes all reasonable steps to ensure that it has appropriate information regarding its claim exposures given the uncertainty in establishing claims provisions it is likely that the final outcome will be different from the original liability established and may result in significant adjustments to the amounts provided.
Adjustments to the amounts provided are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the accounting period in which the adjustments are made.
The Group does not discount liabilities for unpaid claims.
The estimation of claims incurred but not recorded IBNR is generally subject to a greater degree of uncertainty than the estimation of the cost of settling claims already notified to the Group where more information about the claim event is generally available.
The inhouse underwriting team conducts the IBNR review using standard actuarial methodologies to evaluate and determine the IBNR reserves for of the Group.
The Group cedes reinsurance in the normal course of business with retention limits set for each line of business.
The contracts entered into by the Group with reinsurers under which the Group is compensated for losses on one or more contracts issued by the Group and that meet the classification requirements for insurance contracts are classified as reinsurance contracts.
Outward reinsurance premiums are recognised in the same accounting period as the related premium income.
Reinsurance claims recoveries are recognised in the same accounting period as the related insurance claims are accounted for.
The amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated based upon the gross provisions having due regard to their collectability and the terms of the related reinsurance contract.
The reinsurance recoveries in respect of estimated claims incurred but not reported are assumed to be consistent with the historical pattern of such recoveries adjusted to reflect changes in the nature and extent of the reinsurance program over time.
The recoverability of reinsurance recoveries is assessed having regard to market data on the financial strength of each of the reinsurers.
Gains and losses on buying reinsurance are recognised immediately at the point of purchase and not amortised.
The reinsurers share of claims incurred in the profit or loss reflects the amounts received or receivable from reinsurers in respect of those claims incurred during the period.
The reinsurance premiums due are primarily premiums payable for reinsurance contracts and are recognised in the profit or loss as outward reinsurance premiums when due.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the functional currency spot rate of exchange at the reporting date.
Nonmonetary items are measured at historical cost and are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction and nonmonetary items measured at fair value are measured using the exchange rate when fair value was determined.
The Group is exposed to gains and losses that result from the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on foreign currency denomination transactions.
Gains and losses which result from transactions denominated in foreign currency are reported in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Accounting policies continued h Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost or deemed cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
Property plant and equipment are depreciated to their residual values over their useful lives.
Depreciation is calculated on the straight line method to reduce their carrying value to the residual amount as follows
5 years Furniture and fixtures 57 years Leasehold improvements 7 years The residual values length of the economic lives and depreciation method applied are reviewed on a regular basis and at least at every reporting date and adjusted as appropriate.
Where the carrying amount of an asset is greater than its estimated recoverable amount it is written down immediately to its recoverable amount.
Gains and losses on disposal of property and equipment are determined by reference to their carrying amount.
Costs of implementing new software systems are capitalised as incurred.
Amortisation of software does not commence until the system is fully installed and operational.
Intangible assets acquired are measured on initial recognition at cost.
The cost of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is their fair value as at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition intangible assets are carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and any accumulated impairment losses.
The amortisable intangible assets represent computer software and development costs and are reported net of accumulated amortisation.
Costs of implementing new software systems are capitalised as incurred.
Amortisation of software does not commence until the system is fully installed and operational.
The amortisable intangible assets are amortised on a straightlined basis over its estimated useful life of 35 years and is assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
The amortisation of intangible assets is carried out only when the implementation is complete and the asset is in use.
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of subsidiaries and represents the excess of the fair value of consideration transferred over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the identifiable net assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the entity acquired and the fair value of noncontrolling interest in the acquiree.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to each of the CGUs or groups of CGUs that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred.
If the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit is less than its carrying amount.
The impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to that unit and then to the other assets of the unit pro rata based on the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
Any impairment loss is recognised in profit or loss.
Impairment losses so recognised are not subsequently reversed.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand and deposits held on call together with other short term highly liquid investments which are not subject to significant changes in value and have original maturities of less than three months.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies continued l Tax The charge for tax is based on the results for the year determined in accordance with the relevant tax laws and regulations that are enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date in each jurisdiction.
Deferred tax is provided in full on all temporary differences arising between the carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements and the tax bases of the assets and liabilities.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is regarded as more likely than not that they will be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated based on the tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the end of the reporting period and which are expected to be in force when the relevant deferred tax asset is realised or the relevant deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred tax balances are not discounted.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when the Group has a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets and liabilities and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to taxes levied by the same tax authority within the Group.
Sharebased payments A transaction is accounted for as a sharebased payment where the Group receives services from employees and pays for these in shares.
The Group makes equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees.
Equitysettled sharebased schemes are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions at the date of grant measured by use of an appropriate valuation model.
The expected life used in the model is based upon the vesting period and contractual term for each vestingtranche for awards with grade vesting.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the period services are received based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Share options are forfeited when an employee ceases to be employed by the Group.
Shortterm employee benefits Shortterm employee benefits including compensated absences are benefits to be paid within one year after the end of the reporting period in which the related services are rendered.
A liability and expense are recognised for the undiscounted amount expected to be paid for shortterm employee benefits in the period in which the employee renders services in exchange for the benefits.
Other longterm employee benefits The Group and its subsidiaries make payments to defined contribution benefit arrangements on behalf of employees.
The charge to the profit or loss represents the amounts payable by the Group for the year.
The assets relating to these arrangements are held separately to those of the Group.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker.
The chief operating decision maker has been identified as the Chief Executive Officer.
The Board considers that the Groups insurance activities constitute only one operating and reporting segment as defined under IFRS 8.
Management reviews the performance of the Group by reference to total results.
The total profit measures are operating profit and profit for the year both disclosed on the face of the consolidated profit or loss.
No differences exist between the basis of preparation of the performance measures used by management and the figures in the Group financial statements.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Accounting policies continued o Financial assets The Groups financial assets are loans and receivables.
Financial assets are recognised when the Group becomes party to the provisions of the contract.
Loans and receivables These investments are initially recognised at cost being the fair value of the consideration paid for the acquisition of the investment.
All transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition are also included in the cost of the investment.
After initial measurement loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost less allowance for impairment.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
The Groups loans and receivables financial assets comprise all shortterm trade and other receivables excluding prepayments and cash and cash equivalents included in the Statement of Financial Position.
Short term receivables are measured at cost less any impairment.
Cash and cash equivalents includes cash in hand deposits held at call with banks other short term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Impairment of financial assets All financial assets are assessed at the end of each reporting period as to whether there is any objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events having an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the asset.
An impairment loss in respect of loans and receivables financial assets is recognised in the profit or loss and is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and best estimate of the recoverable amount which is an approximation of the amount that the Group would receive for the asset if it were to be sold at the reporting date.
In a subsequent period if the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed through profit or loss to the extent that the carrying amount of the asset at the date the impairment is reversed does not exceed what the amortised cost would have been had the impairment not been recognised.
The Groups financial liabilities are all categorised as loans and payables.
Financial liabilities are recognised when and only when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the financial instrument.
Loans and payables The Groups loans and payables comprise all trade and other payables excluding other taxes and social security costs and deferred income insurance liabilities redeemable preferred shares and Class D shares.
Short term payables are measured at cost.
They represent balances where the Group is not able to avoid settlement in cash or another financial asset.
Shares issued by the Group are classified as a financial liability to the extent that they meet the definition of a financial liability.
Both the redeemable preferred stock and Class D shares are classified as a financial liability as the Group has contractual obligation to deliver cash and in this case payment of dividends which are accrued and paid annually.
The redeemable preferred stocks and Class D shares are measured initially at fair value net of transaction costs and are measured subsequently at amortised cost and interest is recognised in profit or loss.
A financial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged cancelled or expires.
When an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same party on substantially different terms or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability and the difference in the respective carrying amounts is recognised in the profit or loss.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies continued q Commission and fees The Group earns a managing general underwriter and agency commission income for underwriting marketing and administration.
Commission income is recognised as one unit of account on a prorata basis over the policy period.
The Group also earns a fronting fee on the policies it writes.
Fees vary from 3% to 5.5% of premiums written.
Income
The Group also charges a policy administrative fee which is invoiced in addition to the insurance premium.
Such fees are recognised as revenue over the policy term which matches with the period the services are rendered.
Profit commission is a commission paid by the insurance and reinsurance carriers based on overall profit of business placed with the carriers during a particular contractual year.
Profit commission is recorded at the earlier date of when the amounts are received from the reinsurance carriers or when the commission can be reasonably estimated and earned by the Group.
Financial instruments issued by the Group are classified as equity only to the extent that they do not meet the definition of a financial liability or financial asset.
Apart from redeemable preferred stocks and Class D shares the Groups common shares are classified as equity instruments.
Any dividends paid for the redeemable preferred stocks and class D shares are classified as finance costs.
Any dividends on the equity instruments are reported against the accumulated retained earnings in the statement of changes in equity.
Interest income is recognised in the statement of profit or loss as it accrues and is calculated by using the effective interest rate method.
Those direct and indirect costs incurred during the financial period arising from acquiring or renewing of insurance contracts andor investment contracts are deferred to the extent that these costs are recoverable out of future premiums from insurance contract.
All other acquisition costs are recognised as an expense when incurred.
Subsequent to initial recognition this Deferred acquisition cost DAC asset for life insurance is amortised over the expected life of the contracts as a constant percentage of expected premiums.
DAC for general insurance and health products are amortised over the period in which the related revenues are earned.
The deferred acquisition costs for reinsurers are amortised in the same manner as the underlying asset amortisation and is recorded in the statement of profit or loss.
Changes in the expected useful life or the expected pattern of consumption of future economic benefits embodied in the asset are accounted for by changing the amortisation period or method and are treated as a change in an accounting estimate.
An impairment review is performed at each reporting date or more frequently when an indication of impairment arises.
When the recoverable amount is less than the carrying value an impairment loss is recognised in the statement of profit or loss.
DACs are derecognised when the related contracts are either settled or disposed of.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Critical accounting estimates assumptions and judgments The Group makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year.
Estimates and judgments are continually evaluated and based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The key areas in which critical estimates and assumptions are applied are described below a Liability for unpaid claims and loss adjustment expenses The estimation of the ultimate liability arising from claims made under insurance contracts is the Groups most critical accounting estimate.
There are several sources of uncertainty that need to be considered in the estimate of the liability that the Group will ultimately pay for such claims.
Provision is made at the reporting date for the estimated cost of claims incurred but not settled at the reporting date.
The liability for outstanding claims includes the cost of claims reported but yet to be paid claims incurred but not reported and the estimated expenses to be incurred in settling claims.
There is the potential that the amounts at which claims are settled could differ to the amounts at which they are currently provided.
The estimation of insurance liabilities is subject to considerable variability as it requires the use of informed estimates and judgments.
These estimates and judgments are based on numerous factors and may be revised as additional experience becomes available or as regulations change.
The Group takes all reasonable steps to ensure that it has appropriate information regarding its claims exposures.
In arriving at booked claims provisions management also took into consideration changes or uncertainties which may create distortions in the underlying statistics or which might cause the cost of unsettled claims to increase or reduce when compared with the cost of previously settled claims including changes in patterns of claim incidence reporting and payment the impact of inflation both economicwage and superimposed changes in the mix of business the impact of large losses medical and technological developments changes in policyholder behaviour.
There is the potential that the amounts at which claims are settled and the related reinsurance recoveries could differ materially from the amounts at which they are disclosed in the consolidated statement of financial position.
The methods used to analyse past claim experience and to project future claim experience are largely determined by the available data and the nature of the portfolio.
The projections given by the different methodologies assist in setting the range of possible outcomes.
The most appropriate estimation technique is selected taking into account the characteristics of the business class and the extent of the development of each accident year.
The Groups reinsurance premiums loss expense and reserves related to reinsurance business are accounted for on a basis consistent with those used in accounting for the original policies issued and terms of the reinsurance contracts.
Loss expenses related to ceded premiums have been netted against the total loss expenses which are included in expenses on the consolidated statements of income.
The Group also enters into a personal accident excess of loss reinsurance agreement where minimum deposit premiums are paid by the Group.
The Groups gross loss reserve is ultimately based on managements reasonable expectations of future events as is the estimate of future recoveries from reinsurers.
It is reasonably possible that the expectations associated with these amounts could change in the next year and that the effects of such changes could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Critical accounting estimates assumptions and judgments continued c Intangible assets Goodwill is subject to an annual impairment review and more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired.
This requires an estimation of the recoverable amount of the CGU to which goodwill is allocated.
Details of the key assumptions used in the estimation of the recoverable amounts are contained in Note 17.
The key area in which critical judgments are applied are described below a GBG Philippines The Groups Directors have considered the power they exert over the Groups participation in GBG Philippines.
Notwithstanding the fact the Group holds 28% of the shares it is their opinion that they have the power over the investee to affect the investors returns and that GBGI controls GBG Philippines.
As such GBG Philippines has been consolidated as if it were a subsidiary see Note 19.
Management of insurance and financial risk The management of risk is a fundamental concern of the Groups management.
This note summarises the key risks to the Group and the policies and procedures put in place by management to manage them.
The components of insurance market credit liquidity and operational risk are considered below a Insurance risk Insurance risk refers to fluctuations in the timing frequency and severity of insured events relative to the expectations at the time of underwriting.
Insurance risk can also refer to fluctuations in the timing and amount of claim settlements and reserves.
Insurance risk is historically the single most significant risk area within the Group.
It is split between four principal key risks which are all managed through the application of controls as well as the use of reinsurance to offset exposures through the transfer of risk.
These four key risks are as follows Failure of pricing The Group faces the risk of incorrect pricing of products resulting in financial losses or reduced profit through being set too high therefore losing market share or too low therefore resulting in an unacceptable profit contribution for that product.
The Group seeks to manage this through the setting and review of pricing guidelines relevant to each business line and the application of a strict hierarchy of underwriting authorities is in place to ensure that policies are underwritten with management oversight.
Ineffective strategyfailure of product When an inappropriate strategy or product is introduced for a specific business line or the Group as whole there is an increased risk that material financial and reputational losses will occur.
The Group seeks to manage this through the use of processes and procedures in place over the production review and analysis of annual business.
Failure to manage risk aggregationaccumulation The Group may be exposed to an increased likelihood of disproportionate losses for specific perils if insured risks are overly focused on a specific geographical area or type of policy cover.
The Group seeks to manage this through the use of prebind rules and authorities to manage significant within line and crossline exposures.
Adverse reserve development The Group may be exposed to reserve shortfalls or distortions through failing to set sufficient case reserves or through failing to adopt a robust and consistent reserve strategy across products offered to insured and countries.
The Group seeks to manage this through monitoring adherence to established policies and procedures in place governing claims reserving practices.
Amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the outstanding claims provisions and are in accordance with the reinsurance contracts.
The Group purchases excess of loss insurance as part of its risks mitigation programme to limit the maximum net loss.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Management of insurance and financial risk continued a Insurance risk continued Concentration of insurance risk The Group monitors its operations to consider and manage any potential risk concentrations and manage any potential risk concentrations by reference to such analysis.
Impairment of insurance receivables No material amount is past due and impaired hence no material impairment is required to be made in the opinion of the Directors.
Claims development The loss development tables presented below show the cumulative provisions for insurance claims whether reported or not and related loss adjustment expenses arising for each accident year from 2012 onwards.
The historical net insurance claims provision for all outstanding claims arising for accident years prior to 2012 are shown cumulatively as one figure in the left hand column.
All amounts shown in the tables have been stated at constant exchange rates based on the rates prevailing at 30 June 2017.
Insurance claims  Gross As at 30 June 2017 Accident year and prior
Estimate of ultimate claims costs Balance at end of 6 months 1274 3205 5707 10064 12197 13173 13354 Balance at end of 18 months 30997 34706 42675 65390 69709 83171 Balance at end of 30 months 44526 40168 46232 68684 74757 Balance at end of 42 months 45016 40016 46903 68557 Balance at end of 54 months 44370 39980 46920 Cumulative claims payments Balance at end of 6 months 485 978 1131 2661 2025 3859 2438 Balance at end of 18 months 21984 22150 31724 45460 46880 62103 Balance at end of 30 months 40725 35651 44989 64902 71046 Balance at end of 42 months 42724 37553 45778 67282 Balance at end of 54 months 43948 38437 46017 Current estimate of cumulative claims 44370 39980 46920 68557 74757 83171 13354 371109 Cumulative payments to date 43948 38437 46017 67282 71046 62103 2438 331271 Total loss reserve Note 25 422 1543 903 1275 3711 21068 10916 39838 38 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Management of insurance and financial risk continued a Insurance risk continued Insurance claims  Net of reinsurance As on 30 June 2017 Accident year and prior
Estimate of ultimate claims costs Balance at end of 6 months 319 338 743 1713 5286 13173 8076 Balance at end of 18 months 7210 5642 7913 12053 33504 44126 Balance at end of 30 months 8451 5903 8839 13397 37112 Balance at end of 42 months 8415 6080 8777 13127 Balance at end of 54 months 8433 6035 8784 Cumulative claims payments Balance at end of 6 months 011 3859 1413 Balance at end of 18 months 4817 3703 6039 8878 23388 35181 Balance at end of 30 months 8292 5662 8543 12652 35737 Balance at end of 42 months 8376 5944 8635 13096 Balance at end of 54 months 8433 6007 8679 Current estimate of cumulative claims 8433 6035 8784 13127 37112 44126 8076 125693 Cumulative payments to date 8433 6007 8679 13096 35737 35181 1413 108546 Net liability in the statement of financial position Note 25  28 105 31 1375 8945 6663 17147 39 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Management of insurance and financial risk continued a Insurance risk continued Insurance Claims  Gross As at 30 June 2016 Accident year and prior
Estimate of ultimate claims costs Balance at end of 6 months 626 647 3205 5707 10064 12197 13173 Balance at end of 18 months 13301 17695 34706 42676 65389 69709 Balance at end of 30 months 21747 22777 40168 46233 68683 Balance at end of 42 months 22957 22057 40016 46904 Balance at end of 54 months 22776 22345 40250 Cumulative claims payments Balance at end of 6 months 176 310 978 1131 2661 2025 3859 Balance at end of 18 months 9022 12963 22150 31723 45461 46880 Balance at end of 30 months 19286 21441 35651 44989 64901 Balance at end of 42 months 20805 21922 37553 45777 Balance at end of 54 months 21049 22252 38472 Current estimate of cumulative claims 22776 22345 40250 46904 68683 69709 13173 283840 Cumulative payments to date 21049 22252 38472 45777 64901 46880 3859 243190 Total loss reserve Note 25 1727 93 1778 1127 3782 22829 9314 40650 40 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Management of insurance and financial risk continued a Insurance risk continued Insurance Claims  Net of Reinsurance As on 30 June 2016 Accident year and prior
Estimate of ultimate claims costs Balance at end of 6 months 15tel1713 5286 8363 Balance at end of 18 months 3326 3885 5642 7912 12054 33505 Balance at end of 30 months 3738 4713 5903 8838 13266 Balance at end of 42 months 3736 4679 6080 8776 Balance at end of 54 months 3708 4748 6055 Cumulative claims payments Balance at end of 6 months  1011 2641 Balance at end of 18 months 2255 2562 3703 6040 8878 23389 Balance at end of 30 months 3698 4594 5662 8544 12652 Balance at end of 42 months 3730 4646 5944 8636 Balance at end of 54 months 3707 4726 6003 Current estimate of cumulative claims 3708 4748 6055 8776 13266 33505 8363 78421 Cumulative payments to date 3707 4726 6003 8636 12652 23389 2641 61754 Net liability in the statement of financial position Note 25  10116 5722 16667 The estimates of claim cost are presented at the end of 6 months because the policy year is different from the financial year.
Sensitivity analysis Key assumptions The Group develops these estimates for the claims liability on the assumption of the information which is currently available including potential claims which have been reported to the Company experience of the development of similar claims and case law.
This includes assumptions made on the average claim costs number of claims for each accident year legislative changes and changes in inflation rates changes in patterns of claim incidence reporting and payment.
The key assumptions selected are average claim costs or number of claims for each incident year as these factors can be quantified whereas other assumptions like legislative changes or change in patterns of claim incidence are not easily quantifiable.
It is assumed that the increase or lower of one of these key assumptions by 5% will result in 2 possible scenarios i Scenario 1 the gross written premium increase or decrease by 5% but the loss reserve ratio remains the same and ii Scenario 2 The gross written premium increase or decrease by 5% but with no change to claims recoverable from reinsurers.
The 5% is the sensitivity rate that represents managements assessment of the reasonably possible change in the average claim cost or number of claims for each accident year in the next 12 months.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Management of insurance and financial risk continued Sensitivity analysis continued The following tables demonstrate the impact of a 5 percent change lowerhigher in the following key assumptions with all other assumptions held constant to the profit before tax and equity for each reported year Change in assumptions Scenarios Impact on gross premium written Impact on recoverable from reinsurers
Impact
5% average premium written Scenario 1 9174 3889 5285 5285 Scenario 2 9174  9174 9174 Change in assumptions Scenarios Impact on gross premium written Impact on recoverable from reinsurers
Impact
5% average premium written Scenario 1 7680 3795 3885 3885 Scenario 2 7680  7680 7680 b Market risk Market risk is the risk that the Group is adversely affected by movements in the value of its financial assets or liability arising from market movements such as interest rates and foreign exchange rates or other price risk.
A description of the Groups principal risk relating to market risk is shown below along with a summary description of controls the Group applies in seeking to mitigate this risk Currency risk The Group sells less than 12 percent of its insurance policies to foreign customers in foreign currency denominations.
At each period end foreign currency monetary items are translated using the closing rate.
Currency risk arises where assets and liabilities are settled in currencies other than the functional currency of the Group.
Currency risk is the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in foreign exchange rates.
The Group has no significant concentration of currency risk.
000s  CAD EUR GBP
Rupee
China
Renminbi Others
30 June Cash and cash equivalent 69173 817 355tel223 76221 000s  CAD EUR GBP Indian Rupee
Renminbi Others
30 June Cash and cash equivalent 46078 1312 2844 680 1861 98 945 53818 42 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Management of insurance and financial risk continued Sensitivity analysis The impact of 10% movement in the key foreign exchange rates of U.
Dollar as shown below will result in an increase decrease of profit before tax and financial assetsliabilities by 683000 2016 679000.
Impact of 10% movement in foreign exchange rate of 30 June 2017 CAD EUR GBP
Rupee
China
Renminbi Total Cash and cash equivalent 000s 30 June 2016 CAD EUR GBP Indian Rupee
Renminbi Total Cash and cash equivalent Fair value hierarchy The Groups financial assets and liabilities are classified as loans and receivables.
Therefore a fair value hierarchy is not separately disclosed.
In the opinion of the Directors the amounts at which the financial assets and liabilities are disclosed in the consolidated financial statements is a reasonable approximation of their fair value.
A description of each of the Groups principal risks attached to financial risk is shown below along with a summary description of controls the Group applies in seeking to mitigate these risks Credit risk Credit risk is defined as the risk that one party to a financial instrument will fail to discharge an obligation and cause the other party to incur a financial loss.
The Group has exposure to credit risk principally through its holdings of reinsurance assets.
No material insurance premium receivables are past due hence no material impairment risk has been identified by the Directors.
There has been no change in the Groups processes in respect of credit risk over the period.
The Group faces a risk of material losses if their main reinsurers fail or are unable to pay their contractual share of claims payable.
The Group seeks to manage this through annual review of the financial strength and creditworthiness of reinsurance counterparties as well as tracking overall exposures to individual reinsurers.
In addition a list of approved reinsurers is maintained and an established process is in place to ensure that approval is obtained before reinsurance cover is taken out with a reinsurer not on the approved list this may include requiring collateralisation.
The Group faces a risk of material losses and cash flow issues if third party obligors are unable to pay amounts due.
The
Group seeks to manage this risk through the utilisation of processes and procedures in place to ensure that the Group only utilises approved bank operating accounts.
In addition the Group has controls in place to ensure that brokers used are subject to credit checks prior to and during the period where they provide services to the Group where it is possible to do so.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Management of insurance and financial risk continued c Financial risk continued The following table provides an analysis of the major categories of financial assets with credit risk exposure and the credit rating of those financial assets based upon the ratings published by various agencies i.
Standard and Poors or equivalent Moodys Investors Service Fitch Ratings and A.
Best Company.
As at 30 June 2017
AA
BBB
Below investment grade Not rated
Financial assets Insurance premium receivable      69721 69721 Reinsurance recoverable on loss reserves 5844 8357 8441   49 22691 Other receivables 2040 2749 4338   31423 40550 Cash at bank and in hand   76221    76221 Total 7884 11106 89000   101193 209183 Financial liabilities Insurance liabilities 118875 Other insurance liabilities 51383 Trade and other payables 22356 Redeemable preferred stock 250
Net amount As at 30 June 2016
AA
BBB
Below investment grade Not rated
Financial assets Insurance premium receivable 61343 61343 Reinsurance recoverable on loss reserves 14142 6245 3596 Other receivables  3679 17482 21161 Cash at bank and in hand Total 14142 9924 57414   78825 160305 Financial liabilities Insurance liabilities 105751 Other insurance liabilities 50031 Trade and other payables 15429 Redeemable preferred stock 250 Class D shares 5500
Net amount The financial assets and liabilities are classified as loan and receivables.
The amounts disclosed are in the opinion of management comparable to fair value.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Management of insurance and financial risk continued d Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is defined as the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with its financial liabilities primarily insurance claims as they fall due.
This risk is mitigated by holding funds predominately in liquid financial assets i. cash and cash equivalents and constant monitoring of expected asset and liability maturities.
The Group further manages this risk through monthly reviews of the Group cash accounts as well as review and approval of forward looking reviews of cash requirements into the next quarter.
The Groups Treasury department is also operationally responsible to ensure that sufficient funding required for future expected cash requirements are available and that the sources of funding are appropriately diversified.
There has been no change in the Groups processes in respect of liquidity risk over the period.
The following table provides an analysis of the maturity profile of financial liabilities including insurance liabilities As at 30 June 2017 Less than one year One to two years Two to three years More than three years
Insurance liabilities Loss reserves Note 23 33523 6314   39838 Reinsurance premium payable Note 24 37917 7140   45057 Unearned premium Note 23 79037    79037 Premium deposits and credits to customers Note 24 6326    6326
Redeemable Preferred Stock Note 26    250 250 Total 156804 13454  250 170508 As at 30 June 2016 Less than one year One to two years Two to three years More than three years
Insurance liabilities Loss reserves Note 23 35091 5559   40650 Reinsurance premium payable Note 24 38756 6139   44895 Unearned premium Note 23 65101    65101 Premium deposits and credits to customers Note 24 5136    5136
Redeemable Preferred Stock Note 26    250 250 Class D shares Note 26 660 660 660 3520 5500 Total 144744 12358 660 3770 161532 45 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Management of insurance and financial risk continued e Operational risk Operational risk is defined by the Group as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes people and systems or from external events.
It is intrinsic to the Groups operations but is actively mitigated and managed. description of the controls the Group applies in seeking to mitigate these risks.
There has been no change in the Groups processes in respect of operational risk over the period.
IT systems failure The Group potentially faces a risk of business interruptions and inefficiencies if IT systems fail.
Such business interruptions would impact on the profitability of the Group and has the potential to cause reputational damage.
The Group seeks to manage this risk through having procedures in place to backup data together with other controls designed to minimise external threatsunauthorised access.
NonIT systems failure The Group also potentially faces a risk of business interruptions and inefficiencies from a wide range of potential issues such as insufficient or inadequately skilled staff accounting errors errors in processing such as mismatching reinsurance contracts poor customer service badly executed projects and extreme events such as fires or natural disasters that affect the Groups offices and staff.
The Group seeks to manage these risks through the claims audits implementation of training development of policies and appropriate procedures and continued system enhancements.
Legal regulatory or compliance breach The Group operates in a highly regulated insurance environment whereby breaches of the regulations the Group works within may lead to significant financial penalties and reputational damage.
The Group seeks to manage this risk through a number of policies and procedures in place covering regulatory requirements.
These policies are reviewed periodically by key senior management and the Groups legal department to ensure that they provide a basic framework within which the Group is compliant with local and regional regulatory requirements.
The Group also has a Regulatory and Compliance Working Group that meets regularly to review key metrics that pertain to regulatory and compliance and discuss any open issues that fall within the purview of regulatory and compliance.
The Groups capital management objectives are to ensure the Groups ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurate with the level of risk.
To meet these objectives the Group reviews its budgets and forecasts on a regular basis to ensure there is sufficient capital to meet the needs of the Group through to profitability and positive cash flow.
The capital structure of the Group consists of shareholders equity as set out in the Groups Statement of Changes in
All working capital requirements are financed from existing cash resources and borrowings.
In accordance with the Insurance Business Bailiwick of Guernsey Law 2002 the minimum capital requirement of GBG Insurance Limited GIL being a licensed insurer writing general insurance business is 100000 equivalent to 134000 as at 30 June 2017 and 2016.
Similarly in accordance with the Insurance Business Bailiwick of Guernsey Law 2002 the minimum capital requirement of Global Security Life Insurance Ltd GSLIL being a licensed insurer writing general insurance business is 250000 equivalent to 334000 as at 30 June 2017 and 2016.
This company ceased writing business on October 1 2016 and is currently in run off.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Segment Information For management purposes the Group has categorised all its revenue and profit in one reportable segment  provision of specific and customised medical disability life and travel insurance products to meet the needs of expatriates third country local nationals and high net worth local nationals worldwide.
In the normal course of business the Group engages in reinsurance ceded transactions as part of its overall underwriting strategy.
Reinsurance includes quota share excess of loss and facultative treaties on all policies written.
Reinsurance ceded does not discharge the Group from its liabilities to the original policyholders in respect of the risk being reinsured.
Gross premiums written Gross written premium in period 183488 153592 Change in the gross provision for unearned premiums 12723 3859 170765 149733 Outward reinsurance premiums Premium ceded to reinsurers in period 77787 75895 Change in unearned premium provision 1616 3161 79403 79056 Earned premiums net of reinsurance 91362 70677 Commission and fees 42949 37491 Total revenue 134311 108168 Geographic segment The following analysis of the Groups total revenue is based on the geographic location of the Group entities operating the corresponding segment assets are based on the geographical location of the Groups noncurrent assets and loss reserves gross reinsurers share and net.
The Group does not have the geographical analysis of the revenue by location of the customers and the cost to produce this information would be excessive.
Total revenue
America 30320 23968 Asia 2483 3567 Europe 330 790 Guernsey 101178 79843 Total 134311 108168 Noncurrent assets excluding income tax assets
America 9341 6830 Asia 170 190 9511 7020 47 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Segment Information continued Geographic segment continued Loss reserve
Guernsey 39838 40650 Total 39838 40650 Reinsurers share of loss reserve
Guernsey 22691 23983 Total 22691 23983 Net insurance liabilities
Guernsey 15855 16667 Total 15855 16667 Investment income Cash and cash equivalents 287 63 Other incomeexpense Net foreign exchange gainsloss 1469 690 Indirect Initial Public Offering IPO expenses 393 Total 1076 690 Commission and fees Earned commission income 28616 27772 Earned administration fee  other 4573 537 Earned fronting fee income 8492 6075 Administration fees  other 89 75 Profit commission 1179 3025 Other commission and fees  7 42949 37491 48 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Commission expense Commission paid and payable 33981 22574 Closing deferred acquisition costs 15099 14847 Opening deferred acquisition costs 14847 9768 Change in deferred acquisition costs 252 5079 34233 27653 Finance costs Dividend paid on Class D shares 427 660
Equity securities  designated as at fair value 249 In January 2017 Global Benefits Group GBG entered into a strategic partnership with a new Georgiabased insurance company.
JSC Risk Management and Insurance Company known as Global Benefits Georgia.
The Group invested 248551 into Global Benefits Georgia for 15% ownership of the authorized shares.
The Group is a minority shareholder and does not control the investee therefore the Group did not include Global Benefits Georgia in the consolidated financial statements.
The Group has not disclosed fair values for investment in Global Benefits Georgia as fair values or fair value ranges for the investment cannot be reliably estimated.
There is no active market for this investment.
Sharebased payment arrangements a Description of sharebased payment arrangements On 22 February 2017 as part of the initial public offering the Group established share option programmes that entitle employees to purchase shares in the Group.
Under this programmes holders of vested options are entitled to purchase shares at the market price of the shares at grant date.
The key terms and conditions related to the grants under these programmes are as follows all options are to be settled by the physical delivery of shares.
Grant date Number of instruments Vesting conditions Contractual life of options 22 February 2017 2328900 3 years service from grant date 10 years The options will vest at 33.33% per year for a three year period from the grant date.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Sharebased payment arrangements continued b Measurement of fair values The fair value of the employee share options has been measured using the BlackScholes formula.
The inputs used in the measurement of the fair values at grant date of the sharebased payment plans were as follows Fair value at grant date 1.50 Share price at grant date 1.50 Exercise price 1.50 Expected volatility weightedaverage 22.0% Expected life weightedaverage six years Expected annual dividend yield 5.0% Riskfree interest rate based upon government bonds 2.4% Expected volatility was based upon peer group volatility using a six year historical average.
Expected life was estimated using the simplified method based on the midpoint between the vesting period and the contractual term for the grants.
For the year ended 30 June 2017 the total expense for the sharebased payments was 130395 and is included in Administrative Expenses.
Below an overview is provided of shares provided in the employee stock option plan.
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices WAEP of and movements in share options during the year 2017 Total Outstanding at 1 July 2016 Number of shares conditionally granted 2328900 2328900 Number of shares allocated Number of shares forfeited Number of shares vested Outstanding at 30 June 2017 2328900 2328900 There were no options outstanding as of 30 June 2016 year.
There were no options exercisable as of 30 June 2017 and 2016.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Profit for the year is after charging the following Amortisation of intangible assets 313 59 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 301 227 Payments to defined contribution pension arrangements 402 353 Distribution and marketing costs 2328 1216 Employee compensation 17465 13346 Other staff costs 3012 1985 Network fees 1584 Operating lease payments 1733 1020 Other office costs 966 1098 Transportation costs 2040 1447 Professional and legal fees 5145 4760 Auditors fees 533 351 Restructuring expenses  1125 Staff welfare and entertainment 134 90 Office costs  printing postage telecoms and IT 819 815 License and software fees 279 119 Bank charges 1948 1697 Dues and subscriptions 252 257 Other overheads 540 993 39794 30958 Net claims
Reinsurance
Net
Gross claims paid 86461 39655 46805 Movement in insurance loss reserve 813 1292 479 85648 38363 47285
Reinsurance
Total
Gross claims paid 71303 42320 28983 Movement in insurance loss reserve 4614 3939 8553 75917 38381 37536 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Employee costs The table below sets out the employee costs incurred by the Group Wages and salaries and commission 15089 11640 Social security costs 877 676 Other benefit costs 1499 1030 Total 17465 13346 The average number of persons employed directly by the Group including Directors during the year were
Number
Staff
Operations 180 177 Finance and administration 43 48 Technology 12 14 Sales and marketing 42 27 Executive 15 14 Total 292 280 Key management personnel Wages and salaries 4117 3876 Social security costs 155 188 Pension costs 93 125 Total 4365 4189 Highest paid Director Wages and salaries 900 1201 Social security costs 22 25 Total 922 1226 52 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Income tax creditexpense GBGI and GIL are assessed at the Company standard rate of 0% due to the change to the Guernsey corporate income tax regime.
The Group does not file a consolidated return with its foreign subsidiaries.
The Group files U. and its foreign subsidiaries file returns in their respective jurisdictions.
GBG files a consolidated U. return with its subsidiaries ICS GBGH GBG US GAS GIS and GBGC Note 19 for companys full name.
Income taxes currently payable are based on the taxable income for the period.
Income tax expense for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016 are shown below i Analysis of the tax charge for the year Current tax on profits for the period
Foreign tax Increase in deferred income tax 120 232 Income tax expense 265 317 ii Analysis of the factors affecting the tax creditexpense for the year The tax assessed for the year is lower than the standard rate of corporation tax in United States.
The differences are explained below Profit before tax 13935 10734 Tax at effective rate in Guernsey Higher rates of current income tax in foreign jurisdictions 145 85 Change in deferred taxes assets 3125 2272 Unrecognised deferred tax assets 3245 2504 Current tax expense for the year 265 317 The Group has U. federal and U.
16344000.
The losses are available to offset future taxable income which expires in varying amounts beginning in 2033 for U. federal and state tax purposes.
Any foreign net operating losses do not expire.
As the timing and extent of taxable profits are uncertain the deferred tax asset of 9703000 2016 6458000 arising on these losses and accelerated temporary differences has not been recognised in the consolidated financial statements.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Income tax creditexpense continued Deferred tax asset and liabilities Tax assets 90 267 Tax liabilities Tax assets 90 267 Deferred tax Deferred tax liabilities 1208 1088 Deferred tax liabilities Intangible assets  goodwill 1208 1088 1208 1088 Movement on the deferred tax liabilities At 1 July 1088 865 Creditcharge in the profit or loss 120 232 Adjustment for previous year  9 At 30 June 1208 1088 Current tax assets and liabilities are recoverablepayable within one year.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recoverablepayable after more than one year.
Earnings per share  Basic Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit attributable to equity holders of the Group by the weighted average number of Ordinary shares in issue during the year excluding Ordinary shares purchased by the Group and held as treasury shares and sharebased payments for employees.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated based on the profit attributable to ordinary shareholders and weightedaverage number of Ordinary shares outstanding after adjustments for the effects of all dilutive potential Ordinary shares.
Basic and diluted earnings per share 2017 2016 Profit attributable to the equity holders 000s 13459 10370 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue in numbers 73643652 66418950 Basic and diluted earnings per share  0.18 0.16 As at 30 June 2017 the total number of potentially dilutive shares related to outstanding stock options was 2328900 30 June 2016 zero.
The outstanding stock options were excluded from the diluted earnings per share calculation as the impact of including the stock options would have an antidilutive effect.
On 20 February 2017 the Company effectively performed a 1for1950 share split.
Each common share issued and outstanding as of such effective date were effectively exchanged and converted into 1950 ordinary shares.
All share and per share amounts have been restated to reflect the share spilt for all periods presented.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Intangible assets
Software development
Cost as at 30 June 2015 3820 864 4684 Additions  1772 1722 Cost as at 30 June 2016 3820 2636 6456 Additions 798 2213 3011 Cost as at 30 June 2017 4618 4849 9467 Amortisation as at 30 June 2015  451 451 Charge for the year  59 59 Amortisation as at 30 June 2016  510 510 Charge for the year  313 313 Amortisation as at 30 June 2017  823 823 Net book value 2016 3820 2126 5946 Net book value 2017 4618 4026 8644 The balance of goodwill as at 30 June 2017 and 2016 was 4618817 and 3820461.
The goodwill balance relates to the acquisition of the business assets of TieCare International Inc. and GBG Holdings Inc. acquisition of Quality Health Management LLC in January 2017.
The amortisation on software has been charged to the profit or loss as indicated in Note 12.
Goodwill and impairment review The Group has goodwill that has been acquired through business combinations but does not hold any intangible assets that have indefinite lives.
The approach of the Group is to test impairment at the cash generating unit CGU level.
This is the lowest level of unit at which the Group is effectively able to manage and monitor performance cash flow and goodwill.
The Group has one CGU namely the insurance business.
The goodwill has been allocated for impairment testing purposes to this cash generating unit.
The valuation is performed on a valueinuse basis.
In order to evaluate the recoverable amounts relating to the CGU based on value in use the following key information should be noted.
The recoverable amounts have been determined using the cash flow forecast from its most recent financial plans projected for a fiveyear period and then extrapolated into perpetuity with a discount rate applied.
The financial plans have been prepared at the cash generating unit level based on historical trends adjusted for expected events.
These individual plans have been aggregated as the basis for the cash flow forecast.
The discount rate has been calculated as the weighted average cost of capital.
The posttax discount rates calculated was 14.0 percent.
The perpetual growth rate of 3 percent reflects the maturity penetration and profile of the cash generating unit.
This rate is not higher than the average long term industry growth rate.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Intangible assets continued Sensitivity to changes in assumptions With regard to the assessment of value in use for the insurance cash generating unit management does not believe a reasonably possible change in any of the above key assumptions would cause the carrying value of the units to exceed the recoverable amount as the recoverable amount well exceeded the carrying value.
Management performed their annual review of goodwill and determined no impairment existed for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016.
Property plant and equipment
Equipment
Furniture and fixtures
Cost as at 1 July tel736 1553 Additions 12telCost as at 30 June tel866 2185 Depreciation as at 1 July 2015 212 267 405 884 Charge for the year 52 73 102 227 Depreciation as at 30 June 2016 264 340 507 1111 Net book value as at 1 July tel331 669 Net book value as at 30 June tel359 1074
Equipment
Furniture and fixtures
Cost as at 1 July tel866 2185 Additions  121 72 193 Disposals 337 10 24 371 Cost as at 30 June tel914 2007 Depreciation as at 1 July 2016 264 340 507 1111 Charge for the year 25 177 99 301 Disposals 247  25 272 Depreciation as at 30 June 2017 42 517 581 1140 Net book value as at 1 July tel359 1074 Net book value as at 30 June tel333 867 56 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Investments in group undertakings The Groups operating subsidiaries as at 30 June 2017 are as follows Name of subsidiary Principal activity
Place of incorporation
GBG Insurance Limited GIL Insurance business Guernsey 100 100 Global Benefits Group Europe B.
GBE
Broker Netherlands 100 100 Global Benefits Group Inc.
GBG U.
Services Delaware 100 100 International Claims Services ICS Claims Payer for International Claims Delaware 100 100 GBG Administrative Services GAS Licensed U.
Third Party
California 100 100 Global Benefits Group U.
Licensed Broker U.
California 100 100 Shanghai GBG Enterprise Management Consulting LLC Consulting China 100 100 Global Benefits Group Canada GBGC Shell  Dormant Canada 100 100 GBG Services India Administration India 74 74 GBG Holdings Inc.
GBGH Premium Collection Delaware 100 100 GBG Philippines Inc.
Administration and Sales Philippines 28 16 GBG Insurance Services Inc.
GIS Shell  Dormant California 100 100 Global Security Life Insurance Limited GSLIL Insurance Guernsey 100 100 Global Security Life Insurance Limited Insurance  inactive pending license approval Delaware 100 100 GBG Assist Inc.
New  inactive Delaware 100 100 Quality Health Management LLC Licensed U.
Third Party
Florida 100
1 are directly held subsidiaries all others are indirectly held.
Movements in and the closing balance of noncontrolling interests are disclosed in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and consolidated statement of financial position.
The Groups Directors have considered the power they exert over the Groups participation in GBG Philippines.
Notwithstanding the fact the Group holds 28% of the shares it is their opinion that they have the power over the investee to affect the investors returns and that GBGI controls CBC Philippines.
As such GBG Philippines has been consolidated as if it were a subsidiary.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Trade and other receivables Insurance premium receivables 69721 61343 Profit commissions receivables 3575 3997 Other receivables 3991 4422 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 6264 3545 Other trade receivables 4299 Claim deposits 12908 5278 Note receivable  related party Note 33  1467 Stock subscription receivables  13 100758 80065 The other receivables balance consists of an amount owed to the Group from a third party administrator for claims that were paid by the third party administrator that were not in accordance with policy benefits or were not approved by the
The Group determined no allowance was required as at 30 June 2017.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents 51342 24885 Restricted cash 24879 28933 Total 76221 53818 In its capacity as a managing general agent the Group collects premiums from its customers.
The Group deducts its administrative fees and the authorised commissions associated with the sale of the policies and claims administration from these premiums.
The net premium not reserved for claims payment is then remitted to the respective carriers.
Unremitted insurance premiums are held in a fiduciary capacity until the Group disburses them and is classified as restricted cash.
The Group invests these unremitted funds only in cash and money market accounts.
Dividends
The Group did not declare any ordinary dividends for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016.
The Group has paid a sum of 427000 in 2017 and 660000 in 2016 to the class D shareholders Note 9.
The Group was required to pay a distribution to Class B and Class C common shareholders in accordance with contractual obligations triggered upon admission in the amount of 16513000.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Net insurance liabilities
Loss reserve Including IBNR 39838 40650 Unearned premiums 79037 65101 Total insurance liabilities gross 118875 105751
Reinsurers share of technical provisions Reinsurers share of loss reserve Including IBNR 22691 23983 Unearned premiums 27891 26275 Total reinsurers share of technical provisions 50582 50258
Loss reserve Including IBNR 17147 16667 Unearned premiums 51146 38826 Total insurance liabilities net 68293 55493 This impact of the reinsurance arrangements entered into by the Group can be seen in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and the statement of financial position.
The Group establishes claim reserves which are estimates of future payments of reported and unreported claims and claim adjustment expenses with respect to insured events that have occurred.
Reserving is a complex process dealing with uncertainty requiring the use of informed estimates and judgments.
Any changes in estimates or judgments are reflected in the results of operations in the year in which estimates and judgments are changed.
Other insurance liabilities Reinsurance premium payable 45057 44895 Premium deposits and credits to customers 6326 5136 Total other insurance liabilities 51383 50031 59 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Movements in insurance liabilities and reinsurance assets claims provision movement
Reinsurance
Net
At as 1 July 2015 Brought forward as at 1 July 2015 36037 27922 8115 Claims settled in cash in the year 71303 42320 28983 Increasedecrease in liabilities Arising from current year claims 78645 40277 38368 Arising from prior year claims 2729 1896 833 At at 30 June 2016 40650 23983 16667 Brought forward as at 1 July 2016 40650 23983 16667 Claims settled in cash in the year 86461 39655 46806 Increasedecrease in liabilities Arising from current year claims 88384 39403 48981 Arising from prior year claims 2735 1040 1695 At as 30 June 2017 39838 22691 17147 The financial impact of the reinsurance arrangement entered into by the Group are disclosed in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and consolidated statement of financial position.
Redeemable preferred stock and Class D shares Borrowings consist of redeemable preferred stock and Class D shares 250 Redeemable preferred stock Series A 250 250 Class D Shares  5500 Redeemable preferred stock Series A The redeemable preferred stock represents 250 nonvoting Series A preferred shares of GIL issued for cash with a par value of 1000 per share issued under the terms of a Preferred Share Agreement dated 27 June 2011.
Such shares represent all of the authorised shares of Series A Preferred Shares.
The preferred shares accrue dividends Investors Distribution at 50 percent of the difference between the underwriting profit and 10 percent of the net risk premium of insurance premiums received by the Group as a result of the direct marketing efforts of the holder of the redeemable preferred shares.
If at the end of any policy year there is an underwriting loss this loss is carried forward to subsequent policy years and no dividend will be paid until such time that the loss carry forward is applied to underwriting profit of subsequent policy years such that the loss ratio for policy years in aggregate is less than one.
The maximum investor premium is equal to eight times the par value of the outstanding preferred shares.
The par value and therefore the maximum investor premium the Group will accept can be increased by mutual agreement of the parties.
At the option of the investor and if the investor chooses not to receive its dividend at the end of any policy year in which there are no loss carry forwards then the investor shall be entitled to apply its distribution to subscribe for and receive additional preferred shares.
As there were no related policies in force for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016 no dividends were earned.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Redeemable preferred stock and Class D shares continued The shares are redeemable by the Group at the earlier of twenty years from the date of issuance and the expiration of any runoff period after termination of a Cooperation Agreement between GIL and the investor or as otherwise agreed between the Group and the investor.
The redemption price shall be the par value of the preferred shares or as may be agreed between the Group and the Preferred Shareholder.
In the event of a voluntary or involuntary liquidation dissolution or winding up of the Group the investor as a holder of the Series A Preferred Shares shall be entitled to receive only the amount as shall be equal to the investors distribution it would have received in accordance with the foregoing.
The holder of the Series A preferred stocks shall not be required to make additional capital contributions to the Group other than contributions in an amount equal to the underwriting loss without the express prior approval of the Group.
Class D shares On 26 June 2013 the Group entered into an Exchange Agreement and Amendment to the Securities and Exchange Agreement dated 22 September 2010 where 3000000 Class D Common shares were issued to an independent third party and 2500000 Class D Common Shares were issued to a shareholder.
The agreement requires the Group to comply with certain covenants.
As at 30 June 2017 and 2016 the Group was in compliance with its covenants.
The consideration for the issue of the 3000000 Class D Common Shares was the cancellation of a Promissory Note issued to the independent third party by the Group on 22 September 2010 which had a maturity date of 22 September 2015.
The Group cancelled the note in exchange for the issuance of such shares.
In the opinion of the Group the reasonable present cash value of the shares issued was determined as 3000000 which was the amount outstanding on the Promissory Note and that in its opinion the present cash value of the consideration for the issue of such shares was not less than the amount credited for the issue of the shares.
The consideration for the issue of the 2500000 Class D Common Shares was the cancellation of a Promissory Note issued to the independent third party by the Group on 22 September 2010 which had a maturity date of 22 September 2015.
The Group cancelled the note in exchange for the issuance of such shares.
In the opinion of the Group the reasonable present cash value of the shares issued was determined as 2500000 which was the amount outstanding on the Promissory Note and that in its opinion the present cash value of the consideration for the issue of such shares was not less than the amount credited for the issue of the shares.
Class D NonVoting Common Shares accrue dividends at the rate per annum of 0.12 per share payable quarterly in arrears.
Dividends paid on the Class D NonVoting Common Shares were 427000 and 660000 in the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016 respectively.
As part of an initial public offering on 22 February 2017 5500000 Class D Shares were exchanged for 2933333 of Ordinary Shares.
No gain or loss was recorded on the retirement of Class D Shares.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Share capital On 22 February 2017 the Group began to trade on the Exchange.
The Groups authorised share capital was 87752283 Ordinary Shares of 0.001 par value per share.
The Groups issued share capital is summarised in the table below Class of common share Issued and fully paid number of shares
Total issued share capital number of shares Par value
Voting rights
Ordinary Shares 87752283  87752283 0.001 87752 One vote per share
Period ending 30 June 2017 The following transactions took place prior to admission to the Exchange on 22 February 2017 exchanged 2604 Class A Voting 18684 Class A NonVoting 9367 Class B 355 Class C Voting and 3051 Class C NonVoting Shares all at 1.00 per share into 66418950 Ordinary shares at 0.001 per share exchanged 5500000 Class D Shares at 1.00 per share for 2933333 of Ordinary Shares at 0.001 per share. initial placement of 21333333 Ordinary Shares at 1.50 on the exchange.
The called up share capital disclosed in the consolidated statement of financial position represents the difference between issue price and the nominal value of the shares issued by the Group.
Prior to the initial public offering on 22 February 2017 the Companys authorised share capital was 5537468 Common Shares of 1.00 each and this includes class D Shares classified as a financial liability Note 26.
The Companys previously issued share capital is summarised in the table below Class of common share Issued and fully paid number of shares
Total issued share capital number of shares Par value
Voting rights
Class A Voting 2604  2604 1.00 2604 One vote per share
Class A NonVoting 18684  18684 1.00 18684 None Eligible Class B NonVoting 9367  9367 1.00 9367 None None Class C Voting 355  355 1.00 355 One vote per share
Class C NonVoting 3051  3051 1.00 3051 None None Total 34061 34061 34061 Share premium The share premium represents the amounts subscribed for share capital in excess of the par value of the shares.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Share capital continued Dividend and capital requirements Payment of dividends to the Group by its insurance subsidiary GIL is limited by insurance regulations.
The maximum amount of ordinary dividends that GIL may pay to shareholders in a 12month period is limited to the amount that would not preclude GIL from meeting the margin of solvency or approved asset requirements.
GIL has not declared any dividends for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016.
All dividends require approval by the Board of Directors.
In accordance with the Insurance Business Bailiwick of Guernsey Law 2002 the minimum capital requirement of GIL being a licensed insurer writing general insurance business is 100000 equivalent to 130000 as at 30 June 2017 and equivalent to 134000 as at 30 June 2016.
Similarly payment of dividends to the Group by its insurance subsidiary GSLIL is limited by Guernsey insurance regulations.
The maximum amount of ordinary dividends that GIL may pay to shareholders in a 12month period is limited to the amount that would not preclude GSLIL from meeting the margin of solvency or approved asset requirements determined in accordance with the Insurance Business Solvency Rules 2015.
GSLIL has not declared any dividends for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016.
All dividends require approval by the Board of Directors.
In accordance with the Insurance Business Bailiwick of Guernsey Law 2002 the minimum capital requirement of GSLIL being a licensed insurer writing general insurance business is 250000 equivalent to 325000 as at 30 June 2017.
This company ceased writing business on 1 October 2016 and is currently in run off.
Capital redemption reserve
Balance as at 1 July 2016 11993 Removal of Class A Voting and Class A NonVoting 11993 Repurchase of shares as repayment for note receivable 1467 Balance as at 30 June 2017 1467 During the year ended 30 June 2011 the Group purchased 3280 1 Class A Voting and 3280 1 Class A NonVoting Common Shares from a shareholder for 12000000.
The excess of the consideration paid over the nominal value of the shares are classified as treasury stock.
Prior to the initial public offering the Group removed Class A Voting and Class A NonVoting Shares from the articles.
Prior to admission to trading on the Exchange a shareholder from GBGI Limited transferred 788088 Ordinary Shares as repayment on the note receivable of 1467167.
Trade and other payables Trade payables 8045 4695 Accruals and other payables 14311 10734 22356 15429 63 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Contingent liabilities In the normal course of business the Group engages in reinsurance ceded transactions as part of its overall underwriting strategy.
Reinsurance includes quota share excess of loss and facultative treaties on all policies written.
Reinsurance ceded does not discharge the Group from its liabilities to the original policyholders in respect of the risk being reinsured.
The Group believes its reinsurance companies are financially stable.
The Group is also involved in certain claims and legal proceedings which have arisen in the normal course of business.
Management does not believe that the outcome of any current pending claims or legal proceedings in which the Group is currently involved will have a material adverse effect on the Groups consolidated financial position results of operations or cash flows.
Operating lease commitments The Group has various operating leases for office space and equipment with terms expiring at various dates through June 2022.
The future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases in excess of one year at 30 June 2017 are as follows Office space and equipment Within next 12 months 1247 1138 More than 12 months and less than 5 years 2534 842 More than 5 years 3781 1980 Operating lease payments recorded for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016 were 1734723 and 1019648 respectively.
Acquisition of subsidiary On 20 January 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the shares and voting interests in Quality Health Management LLC QHM a leading thirdparty administrator and cost containment firm.
For the five and a half months ended 30 June 2017 QHM contributed revenue of 801801 and profit of 221438 to the Groups results.
The following table summarises the acquisition date fair value of each major class of consideration transferred.
Cash 1350 Future annual cash payments 535 Total consideration transferred 1885 b Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed The following table summarises the recognised amounts of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition.
Trade and other receivables 5715 Cash 1003 Trade and other payables 5631 Total identifiable net assets acquired 1087 There is a deferred and contingent consideration element to the business combination portion of the acquisition of QHM.
This element consists of two 325000 payments to be made on 31 January 2018 and 31 January 2019 respectively.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Acquisition of subsidiary continued Measurement of fair values The trade receivables comprise gross contractual amounts due of 5669759 of which zero was expected to be uncollectible at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill arising from the acquisition was 798356.
The goodwill is attributable mainly to QHMs extensive provider network and cost containment strategies.
None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
The Group incurred acquisitionrelated costs of 7358 on legal fees and diligence costs.
These costs have been included in administrative expenses.
Related parties The Group had a note receivable from a shareholder of GBGI in the amount of 1760500.
As at 30 June 2017 and 2016 the balance on the note receivable is 0 and 1467167.
In April 2014 the Group and the shareholder amended the note receivable to reflect a lump sum principal payment plan with the lump sum being due the earlier of January 2017 as defined by the agreement.
All other term notes remained unchanged including the payment of interest compounded quarterly at 2.5%.
In February 2017 as part of the share capital exchange and initial public offering the shareholder paid the note receivable with 788088 of Ordinary Shares.
The Group provided advances to various officers of the Group.
The total amount of advances outstanding as at 30 June 2017 and 2016 were 296000 and 228000 respectively.
These advances are included within prepaid expenses and other assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Group paid for various services associated with an acquisition activity in 2013 that was reviewed but later abandoned that were shared by two shareholders of the Group.
As at 30 June 2017 and 2016 the Group has a receivable due from the shareholders for reimbursement of those costs in the amount of 139999 for each year.
The receivable is included within prepaid expenses and other assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Group has an operating agreement with their Eastern Europe sales representative.
The Group pays the representatives operating expenses in exchange for the representative serving as Regional Vice President for Eastern
The operating expense amounted to 1296549 and 992530 for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016 respectively.
On 22 September 2010 the Group entered into a consulting agreement with a minority shareholder.
The consulting agreement provided for a minimum annual consulting fee of 219069 with provisions for increases in fees that are capped at 350000 for any given 12month period.
In February 2017 the agreement was terminated.
The consulting expense incurred relating to the consulting agreement was 199000 and 289264 for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016 respectively.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Related parties continued Employment agreements The Group has entered into employment agreements with certain officers and employees.
Some of these employment contracts do not have a term and expire upon retirement or termination.
These agreements have minimum obligations of approximately 720000 annually and are not included in the table below.
Certain employment agreements also include provisions for additional compensation based on performance criteria some have a provision for additional compensation related to change in control and some have severance provisions.
The Group also has employment agreements with certain officers and employees with terms expiring at various dates through June 2019.
Future minimum obligations under such agreements with defined terms are as follows Years ending 30 June 000s 2017 4783979 2018 3059913 2019 1902375 Events after the reporting period The Group has advised that it will be changing its accounting calendar from the current 30 June fiscal year ending date to 31 December starting 31 December 2017.
There have been no other material events subsequent to the period end and up to 21 November 2017 the date of approval of the financial statements by the Board of Directors.
Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Directors advisers and other service providers NonExecutive Directors William Bill Ward Anne Gunther Murray Wood David Gibson Douglas Trussler Executive Directors Robert Bob Dubrish Eric Dickelman Andrew Andy Thorburn Registered Office and Company number Level 5 Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port
GY1 1EJ Company Number 48728 Nominated Adviser and Broker Canaccord Genuity Limited 88 Wood Street
EC2V 7QR Company information
BDO USA LLP 1888 Century Park East 4th Floor Los Angeles CA 90067 United States of America Company Secretary
Alternative Risk Management
Level 5 Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port
GY1 1EJ
Link Asset Services 65 Gresham Street
EC2V 7NQ
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes 68 Financial Statements GBGI Annual Report 2017 Notes Designed and produced by Instinctif Partners creative.
