Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Significant
Growth
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc is a specialist regional office investment and development company operating throughout the UK.
At a Glance Prime Regional
Our Portfolio The Groups portfolio consists of 15 commercial property investments and developments in the UK with a current value of 93.0m up 19.7% 15.3m from the previous year end.
All of the properties are currently held by CPUT andor the Jersey Subsidiaries.
The portfolio comprises approximately 634801 sq ft of primarily office accommodation.
36 Great Charles Street
Recently refurbished by Circle this 25750 sq ft office is located in the Citys central business district and is now available to let.
One Castlepark Tower Hill Bristol A reversionary 78500 sq ft multilet office building well located close to both Temple Meads railway station and Cabot Circus.
Kents Hill Park Timbold Drive Milton Keynes A top quality 40000 sq ft out of town office building set within a business park and regional conference facility immediately available to let offering suites from 3000 sq ft upwards following completion of the Companys refurbishment programme.
For more detailed information on our portfolio please see page 8 Portfolio Review Contents Strategic Report Highlights of the Year 1
Chairmans Statement 2
Chief Executives Statement 3 Business Model 4 Market Overview 5 Our Strategy 6 Portfolio Review 8 Principal Risks 14
Board of Directors 16 Governance Report 18 Directors Report 21
Remuneration Committee Report 23
Financials
Auditors Report 25
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 26 Consolidated statement of financial position 27 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 28 Consolidated statement of cash flows Notes to the consolidated financial statements 30 Officers and Professional Advisers ibc Key Stats Commercial Property
T otal Approximate Portfolio Value UK Regions Covered Regional Offices Retail and Industrial
141 Moorgate
A refurbished 11400 sq ft office building located in the City of London above Moorgate Underground and Crossrail stations with one suite available to let.
Somerset House Temple Street Birmingham A prime 47 000 sq ft office and restaurant property currently undergoing refurbishment with completion due autumn 2017.
Park House Northampton Business Park
A multilet 43500 sq ft office property with active management initiatives underway.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report 40tel Portfolio Value 19.7% 2016 2017 Net Asset Value Per Share 19.9% el Shareholders Funds 19.9% YE2016 YE2017 Post 2017 LikeforLike Income 18.6% Highlights of the Year to 31 March 2017
Operational Highlights
Secured Compass on new 1520year breaks lease at Kents Hill at an initial rent of 1.5m per annum up 71.48% with fixed annual increases of 3%.
Power House Milton Keynes  letting of part of the refurbished ground floor to Urgent Technology on 10year lease at 16.10 psf against an average passing rent of 14 psf.
Elizabeth House Staines  A new letting to Hardy and Hewitt at a rent equating to 18.95 psf against an average passing rent of 14 psf.
Post Year End Operational Highlights 20 year letting to Las Iguanas at Somerset House in Birmingham on an initial rent of 220000 per annum.
Powerhouse Milton Keynes  a new letting to Steven Eagell Limited of the remaining refurbished ground floor for 10 years at a rent of 106256 per annum equating to 16 psf.
Baildon Bridge Retail Park Shipley  a new 10 year letting to Topps Tiles with 5 year break at an initial rent of 52585 per annum.
Strategic Highlights
Sale of noncore asset at Winwick Road Warrington for 1.32m an increase of 34% above the previous years valuation of the car showroom.
Completion of the refurbishments at both the K2 Kents Hill Business Park and 36 Great Charles Street Birmingham with a combined ERV of 1.120m per annum.
Financial Highlights
Profit before tax of 9.9m reflecting a combination of operating profit revaluation gains and profit on disposals.
19.7% growth in portfolio valuation to 93m 31 March 2016 77 .7m.
19.9% growth in EPRA NAV per share to 1.83 31 March 2016 1.53.
Increase in operating profit to 2.3m 31 March 2016 0.8m.
Earnings per share increased to 35p 31 March 2016 4p.
Proposed final dividend per share of 2.6p to bring the annual dividend to 5p.
18.6% Likeforlike Income
19.7% Portfolio Value
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Chairmans Statement
A Year of Strong Growth We are pleased with the portfolios overall performance especially given the current uncertainties in the market and will be concentrating on further lettings and active management initiatives to continue driving growth forward Whilst the political and economic uncertainty of 2016 continues to play out the underlying quality of Circle Property Plcs portfolio of regional offices and the wealth of experience and expertise inherent within its management team has driven a period of growth for the Company.
Circle has successfully realised a yearonyear growth of 19.9% in NAV delivering a final NAV of 183p per share as well as a proposed final dividend of 2.6p per share an increase of 8.3% to bring the annual dividend to 5p.
This growth has come almost entirely through the teams strong asset management and stock picking capabilities with assettransforming capex programmes at key sites including K2 Kents Hill Park in Milton Keynes and 36 Great Charles Street in Birmingham which reached completion in the period as well as solid progress being made at Somerset House in Birminghams CBD.
Circles high level of tenant retention is largely attributable to both the high standards of management that we demand within our multilet properties and our flexible approach to tenant renewal negotiations.
Our vacancy rate in the standing investment portfolio is less than 1% as where appropriate we continue to place a greater emphasis upon the certainty of secure income and the creation of longer leases in preference to the maximisation of rents.
It is the strength of Circles asset management that differentiates the Company from its peers.
In order to achieve lettings in a highly competitive market it is essential to respond swiftly to tenants everchanging occupational demands.
By listening to tenants and taking advice from agents the Company remains totally aware of emerging occupier trends such as the increasing preference towards characterful or individualistic offices and is able to increase value by providing supply for this demand.
This strategy to deliver bestin class office properties in regional locations was further supported by the successful refinancing of Circles senior debt with RBS following the agreement of a new 50m facility.
Circle is well positioned in this uncertain political and economic environment with a closely managed business a positive strategy and an entrepreneurial management team ready to exploit emerging opportunities Ian Henderson
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report Throughout the year we have continued with our asset management programme and have now assembled a core portfolio of high quality regional offices in prime locations which are primarily well let to high quality tenants on medium or longterm leases.
As a result and because of the resilient demand for the type of space we offer we believe our portfolio will prove less susceptible to any downward valuation shifts arising from any prolonged political and economic uncertainty.
Following the refinancing of our debt facility with RBS we are currently also reviewing our hedging strategy including the possibility of entering into longerterm fixed rate funding.
Our
It is therefore likely that income will continue to feature as a prerequisite to attract investors but through continued strong stock selection appropriate portfolio recycling and strong asset management we aim to provide a better total return over time than a purely income driven stock as evidenced by the 19.9% growth in EPRA NAV in the year under review compared to a 3.9% total return for the MSCI All Property index in 2016.
Most encouragingly almost all of the increase in NAV within the portfolio is attributable to our asset management.
By successfully undertaking lease renegotiations new lettings and lease renewals we have maximised income and have generated earnings per share of 35p.
In Birmingham we only recently in July launched 36 Great Charles Street into the letting market and it has been very well received The faade has just been cleaned while the reception area has been enlarged decorated and furnished to form a distinctive area for the tenants to meet and greet visitors as well as hold informal meetings directly off street level.
Chief Executives Statement Resilience Through the Cycle Also in Birmingham Somerset House Temple Street will be available in the autumn.
The specification we are implementing enhances and complements the buildings many art deco features including the restored parquet flooring that will help to differentiate our offering from many others in the vicinity.
Prime rents in the city have now reached 35 psf so our two buildings at 18 and 20 psf respectively should prove highly attractive to those tenants seeking well located high quality office space.
Although the letting market for requirements over 10000 sq ft has been noticeably slower in the first half of the 2017 calendar year we are in negotiations to let a substantial part of our 40000 sq ft office building K2 at Kents Hill Park Milton Keynes to a major occupier and have multiple interest in the remainder following our decision to further subdivide the building into smaller suites.
From the outset we built maximum flexibility into the layout of the property and by a simple repositioning of services subdivision is possible with minimum loss of net internal area and at a modest additional construction cost.
All of our buildings that are either in the course of refurbishment or completed and available to let are capable of being occupied by tenants seeking less than 5000 sq ft which is the most active sector of the market.
Our optimism in the economy in the lead up to leaving the EU is being tested by the hung parliament and increasing political uncertainty following the general election.
We are mindful that the heightened sense of nervousness may have an adverse effect upon some areas of the property market.
However with a strong cash flow and cash at bank we believe that our business is well placed to capitalise upon a regional office market that has todate remained fairly robust due to sustained demand for offices in the sub 5000 sq ft range and the continuing loss of much of the lower quality office stock due to obsolescence and residential conversion.
In the short term Circle Property Plc will concentrate on letting the space within the development portfolio which once fully let on the basis of current rental levels has the capability to treble the net operating profits enhancing the future earnings per share and supporting our progressive dividend policy.
We hope this will help drive demand for our shares facilitating an expansion of our investor base and so creates greater liquidity in our stock.
John Arnold
Chief Executive Officer 4
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Refurbish and actively manage Revalue and regear
Business Model Our aim is to provide a growing and secure income stream to fund our progressive dividend policy whilst in addition generating strong capital growth.
Refurbish and actively manage This is done by careful asset selection.
Whether we are buying short let income to drive the rents forward or offices requiring refurbishment we use our proven expertise to provide tenants with the occupational space they desire in locations where there is proven occupier demand.
Buy
We buy well located provincial offices where we can reposition the asset and maximise its full value.
Revalue and regear Having successfully regeared leases or refurbished and let the office building we revalue the asset and use the equity released by refinancing to start the cycle again.
The higher rent feeds our progressive dividend policy.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report Market Overview The market for regional offices located within major conurbations has been less affected by BREXIT as they are not as dependent as London on international finance and investment.
Companies relocating to the regions to save costs being attracted by lower employment costs business rates and rent coupled with existing demand from local professional occupiers and SMEs have further enhanced tenant demand for good quality well located offices.
Market Opportunities With REITs competing for income and institutions restricted by their large asset lot size requirement there is less competition for us to acquire well located short let or part vacant provincial offices.
Furthermore major provincial cities have experienced the Permitted Development Rights effect whereby offices can be converted to residential without planning permission.
This has led to a shortage in supply of good quality office accommodation.
Significant Trends A reduction in supply for good quality provincial offices along with a stable provincial economy has created good office demand which has led to rental growth with reducing tenant incentives.
Tenants occupational requirements are changing with many seeking something different such as exposed mechanical services which are not normally found in provincial offices.
Growth Drivers
Development Rights reducing regional office supply Demand from both local occupiers and those relocating Providing inspiring offices where tenants want to work Kents Hill Reception 6 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Our Strategy Our expertise and track record in acquiring actively managing and adding value to provincial offices enables us to deliver both rental and capital growth to our shareholders.
Strategy Progress 201617 Outlook 201718 Key Performance Indicator
We buy well located short letfully or part vacant provincial offices where we are confident in the letting market.
Somerset House Central Birmingham acquired in January 2016 for 7.75m.
We have a strong pipeline of further regional offices under consideration.
Active Management Our handson approach to asset management leads to decreasing letting voids and increasing rental income.
Renegotiation of existing 10 year Compass lease in Milton Keynes for a 25 year lease increasing rent by 71.4% to 1.5m.
Likeforlike income on core investment portfolio up 18.6% over the year.
Low vacancy rate of 1% within core investment portfolio.
Property valuations up 19.7% as a result of active asset management.
Let newly refurbished offices.
Undertake lease renewals and rent reviews to capture reversionary rent.
YE 2017 Total ERV Office Portfolio Total Portfolio Likeforlike Contracted Rent v Total ERV 14.98% Amount let oces are underrented v ERV Recycle Capital We sell noncore assets where we have completed the asset management and recycle the proceeds into new provincial office opportunities.
Sale of a car showroom situated in Warrington for 34% above valuation December 2016.
Complete active management of noncore assets adding value above existing valuation and then sell.
Recycle Capital 34% Above Valuation Development Programme We reposition and add value to well located provincial offices by undertaking both minor or extensive refurbishments.
K2 Kents Hill Business Park Milton Keynes a comprehensive 2.5m refurbishment of a 40000 sq ft office completed July 2016.
36 Great Charles Street Birmingham a comprehensive 2.66m refurbishment of a 25750 sq ft office completed June 2017.
Somerset House Temple Street Birmingham a comprehensive refurbishment of a 47 400 sq ft office for 2.45m currently underway.
As at 31 March 2017 671k of expenditure had been incurred.
Refurbished and let 10000 sq ft offices at Power House Knowle Hill Milton Keynes.
Let newly refurbished offices and progress refurbishment of Somerset House.
Development Portfolio 34.3% Current oce refurbishment stock by oor area either under refurbishment or recently completed Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report Strategy Progress 201617 Outlook 201718 Key Performance Indicator
We buy well located short letfully or part vacant provincial offices where we are confident in the letting market.
Somerset House Central Birmingham acquired in January 2016 for 7.75m.
We have a strong pipeline of further regional offices under consideration.
Active Management Our handson approach to asset management leads to decreasing letting voids and increasing rental income.
Renegotiation of existing 10 year Compass lease in Milton Keynes for a 25 year lease increasing rent by 71.4% to 1.5m.
Likeforlike income on core investment portfolio up 18.6% over the year.
Low vacancy rate of 1% within core investment portfolio.
Property valuations up 19.7% as a result of active asset management.
Let newly refurbished offices.
Undertake lease renewals and rent reviews to capture reversionary rent.
YE 2017 Total ERV Office Portfolio Total Portfolio Likeforlike Contracted Rent v Total ERV 14.98% Amount let oces are underrented v ERV Recycle Capital We sell noncore assets where we have completed the asset management and recycle the proceeds into new provincial office opportunities.
Sale of a car showroom situated in Warrington for 34% above valuation December 2016.
Complete active management of noncore assets adding value above existing valuation and then sell.
Recycle Capital 34% Above Valuation Development Programme We reposition and add value to well located provincial offices by undertaking both minor or extensive refurbishments.
K2 Kents Hill Business Park Milton Keynes a comprehensive 2.5m refurbishment of a 40000 sq ft office completed July 2016.
36 Great Charles Street Birmingham a comprehensive 2.66m refurbishment of a 25750 sq ft office completed June 2017.
Somerset House Temple Street Birmingham a comprehensive refurbishment of a 47 400 sq ft office for 2.45m currently underway.
As at 31 March 2017 671k of expenditure had been incurred.
Refurbished and let 10000 sq ft offices at Power House Knowle Hill Milton Keynes.
Let newly refurbished offices and progress refurbishment of Somerset House.
Development Portfolio 34.3% Current oce refurbishment stock by oor area either under refurbishment or recently completed 8 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Portfolio Review Active Management Feeds Growth During the year we continued to increase the portfolios income by concentrating on lease renewals and lettings.
In addition our three key developments are progressing well.
Both K2 Kents Hill Business Park and 36 Great Charles Street Birmingham are complete and we have good tenant interest for both.
At Somerset House Temple Street Birmingham planning permission was obtained for change of use of the ground floor for two enlarged restaurant units which attract a higher rental than offices 40 psf against 20 psf.
The offices above are undergoing refurbishment and are due to be completed by autumn 2017.
Our strategy of owning buildings capable of subdivision to provide smaller office suites of up to 5000 sq ft is paying off as 70% of all lettings in the cities where we are invested are within this size range.
At this smaller end of the letting market we attract local professionals and SMEs which are less prone to the uncertainties of BREXIT.
The current uncertainty in the market may give rise to further opportunities which we will endeavour to exploit should the returns be sufficiently attractive.
We are pleased with the portfolios overall performance and will concentrate on further lettings and active management initiatives to continue driving growth Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report Portfolio Floor Area sq ft by Sector Oce
Warehouse
Retail
Warehouse
Roadside
Other
Conference
Facility
44.0% 21.0% 4.0% 18.0% 8.0% 1.0% 4.0% Portfolio Location by Region and Value South East South West
West Midlands East Midlands North West North of England East of England March 2016 YE March 2017 YE Years to break Years to lease expiry WAULT Comparison
Portfolio Overview As at 31 March 2017  the total portfolio value was 93025000 an increase of 19.7% from the previous year mainly driven by asset management as opposed to yield compression.
The portfolio is made up of 15 assets primarily well located provincial offices.
Our car showroom in Warrington was sold at a price of 1.32m an increase of 34% above the previous years valuation.
By floor area 80% of the total portfolio is let and income producing and forms the investment portfolio.
For the remaining vacant 20% 19% is held within our development portfolio which consists of three office buildings two of which have been refurbished and one is currently under refurbishment.
Only 1% of the vacancy is held within the core investment portfolio.
89.7% of the portfolio by value is in the office and conference sector which forms the core portfolio.
The remaining 10.3% is split across four sectors being the noncore portfolio which although providing good high yielding income are likely to be sold once their business plans are complete.
73.7% of the portfolio by value is located in Milton Keynes Bristol and Birmingham an increase of 5% from the previous year end.
Principal tenants within the portfolio include Compass Contract Services Ltd 26.69% 24.5 years to lease expiry Which Financial Services Ltd 5.89% Grant Thornton LLP 5% BandM Retail Ltd 5% and New World Trading Company Ltd 4.3%.
As at 31 March 2017  the weighted average unexpired lease term WAULT to first tenants break option increased from 5.6 years to 7.39 years whilst to lease expiry increased from 6.85 years to 11.23 years.
The total annual contracted income produced by the portfolio is over 5.6m net current annual income of 5.32m with a reversionary rent based on full ERV and once the development assets are let of approximately 8.9m.
Edward Olins Chief Operating Officer 10 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Portfolio Review continued Kents Hill Park Milton Keynes When acquired in December 2013 the 22acre estate provided 246598 sq ft of conference leisure and office accommodation across two parts.
The first being a 176941 sq ft office leisure and conference facility housed within six selfcontained buildings let to Compass Group on a rolling threemonthly management agreement paying 100000 per annum.
The second part comprises two selfcontained offices providing 69657 sq ft of accommodation 30% of which was let to Accenture for a term of one and a half years unexpired at a rent of 291987 per annum.
The remaining 70% was old unattractive vacant offices that required refurbishment.
The combined rental income was 391987 per annum.
During the acquisition we agreed new letting terms with Compass Group which surrendered its existing management agreement and entered into a 10year lease at an increased rent of 875000 per annum.
This lease has subsequently been regeared again in September 2016 for a term of 25 years tenant break options at 15 and 20 years at a further increased rent of 1.5m per annum subject to annual 3% per annum uplifts.
The remaining 70000 sq ft of offices and former accommodation occupied by Accenture have been refurbished and rebranded as K1 and K2 Kents Hill Business Park.
K1 totalling 26889 sq ft is already fully let and produces an income of 389326 equating to 14.48 psf overall whilst K2 totalling 40534 sq ft is available to let.
We have good interest in this building where we are quoting a rent of 18.50 psf.
The current rental income of both parts of Kents Hill Park is 1.889m with the potential to increase by a further 609000 per annum should K2 be let at the current quoting rent.
CASE STUDY Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report The Key Office Investment Assets Park House 300 Pavilion Drive Northampton Business Park
The property was purchased in May 2009 for 4m and provides approximately 43577 sq ft of office accommodation within one of Northamptons premier business parks.
The property is fully let to three tenants being Grant Thornton 53% NRG Group UK Ltd ta Ricoh 30% and Cedar Open Accounts 17%.
The weighted unexpired lease term is 4.29 years to expiry and 1.49 years to break.
Discussions are ongoing with the principal tenant Grant Thornton which occupies the building as its main internal accounts function for the UK regarding the removal of this one break option in August 2018.
The total rent passing is 526490 per annum equating to 12.08 psf overall.
The property was valued for 5.8m at 31 March 2017.
141 Moorgate London EC2
A prime city office building of some 11400 sq ft acquired in March 2003 for 2.375m.
The property was refurbished in 2013 and is well located being situated above Moorgate Underground Station and immediately adjacent to Moorgate Crossrail Underground Station.
The property is multilet to four tenants and has a contracted rental income of 182174 per annum.
The 5th floor is currently vacant following a refurbishment.
The property was valued for 4m at 31 March 2017.
Kents Hill Park Milton Keynes
A regional conference facility and business park purchased in December 2013 for 11.05m.
The regional conference facility is let to Compass Contract Services and provides hotel leisure and conference facilities within six buildings totalling approximately 177 200 sq ft.
The business park provides some 70000 sq ft of office accommodation within two selfcontained buildings.
K1 has been fully refurbished and is fully let to three tenants namely Lundbeck IFG Management and Traffic Master.
K2 is currently vacant following the recent completion of a refurbishment.
Both the regional conference facility and business park have a current combined contracted rent of 1.9m an increase of 625428 per annum or 49.5% from the previous period.
The property was valued at 32.85m on 31 March 2017 an increase of 11.6m or 55% over the previous period.
One Castlepark Tower Hill Bristol
Purchased in November 2012 for 4.16m the property now provides approximately 78500 sq ft of refurbished office accommodation.
The property is fully let to eight tenants including Which Financial Services Limited Irwin Mitchell LLP and JISC.
The total passing contracted rent is approximate 1.06m per annum.
The property was valued at 14m on 31 March 2017.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Portfolio Review continued The Key Office Development Assets K2 Kents Hill Business Park Milton Keynes
The refurbishment of this 40000 sq ft office building has completed at a cost of 2.4m.
Based on the quoting rent of 18.50 psf and once fully let the property will produce an annual rental income of around 740000 per annum.
There is good letting interest in this property which is capable of subdivision to provide suites ranging from 3500 sq ft up to 20000 sq ft per floor.
The property is considered to provide some of the best out of town business park accommodation in the Milton Keynes area.
36 Great Charles Street Birmingham
36 Great Charles Street provides 25787 sq ft of office accommodation and was acquired in August 2015 for 2.5m.
The property is located on the citys inner ring road within Birminghams traditional office core.
The immediate area around the property is undergoing significant change with Argents Paradise Island development providing 1.8m sq ft of Grade A office accommodation along with retail leisure and a 4star hotel located just 200 yards away.
PwC has taken a 90000 sq ft prelet within the scheme at a reported rent of 32 psf.
The buildings refurbishment completed in June 2017 and it now offers suites ranging from 1250 sq ft to 3594 sq ft per floor.
Once fully let the property will produce an annual rental income of around 525000 per annum based on the competitive quoting rent of 18.50 psf.
The property was valued at 4.6m at 31 March 2017.
See case study.
Somerset House Temple Street Birmingham
Acquired in January 2016 for 7.75m the property is located on Temple Street within the heart of Birminghams financial and professional core and just a twominute walk from Birmingham New Street Station.
The property provided 43700 sq ft of vacant office accommodation above ground floor restaurant and retail accommodation of some 3100 sq ft.
Subsequently planning permission has been obtained and construction completed for the change of use and reconfiguration of the ground floor to provide two enlarged restaurant units of approximately 5000 sq ft each which attracts much higher rental levels than the office space.
Since the year end one of the restaurant units has been let to Las Iguanas on a 20year lease without break at an initial passing rent of 220000 per annum.
The refurbishment of the vacant offices is underway and anticipated to be completed by autumn of 2017.
On completion of the redevelopment and once fully let the estimated annual rental income for the property is 1.177m per annum.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report 36 Great Charles Street Birmingham The property was purchased substantially vacant in August 2015 for 2.5m and has since undergone a major refurbishment which completed in June 2017.
The building now provides 25787 sq ft of top quality office accommodation.
Situated within Birminghams central business district the buildings location is set to improve further by the development of Argents Paradise Island which is approximately 200 yards away.
Paradise is one of the most important commercial developments outside London delivering 1.8m sq ft of Grade A office accommodation along with retail leisure and a 4star hotel.
Within the scheme PwC has prelet 90000 sq ft at a reported rent of 32 psf.
Once fully let our property will produce an annual rental income of around 525000 per annum based on the competitive quoting rent of 18.50 psf.
CASE STUDY
During the year Circle Property Plc completed the refinancing of its entire senior debt with the Royal Bank of Scotland Plc on the following terms Loan amount Increased loan amount from 39.2m to 50m allowing the Company to refinance its portfolio undertake refurbishments and fund further acquisitions.
Term Threeyear term with two options to extend for a further year at the expiry of the 1st and 2nd anniversary of the term.
Loan to value A maximum drawdown to LTV of 65%.
Interest rate Decreased to 1.85% over LIBOR from 2.95% over LIBOR.
Interest rate cover 1.751 for the first two years of the term increasing to 2.001 thereafter.
Debt to rent ratio No greater than 111 for the first two years of the terms decreasing to 101 thereafter.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Principal Risks Risk Trend
Unchanged
Decreasing
Risk Impact Mitigation Movement Tenant default Loss or shortfall of rental income.
Increase in additional expenses rates voids and service charge shortfalls until the property is relet.
Impact the valuation.
Multilet portfolio not reliant on one tenant.
Parent company guarantees or rent deposits sought if required.
Properties acquired in established business locations of investment.
Regular close contact and management meetings held with all our tenants to assess any occupational issues and to manage potential bad debt risk.
Low risk
Refurbishment
Unexpected increase in refurbishment cost.
Delay in the refurbishment programme.
Overexposure to refurbishments within portfolio.
Business plan put in place for each acquisition approved by the Board which covers expected refurbishment cost and overall incomecapital returns.
Employment of specialist project managers to oversee refurbishments.
Weekly site team meetings with the contractors and project manager with quarterly presentations to the Board.
Maximum target of 33% of portfolio by floor area under refurbishment at any one time.
Strong cash flow from core portfolio Medium risk
Financing and cash flow Interest rate sensitivity.
Breach of loan covenants interest rate cover and loan to value.
Reduced availability of debt.
Continual review of hedging strategy.
Core portfolio generating strong cash flow to cover interest payments.
Reduction of loan to value as refurbishments and lettings complete.
Strong relationship with the Companys lenders along with quarterly compliance statements on geared assets ensure funding transparency.
Medium risk
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report Risk Impact Mitigation Movement Economic and political Brexit and general uncertainty on the economy tenant covenant strength and occupier demand.
Possibility of a general election within the current parliamentary term.
Focus on debt reduction and letting vacant development stock.
High risk
Property valuation The valuation of the Companys portfolio affects its profitability net asset value and the price of ordinary shares.
The Companys portfolio is valued by Savills an independent valuer who assess the fair value of each of the properties.
Medium risk
Management the Company and its operation Loss of key personnel could have adverse consequences for the Company.
Issues in managing the portfolio and collecting rent.
Key personnel remuneration structure reviewed.
Retention of good external advisers and agents to promotemaintain smooth operational running.
Rents and insurance collected internally with only daytoday property management outsourced.
Low
Unchanged 16 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Board of Directors
ARNOLD
EDWARD
OLINS
IAN
HENDERSON
RICHARD
HEBERT
JAMES
HAMBRO
THE DUKE OF
MICHAEL
FARROW
Chief Executive Chief Operating Officer NonExecutive Chairman NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director Biography Mr Arnold left St Quintin Chartered Surveyors now CBRE after seven years in the management department and joined Hambros plc in January 1986.
He became a Director of Berkeley Hambro plc its property subsidiary in 1991 where he remained until Investecs acquisition of Hambros Bank in 1998 when he was appointed Managing Director of Investec Property plc.
He left Investec at the end of 1999 and founded Circle in April 2002.
Mr Arnold is a Fellow of The Royal Institution of Chartered
Mr Olins joined DE and J Levy LLP as a graduate surveyor and became a salaried partner in 2000.
He left the partnership in 2003 to join London and County Estates Limited as Investment Director.
In 2006 he joined Circle to take control of new business acquisitions and assist Mr Arnold in the running of the
Mr Olins is a Member of The Royal Institution of Chartered
Mr Henderson is a consultant to Capital and Counties Properties plc Dolphin Square Foundation and The Natural History Museum.
Mr Henderson was formerly Chief Executive of Land Securities Group plc and has been widely involved in the UK property industry including being a past president of the British Property Federation.
Mr Henderson is a Fellow of The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Mr Hebert has 30 years experience in the trust and corporate services sector in Jersey working in the trust departments of several large firms associated to law practices and banks.
This included being a member of the management team of one of the largest independent trust businesses in Jersey and on the integration project team for two major acquisitions.
He is a director of Consortia Partnership
Mr Hebert is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered and Certified Accountants a Fellow of the Association of Accounting Technicians and an Associate of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries and Administrators.
Mr Hambro is Chairman of James Hambro and Partners he was previously Chairman of Hansteen Holdings PLC  a FTSE 250 industrial property company and a director of Primary Health
He was also a Chairman of the Henry Smith Charity until 2015.
Later that year he became Chairman of The Guide Dogs for the Blind charity.
Guy Innes Ker The Duke of Roxburghe was previously NonExecutive Director of Townhouse Hotel Investments Limited and The Sport Entertainment and Media Group
The Duke of Roxburghe is involved in the daytoday running of the Roxburghe Estates including the opening of Floors Castle to the public in 1977 and opening The Roxburghe Golf course in 1997.
Mr Farrow is a founding Director of Consortia Partnership Limited a Jersey licensed trust and fund services company.
He heads their institutional business which amongst other services provides property and private equity fund administration.
He is currently the Senior Independent Director of Redefine International plc a FTSE 250 property company the Chairman of Bellzone Mining plc AIM listed the Chairman of STANLIB Funds Limited a Jersey regulated openended investment company and a NonExecutive Director of RedT Energy plc formerly Camco Clean Energy plc AIM listed.
Between 1997 and 2004 Mr Farrow was an Executive Director and Trustee of a substantial family office which held diversified investment and trading portfolios primarily focused on real estate in Europe and
He has also been Group Company Secretary of Cater Allen Jersey a banking fiduciary and investment management group and formerly a regular Army officer.
Mr Farrow holds a Master of Science in Corporate Governance and is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries and Administrators.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
JOHN
ARNOLD
EDWARD
OLINS
IAN
HENDERSON
RICHARD
HEBERT
JAMES
HAMBRO
THE DUKE OF
MICHAEL
FARROW
Chief Executive Chief Operating Officer NonExecutive Chairman NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director Biography Mr Arnold left St Quintin Chartered Surveyors now CBRE after seven years in the management department and joined Hambros plc in January 1986.
He became a Director of Berkeley Hambro plc its property subsidiary in 1991 where he remained until Investecs acquisition of Hambros Bank in 1998 when he was appointed Managing Director of Investec Property plc.
He left Investec at the end of 1999 and founded Circle in April 2002.
Mr Arnold is a Fellow of The Royal Institution of Chartered
Mr Olins joined DE and J Levy LLP as a graduate surveyor and became a salaried partner in 2000.
He left the partnership in 2003 to join London and County Estates Limited as Investment Director.
In 2006 he joined Circle to take control of new business acquisitions and assist Mr Arnold in the running of the
Mr Olins is a Member of The Royal Institution of Chartered
Mr Henderson is a consultant to Capital and Counties Properties plc Dolphin Square Foundation and The Natural History Museum.
Mr Henderson was formerly Chief Executive of Land Securities Group plc and has been widely involved in the UK property industry including being a past president of the British Property Federation.
Mr Henderson is a Fellow of The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Mr Hebert has 30 years experience in the trust and corporate services sector in Jersey working in the trust departments of several large firms associated to law practices and banks.
This included being a member of the management team of one of the largest independent trust businesses in Jersey and on the integration project team for two major acquisitions.
He is a director of Consortia Partnership
Mr Hebert is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered and Certified Accountants a Fellow of the Association of Accounting Technicians and an Associate of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries and Administrators.
Mr Hambro is Chairman of James Hambro and Partners he was previously Chairman of Hansteen Holdings PLC  a FTSE 250 industrial property company and a director of Primary Health
He was also a Chairman of the Henry Smith Charity until 2015.
Later that year he became Chairman of The Guide Dogs for the Blind charity.
Guy Innes Ker The Duke of Roxburghe was previously NonExecutive Director of Townhouse Hotel Investments Limited and The Sport Entertainment and Media Group
The Duke of Roxburghe is involved in the daytoday running of the Roxburghe Estates including the opening of Floors Castle to the public in 1977 and opening The Roxburghe Golf course in 1997.
Mr Farrow is a founding Director of Consortia Partnership Limited a Jersey licensed trust and fund services company.
He heads their institutional business which amongst other services provides property and private equity fund administration.
He is currently the Senior Independent Director of Redefine International plc a FTSE 250 property company the Chairman of Bellzone Mining plc AIM listed the Chairman of STANLIB Funds Limited a Jersey regulated openended investment company and a NonExecutive Director of RedT Energy plc formerly Camco Clean Energy plc AIM listed.
Between 1997 and 2004 Mr Farrow was an Executive Director and Trustee of a substantial family office which held diversified investment and trading portfolios primarily focused on real estate in Europe and
He has also been Group Company Secretary of Cater Allen Jersey a banking fiduciary and investment management group and formerly a regular Army officer.
Mr Farrow holds a Master of Science in Corporate Governance and is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries and Administrators.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Directors acknowledge the importance of good Corporate Governance and so their approach has been informed by the best practice principles outlined by the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Company whilst wishing to be as transparent as is practicable recognizes the limitations of its internal resources.
The Company however will continue to develop its policies and procedures but has ensured that it adopted policies which have significant implications such as a disclosure conflicts policy share dealing code insider lists and an antibribery and corruption policy.
As the Company evolves the Board is committed to enhancing the Companys corporate governance policies and practices appropriate for its size and maturity.
The Board of Directors is responsible for the success of the Group and through the independent oversight of management is accountable to shareholders for the performance of the business.
Leadership
The Board of Directors comprises three independent NonExecutive Directors two further NonExecutive Directors and two Executive Directors providing the requisite independent oversight expertise and experience to meet the responsibility of making the business a success.
The role of the Board The principal role of the Board is to set the Groups strategy and to review regularly its performance in relationship to the agreed strategy.
In doing this the Board is able to carry out its corporate governance duties and responsibilities.
The Board has established committees which are responsible for audit and remuneration.
Nomination issues will be addressed by the entire Board.
Responsibility for daytoday management of the business is delegated to the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating Officer.
The Board directs and monitors the Groups affairs within an evolving framework of controls which enable risk to be assessed and managed effectively.
Board Meetings The core activities of the Board are carried out in scheduled quarterly meetings of the Board and its Committees.
These meetings are timed to link to key events in the Companys corporate calendar and regular reviews of the business are conducted.
Additional meetings and conference calls are arranged to address matters which require consideration outside the scheduled meetings.
All meetings are held in Jersey.
The Board held four quarterly meetings and six standing committee meetings in its first full year of trading.
Outside the meetings of the Board the directors maintain frequent contact with each other to discuss any issues of concern they may have relating to the Company or their areas of responsibility and to keep themselves fully briefed on the Companys operations.
Independent NonExecutive Directors The independent NonExecutive Directors bring a broad range of business and property experience to the Company and have a particular responsibility to monitor and challenge independently and constructively the performance of the executive management team in the delivery of the agreed objectives and targets.
Delegations of authority Certain other matters are delegated to the Board Committees namely the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
The memberships roles and activities of these Committees are detailed on the Companys website.
Each committee reports to the Board and the issues considered at meetings of the Committees are presented by the respective Committee Chairmen.
Other governance matters All of the Directors are aware that independent professional advice is available to them in order to properly discharge their duties.
In addition each Director and Board Committee has access to the advice of the corporate Company Secretary.
The Company Secretary The Company Secretary is Consortia Secretaries Limited a limited liability company regulated by the Jersey Financial Services Commission which provides full secretarial services.
Michael Farrow and Richard Herbert are both Directors of the Company Secretary.
Effectiveness
In assessing the composition of the Board the Directors have had regard to the following principles the Chairman should be an independent NonExecutive Director the role of the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer should not be exercised by the same person the Board should include at least two independent NonExecutive Directors increasing where additional expertise is considered desirable in certain areas or to ensure a smooth transition between outgoing and incoming NonExecutive Directors and the Board should comprise Directors with an appropriate range of qualifications and expertise.
Biographical details of the Directors are set out on pages 1617 of this Annual Report.
Governance Report Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
The Directors are of the view that the Board and its Committees consist of Directors with an appropriate balance of skills experience independence and diverse backgrounds to enable them to discharge their duties and responsibilities effectively.
Independence
The Board has adopted a formal policy for the determination of the independence of the NonExecutive Directors.
Among the key criteria of the independence policy are independence from management and the absence of a relationship such as ownership which could materially interfere with the directors independence of judgment.
Where contracts in the ordinary course of business exist between Circle Property Plc and a company in which a director has declared an interest these are reviewed for materiality both to the Group and the other party to the contract.
Material is defined in the policy as being where the relationship accounts for more than 10% of either partys consolidated gross revenue per annum although the test also takes other circumstances into account.
Appointments
Directors appointed by the Board are subject to election by shareholders at the following Annual General Meeting of the Company and thereafter are subject to reelection in accordance with the Companys Memorandum and Articles of Association.
Commitments
All Directors have disclosed any significant commitments to the Board and confirmed that they have sufficient time to discharge their duties.
Conflict of interest A director has a duty to avoid a situation in which he or she has or can have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or possibly may conflict with the interests of the Company.
The Board has satisfied itself that there is no compromise to the independence of those directors who have appointments on the boards of or relationships with companies outside the Company.
The Board requires directors to declare all appointments and other situations which could result in a possible conflict of interest.
The Company also maintains a register of gifts and no gifts were received in the reporting period although Mr Olins attended the Lambert Smith Hampton Ski Challenge designed to build business relationships in the commercial property sector.
Board performance and evaluation The Board is not formally evaluated at present but will consider this at the appropriate juncture.
It is envisaged that annual assessments will take place.
Accountability
The Board is committed to providing shareholders with a clear assessment of the Companys position and prospects.
This is achieved through this report and as required other periodic financial and trading statements.
The Board has delegated to the Audit Committee oversight of the relationship with the Companys auditors.
Going concern The Companys business activities together with factors likely to affect its future operations financial position and liquidity are set out in the Chairmans Statement and the CEOs Report in this report.
In addition note 22 to the consolidated financial statements discloses the Companys financial risk management practices with respect to its capital structure liquidity risk interest rate risk credit risk and other related matters.
The Directors statement on going concern is set out in note 2 on page 30 of the consolidated financial statements.
Internal controls The Board of Directors reviews the effectiveness of the Companys system of internal controls.
The internal control system is designed to manage the risk of failure to achieve the Companys business objectives.
This covers internal financial and operational controls compliance and risk management.
The Company has necessary procedures in place and the directors acknowledge their responsibility for the Companys system of internal controls and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The Board confirms the need for an ongoing process for identification evaluation and management of significant risks faced by the Company.
The Audit Committee The Audit Committee regularly reviews and reports to the Board on the effectiveness of the system of internal control.
Given the size of the Company and the relative simplicity of the systems the Board considers that there is no current requirement for an internal audit function.
The procedures that have been established to provide internal financial control for the Company are considered appropriate for a company of its size and include controls over expenditure regular reconciliations and management accounts.
The directors are responsible for taking such steps as are reasonably available to them to safeguard the assets of the Company and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Remuneration Committee The Board has delegated to the Remuneration Committee responsibility for agreeing the remuneration policy for senior executives.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Shareholder relations Open relevant and transparent communication with shareholders is given high priority.
No shareholder or interested party is to be provided information that is not available to all shareholders without restrictive covenants related to trading in equities.
The Board has processes to manage disclosures in compliance with all regulations and Company share trading policies.
All Directors are kept aware of changes in major shareholders in the Company and are available to meet with shareholders who have specific interests or concerns within the constraints of not placing any party in a position of advantage.
The Company issues its results to shareholders promptly and also publishes them on the Companys website.
Regular updates to record news in relation to the Company and the status of its assets are included on the Companys website.
The Directors are available to meet with shareholders to discuss any issues and gain an understanding of the Companys business its strategies and governance.
Meetings may also be held with the corporate governance representatives of institutional investors when requested.
At every Annual General Meeting shareholders are given the opportunity to put questions to the Chairman Executive Directors and to other members of the Board that may be present.
Ian Henderson
Governance Report continued Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
The Directors present their report and the audited consolidated financial statements of Circle Property Plc and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 March 2017.
A review of the Groups business and results for the year is contained within the Chairmans Statement and Chief Executives Statement which should be read in conjunction with this report.
The Directors have adopted the provisions of Companies Jersey Law 1991 in preparing the financial statements.
The Directors submit their report together with the Groups consolidated statement of comprehensive income consolidated statement of financial position consolidated statement of changes in equity consolidated statement of cash flows and related notes for the financial year ended 31 March 2017  which have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU and are in agreement with accounting records which have been properly kept in accordance with Section 103 of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Principal activity The Groups principal activity is to invest in commercial property in order to offer the potential for capital appreciation from longterm investment yet enjoy strong dividend income.
The Directors actively manage the property assets acquired by the Group to enhance rental and capital growth opportunities.
Results and dividends The results for the year are set out in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on page 26.
During the year the Directors paid a dividend of 2.4p on 26 May 2016 in respect of the period ended 31 March 2016.
An interim dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017  was paid on 18 January 2017.
Subsequent to the year end the Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend in respect of the year ended 31 March 2017 of 2.6p per ordinary share.
Directors interests in shares Directors interests in the shares of the Company including family interests were as follows Ordinary shares 31 March 2017 Ordinary shares 31 March 2016 John Arnold 977971 977 971 Edward Olins 128089 128089 The Duke of Roxburghe 2483069 2483069 James Hambro 3267656 3267656 There have been no changes in the Directors shareholdings since the year end.
Directors remuneration and service contracts Ian Henderson is the NonExecutive chairman and his letter of appointment continues until 15 February 2019 unless it is terminated by either party giving three months notice such notice not to be given before 15 February 2017.
From 16 February 2016 his fees were 50000 per annum.
John Arnold is the Chief Executive and his service agreement continues unless it is terminated by either party giving 12 months notice.
His salary from 16 February 2016 was 200000 per annum.
Edward Olins is the Chief Operating Officer and his service agreement continues unless it is terminated by either party giving 12 months notice.
His salary from 16 February 2016 was 180000 per annum.
The letter of appointment of The Duke of Roxburghe continues until 15 February 2019 unless it is terminated by either party giving three months notice such notice not to be given before 15 February 2017.
From 16 February 2016 his fees were 20000 per annum.
The letter of appointment of James Hambro continues until 15 February 2019 unless it is terminated by either party giving three months notice such notice not to be given before 15 February 2017.
From 16 February 2016 his fees were 20000 per annum.
The letter of appointment of Michael Farrow continues until 15 February 2019 unless it is terminated by either party giving three months notice such notice not to be given before 15 February 2017.
From 16 February 2016 his fees were 20000 per annum.
The letter of appointment of Richard Hebert continues until 15 February 2019 unless it is terminated by either party giving three months notice such notice not to be given before 15 February 2017.
From 16 February 2016 his fees were 20000 per annum.
Directors Report 22 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The basic salaries and fees paid to the Directors during the year ended 31 March 2017 is shown below
1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017
4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Ian Henderson 50000 6079 John Arnold 200000 24204 Edward Olins 180000 21813 The Duke of Roxburghe 20000 2432 James Hambro 20000 2432 Michael Farrow 20000 2466 Richard Hebert 20000 2466 Details of the remuneration paid to the Directors including the bonus is included in the Remuneration Committee Report on pages 23 to 24.
Financial risk management and financial instruments The Groups policy in relation to financial risk management and use of financial instruments is set out in note 22 to the financial statements.
Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law they have elected to prepare the financial statements in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU.
Under Company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that year.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates which are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with Companies Jersey Law 1991.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Company and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website and for the preparation and dissemination of the financial statements.
Legislation in Jersey governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Provision of information to auditors The Directors who held office at the date of approval of the financial statements confirm that so far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of that information.
KPMG Channel Islands Limited have indicated their willingness to continue in office as auditors and a resolution proposing their reappointment will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
By order of the Board Consortia Secretaries Limited Company Secretary Directors Report continued Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
I am pleased to present the Remuneration Committee RemCom or Committee Report for the year ended 31 March 2017.
The RemCom comprises only NonExecutive Directors with the Chairman being independent.
The Terms of Reference take into account the UK Corporate Governance Code published in 2014 but applies the Code only in so far as it is consistent with the nature of size and stage of development of the business.
Its objective is to design and maintain processes that retain and reward the Executive Directors and senior management in accordance with best practice and to ensure that members of the executive management of the Company are provided with appropriate incentives to encourage enhanced performance and are also in a fair and reasonable manner rewarded for their individual contributions to the success of the Company.
The RemCom shall agree with the Board the framework or broad policy for the remuneration of the Companys Chairman and Executive Directors.
The remuneration of NonExecutive Directors shall be a matter for the Chairman and the executive members of the Board.
It will ensure that failure is not rewarded and that the duty to mitigate loss is fully recognised.
It will also determine the policy and scope for pension arrangements for each Executive
The Committee will arrange for periodic reviews of its own performance and review its constitution and Terms of Reference to ensure it is operating effectively and recommend any changes it considers necessary for Board approval.
The Committee is authorised by the Board to obtain at the Companys expense outside legal or other professional advice on any matters within its Terms of Reference.
Reporting Responsibilities The Committee Chairman shall report to the Board on its proceedings after each meeting on all matters within its duties and responsibilities.
The
RemCom shall make whatever recommendations to the Board it deems appropriate on any area within its remit where action or improvement is needed.
The RemCom shall produce a report of the Companys remuneration policy and practices to be included in the Companys Annual Report and ensure each year that it is put to shareholders for approval at the AGM.
Policy
NonExecutive Directors The Companys policy is to pay fees to NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman which are at the lower end of peer group companies listed on AIM with the intention of revision in line with the success of the Company.
NonExecutives are not currently eligible for bonuses share options long term incentives pensions or other remuneration.
They are entitled to reasonable expenses made in pursuit of their duties.
Executive Directors The Companys policy is to provide remuneration and other benefits sufficient to attract retain and motivate Executives of the required calibre.
Total remuneration includes salary performancerelated bonus benefits including pension and health insurance and longterm incentives based on share options.
The latter are designed specifically to align shareholder interests within the Company over time.
Rewards
The Companys remuneration policy is based on three pillars an industry competitive salary a bonus calculated on fixed performance indicators and a Long Term Incentive Share Plan LTIP with a rolling threeyear vesting cycle.
The bonus and LTIP are scaled to vary awards but each have a cap at 100% of salary.
The amounts involved are described in the table on page 24.
Salaries
The Company has undertaken to increase executives salaries in line with inflation and a 2.5% increase has been awarded for the year ending 31 March 2018.
Bonus
A bonus may be awarded to an employee of the Company.
The key performance indicators KPIs comprise the net asset value earnings EBITDA and maintenance of a progressive dividend policy each evenly weighted.
Such bonus awards against KPIs will always take regard of the individual performance of the Executive and of the business as a whole but remain at the absolute discretion of the Board.
Due to the exceptional performance of the Company over the year the bonus has achieved the capped amount of 100% of salary.
Long Term Incentive Plan the LTIP A key employee of the Company may be invited to join the LTIP scheme the purpose of which is to align the longerterm objectives of shareholders and management.
Awards will take the form of a conditional right or nil cost option to acquire ordinary shares.
There will follow a threeyear vesting period over which the performance of the Company must satisfy the targets in order that the awards will vest at the end of that period.
There are two equally weighted targets being total shareholder return TSR and a fixed hurdle rate for NAV.
TSR is a comparison of share price plus dividends paid with a bespoke basket of peer companies and REITs.
The NAV target is fixed such that a NAV total return NAVTR of less than 8% will not attract a vesting but where the NAVTR is between 8% and 14% the amount vesting will be calculated on a straight line basis between 30% and 100%.
The quantum of LTIP awards is restricted to 100% of the equivalent salary of the Executive which will alter from time to time in line with the salary and share price.
In numeric terms the awards previously granted are capped at 255034 shares at a price of 1.49 per ordinary share.
Remuneration Committee Report 24
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
There are standard good and bad leaver provisions included in the LTIP terms.
Where awards vest the beneficiary will be entitled to the notional dividends accrued over the threeyear period.
Standard claw back provisions are included as is the absolute discretion of the Board to deal with unvested shares.
Defined Contribution Pension Plan The Company operates a defined contribution pension plan for the Executives and senior management.
Currently only John Arnold and Edward Olins have been offered this benefit.
It has been agreed that the Company contributes 10% of base salary and Executives contribute 5%.
John Arnold is excused from contribution as his SIPP is closed and so the Company has made a payment in lieu of pension at a rate of 5% to bring historic rights up to date at year end and 8% going forward.
Remuneration during the year ended 31 March 2017
Bonus
LTIP
Benefits in kind
Total value Executive Directors John Arnold 200000 200000  14060 10833 424893 Edward Olins 180000 180000  19477 19500 398977 NonExecutive Directors Ian Henderson 50000     50000 James Hambro 20000     20000 Duke of Roxburghe 20000     20000 Michael Farrow 20000     20000 Richard Hebert 20000     20000 Totals 510000 380000  33537 30333 953870 Remuneration during the period ended 31 March 2016 Salary or fees
LTIP
Benefits in kind
Total value Executive Directors John Arnold 24204   2370  26574 Edward Olins 21813   1758  23571 NonExecutive Directors Ian Henderson 6079     6079 James Hambro 2432     2432 Duke of Roxburghe 2432     2432 Michael Farrow 2466     2466 Richard Hebert 2466     2466 Totals 61892   4128  66020 The NonExecutive Directors There has been no adjustment to NonExecutive Directors fees for the year.
Michael Farrow Committee Chairman
Remuneration Committee Report continued
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
Independent auditors report to the members of Circle Property Plc We have audited the group financial statements of Circle Property Plc the company and its subsidiaries collectively the group for the year ended 31 March 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows and the related notes.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Article 113A of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of directors and auditors As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on pages 21 and 22 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements An audit involves obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
This includes an assessment of whether the accounting policies are appropriate to the groupss circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and non financial information in the Highlights of the Year the Chairmans Statement the Chief Executive Statement the Business Model the Market Overview Our Strategy the Portfolio Review the Principal Risks the Board of Directors the Governance Report the Directors Report and the Remuneration Committee Report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify any information that is apparently materially incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatements or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Opinion on the financial statements In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups affairs as at 31 March 2017 and of the groups profit for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Jersey Law 1991 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Lesley Averell for and on behalf of KPMG Channel Islands Limited Chartered Accountants 37 Esplanade St Helier
JE4 8WQ 9 August 2017 26 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Note
1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Rental income 4 5265507 664392 Other income 4 138122 595178 5403629 1259570 Property expenses 5 1037375 122529 Net rental income 4366254 1137 041 Administrative expenses 6 2114965 293255 Operating profit 2251289 843786 Gains on disposal of investment properties 278771 Gains on revaluation of investment properties 13 7360657 Negative goodwill on acquisition of CPUT 195554 3817 264 Impairment of goodwill on acquisition of CPML  2117591 Listing costs 12 107493 1326054 Operating profit after revaluation of investment properties and goodwill 9978778 1217405 Finance income 8 48511 17875 Finance costs 9 1293384 183054 Effective interest rate adjustment on borrowings 16 1232304 53578 Net finance costs 12569 111601 Profit for the yearperiod before taxation 9966209 1105804 Taxation 10 21912 32399 Total comprehensive income and profit for the yearperiod 9944297 1073405 Earnings per share 0.35 0.04 There is no comprehensive income other than that included in the profit for the year.
All of the profit for the year is attributable to the owners of the
All items in the above statement derive from continuing operations.
The Companys profit for the year nonconsolidated was 989.270.
The notes on pages 30 to 45 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
Note
31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Noncurrent assets Investment properties 13 86054336 75780824 Property plant and equipment 29158 22371 Trade and other receivables 14 6518077 1771394 Deferred tax 10 1141887 914949 Financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss 17 710 93744168 78489538 Current assets Trade and other receivables 14 1195372 2555037 Deferred tax 10 128240 104504 Cash and cash equivalents 15 4893807 4516153 6217419 7 175694 Total assets 99961587 85665232
Stated capital 19 42542179 42542179 Treasury share reserve 380001 380001 Retained earnings 9659457 1073405 Total equity 51821635 43235583 Noncurrent liabilities Loan borrowings 16 45590423 40028371 Financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss 17  94855 45590423 40123226 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 2549529 2306423 2549529 2306423 Total liabilities 48139952 42429649 Total liabilities and equity 99961587 85665232 The consolidated financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 9 August 2017 and signed on its behalf by Michael Farrow
The notes on pages 30 to 45 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of financial position As at 31 March 2017 28 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Share capital Treasury shares reserve
Total
As at 4 December 2015 Profit for the period   1073405 1073405 Issue of ordinary share capital 42162178   42162178 Issue of treasury shares 380001 380001 As at 31 March 2016 42542179 380001 1073405 43235583 Profit for the year   9944297 9944297 Dividends   1358245 1358245 As at 31 March 2017 42542179 380001 9659457 51821635 The notes on pages 30 to 45 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Cash flows from operating activities Profit for the yearperiod before taxation 9966209 1105804 Adjustments for Finance income 48511 17875 Finance expense 1293384 129476 Depreciation 7414 1195 Gains on revaluation of investment properties 7360657 Gains on disposal of investment properties 278771 Amortisation of loan arrangement fees 40136 7223 Fair value movement on interest rate swaps 95565 2146 Effective interest rate adjustment on loan borrowings 1232304 53578 Negative goodwill on acquisition of CPUT 195554 3817 264 Impairment of goodwill on acquisition of CPML  2117591 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 3409020 1712781 Decrease in trade and other payables 103177 580888 Cash generated from operating activities 1416416 606611 Interest paid 1416942 60158 Interest received 70513 4107 Net cash from operating activities 2762845 550560 Cash flows from investing activities Cost of additions to investment properties 3520046 266755 Proceeds from disposal of investment properties 1278770 Cost of additions of property plant and equipment 14200 15150 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired  3891568 Net cash from investing activities 2255476 3609663 Cash flows from financing activities Repayment of borrowings 39775343 827790 Drawdown of borrowings 46529563 Proceeds of issue of shares  1183720 Dividends paid 1358245 Net cash used in financing activities 5395975 355930 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 377654 4516153 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the yearperiod 4516153 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the yearperiod 4893807 4516153 The notes on pages 30 to 45 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 March 2017 30 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
1 General information These financial statements are for Circle Property Plc the Company and its subsidiary undertakings together referred to as the Group.
Notes in respect of the Companys subsidiary undertakings are outlined in note 23.
The Companys shares are admitted to trading on AIM a market operated by the London Stock Exchange plc.
The Company is domiciled and registered in Jersey Channel Islands.
The address of its registered office is 3rd Floor Standard Bank House 4749 La Motte Street St Helier Jersey JE2 4SZ.
The nature of the Companys operations and its principal activities are that of property investment in the UK.
2 Principal accounting policies The Group financial statements show a true and fair view and have been prepared on a going concern basis and in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU and the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
The financial statements have been prepared in pounds sterling which is the Groups functional currency and under the historic cost convention as modified by the revaluation of investment property and derivative financial instruments which are measured at fair value.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Chief Executives Statement on page 3.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in these financial statements.
In addition note 22 to the financial statements includes the Groups financial management objectives details of its financial instruments and its exposures to credit liquidity and market risk.
The Groups policy for managing capital is included in note 20.
The Group has adequate financial resources together with longterm rental contracts with a wide range of tenants.
As a consequence the Directors believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risks.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Basis of consolidation and business combinations The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries as outlined in note 23.
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Intragroup balances and any unrealised gains and losses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
The results of subsidiaries acquired during the year are included from the effective date of acquisition being the date on which the Group obtains control.
They are deconsolidated on the date that control ceases.
If the consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is more than the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired the difference is recognised as goodwill and is written off directly in the statement of comprehensive income if there is no future economic benefit associated with the goodwill.
If the consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is less than the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired the difference is recognised as negative goodwill and is reflected directly in the statement of comprehensive income.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred.
Adoption of new and revised IFRSs New standards amendments to standards and interpretations which came in to effect for accounting periods starting on or after 1 April 2016 have not had a material impact on the preparation of these financial statements.
New standards and interpretations A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017  and have not been applied in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
IAS 12 Income Taxes was amended to clarify the accounting for deferred tax where an asset is measured at fair value and that fair value is below the assets tax base.
This amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments addresses the classification measurement and recognition of financial assets and financial liabilities.
The standard is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers deals with revenue recognition and establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entitys contracts with customers.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and earlier application is permitted.
IFRS 16 Leases was issued in January 2016.
For lessees it will result in almost all leases being recognised on the statement of financial position as the distinction between operating and finance leases will be removed.
Under the new standard an asset the right to use the leased item and a financial liability to pay rentals are recognised.
The only exceptions are shortterm and low value leases.
The accounting for lessors will not significantly change.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and earlier application is permitted.
The Directors anticipate that the adoption of these standards and interpretations in future periods will have no material impact on the financial statements of the Group.
The Group does not intend to apply any of these pronouncements early.
Estimates and judgements The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities as at the balance sheet date and the amounts reported for revenue and expenses during the period.
The nature of the estimation means that actual outcomes could differ from those estimates.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised prospectively.
Significant estimates Fair value of investment property Investments in property and propertyrelated assets are inherently difficult to value due to the individual nature of each property.
As a result valuations are subject to substantial uncertainty.
There is no assurance that the estimates resulting from the valuation process will reflect the actual sales price even where such sales occur shortly after the valuation date.
The Directors employed professional valuers Savills UK Limited to perform valuations of the investment property using Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors RICS valuation standards as at 31 March 2017.
Volatility in the economic environment is reflected in commercial real estate markets.
In arriving at their estimate of market value as at 31 March 2017  the valuers used their market knowledge and professional judgement and did not rely solely on comparable historical transactions.
There is an inherent degree of uncertainty when using professional judgement in estimating the market values of investment property.
The significant methods and assumptions used by the valuers in estimating the fair value of investment property are set out in note 13.
Fair value of interest rate contracts The fair values of interest rate contracts have been calculated and provided by the relevant counterparty bank using recognised valuation techniques.
Details of the interest rate contracts are set out in note 17.
Significant judgements Operating lease commitments  Group as lessor The Group has entered into commercial property leases on its investment property portfolio.
The Group has determined that it retains all the significant risks and rewards of ownership of these properties and therefore accounts for them as operating leases.
Revenue recognition Rental income from operating leases is recognised in profit or loss on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
The term of the lease is the full lease period where there is a reasonable expectation at the inception of the lease that the tenant will not utilise the lease break clause.
Lease incentives granted are spread evenly over the term of the lease.
Property service charges The properties service charge accounts are managed by third parties and therefore the Group considers that it is acting in the capacity of an agent.
Service charges receivable from tenants and related costs are not recognised by the Group.
Service charge costs in relation to void areas are recognised within property expenses on an accruals basis.
Administrative fees listing costs and other expenses Administrative and other expenses are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they are incurred.
Finance income and finance costs Finance income comprises bank and loan interest income.
Finance costs comprise interest expense on borrowings and net interest on interest rate swaps.
Finance income and finance costs are recognised on an effective interest rate basis.
Investment property Property that is held for longterm rental yields or for capital appreciation or both is classified as investment property in accordance with IAS 40 Investment Property.
2 Principal accounting policies continued 32 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Investment properties including properties under development are initially recognised at cost being the fair value of consideration given including associated transaction costs.
Any subsequent qualifying capital expenditure incurred in improving investment properties is capitalised in the period in which the expenditure is incurred and included in the book cost of the properties.
After initial recognition investment properties are measured at fair value with unrealised gains and losses recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
The fair value is based on valuations provided by Savills UK Limited at the balance sheet date using recognised valuation techniques.
An investment property shall be derecognised on disposal or at a time that no benefit is expected from future use or disposal.
Any gain or loss is determined as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount and is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Recognition and derecognition occurs on the completion of a sale between a willing buyer and a willing seller.
Any investment properties on which contracts for sale have been exchanged but which had not completed at the year end are disclosed as properties held for sale and stated at fair value.
At
31 March 2017 and 2016 none existed.
In accordance with IAS 40 Investment Property property that is being constructed or developed for future use as investment property is classified as investment property during its construction or development.
At 31 March 2017 and 2016 none existed.
Technique used for valuing investment properties The traditional method converts anticipated future cash flow benefits in the form of rental income into present value.
This approach requires careful estimation of future benefits and application of investor yield or return requirements.
One approach to value the property on this basis is to capitalise net rental income on the basis of an initial yield generally referred to as the All Risks Yield approach or Net Initial Yield approach.
These fair values are based on active market prices where possible adjusted if necessary for any difference in the nature location or condition of the specific assets.
The fair value of investment properties is measured based on each propertys highest and best use from a market participants perspective and considers the potential uses of the property that are physically possible legally permissible and financially feasible.
Operating leases Properties leased out under operating leases where the Group is the lessor are included in investment property in the consolidated statement of financial position.
Please refer to revenue recognition for the discussion of recognition of rental income.
Financial Instruments Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and call deposits with original maturities of three months or less.
These are carried at cost.
Trade and other receivables Loans and receivables are financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
Such assets are recognised initially at fair value plus any directly attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment losses.
Trade and other payables Trade payables are not interest bearing and are recognised initially at fair value.
The subsequent carrying amount of these liabilities approximates their fair value.
Loan borrowings Loan borrowings are recorded initially at fair value net of direct issue costs incurred.
Loan borrowings are subsequently stated at amortised cost any difference between the proceeds net of transaction costs and the redemption value is recognised within finance costs in the income statement over the term of the borrowings using the effective interest rate method.
Derivative financial instruments The Group uses derivative financial instruments to hedge its risk associated with interest rate fluctuations.
The Groups policy is not to trade in derivative instruments.
The Group does not apply hedge accounting.
Recognition of the derivative financial instruments takes place on the date at which a derivative contract is entered into.
Such derivative financial instruments are measured initially and subsequently at fair value transaction costs are included as incurred in the statement of comprehensive income under finance costs.
Gains or losses on derivatives are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income in net gain or loss from financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss.
Interest expenses on derivative financial liabilities are included as incurred in the statement of comprehensive income in finance costs.
2 Principal accounting policies continued Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
Impairment
The Group considers evidence of impairment for financial assets at both an individual asset and a collective level.
All individually significant assets are individually assessed for impairment.
Those found not to be impaired are then collectively assessed for any impairment that has been incurred but not yet individually identified.
Assets that are not individually significant are collectively assessed for impairment.
Collective assessment is carried out by grouping together assets with similar risk characteristics.
In assessing collective impairment the Group uses historical information on the timing of recoveries and the amount of loss incurred and makes an adjustment if current economic and credit conditions are such that the actual losses are likely to be greater or lesser than suggested by historical trends.
An impairment loss is calculated as the difference between an assets carrying amount and the present value of the estimated future cash flows discounted at the assets original effective interest rate.
Losses are recognised in profit or loss and reflected in an allowance account.
When the Group considers that there are no realistic prospects of recovery of the asset the relevant amounts are written off.
If the amount of impairment loss subsequently decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised then the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed through profit or loss.
Taxation
The Company Circle Property Unit Trust CPUT and CPUTs subsidiary investments are registered in Jersey Channel Islands.
The Company and CPUTs subsidiaries are taxed at the Jersey company standard rate of 0%.
CPUT is not subject to tax in Jersey.
Circle Property Management Limited CPML was registered in the UK and subject to corporation tax at a rate of 20%.
No corporation tax was incurred during the year 2016 nil and CPML was dissolved on 30 May 2017.
The Company is registered under the NonResident Landlord Scheme and is liable to UK taxation at a rate of 20% on net rental income from its investment properties.
Deferred taxation Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the tax profit nor the accounting profit.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in profit or loss except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to other comprehensive income in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in other comprehensive income.
Share capital Ordinary share capital is classified as equity.
Dividends are recognised as a liability in the year in which they are approved.
Treasury shares Treasury shares are equity shares of the Company held for the purpose of awarding shares in the 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP.
The shares are recorded at cost and are deducted from equity.
Sharebased payments The Group has applied the requirements of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment to share options.
To the extent that the Directors assess this to be material the fair value of the share options are determined at the grant date and are expensed on a straight line basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event and it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Where the Group expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed the reimbursement is recognised as a separate asset but only when the reimbursement is virtually certain.
The expense relating to any provision is presented in the income statement net of any reimbursement.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are discounted using a current pretax rate that reflects where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
Where discounting is used the increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as a borrowing cost.
2 Principal accounting policies continued Financial instruments continued 34 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the net identifiable assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is included within intangible assets.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Impairment losses on goodwill are not reversed.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Negative goodwill recognised in the year relates to the recognition of additional capital allowances available to the Group to carry forward against future profits on the acquisition of Circle Property Unit Trust in the prior period.
3 Operating segments The Group has adopted IFRS 8 Operating Segments which requires operating segments to be identified on the basis of internal reports about components of the Group that are regularly reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM to allocate resources to the segments and to assess their performance.
For the purposes of IFRS 8 the CODM takes the form of the two Executive Directors of the Company.
The CODM considers that there is only one geographical segment which is the UK and one reporting segment which is investment in commercial property.
Therefore no segmental reporting is required.
4 Revenue 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Rental income 4743974 614024 SIC 15 adjustment spreading of lease incentives 521533 50368 5265507 664392 Insurance recovery 118647 18884 Other income 19475 576294 5403629 1259570 5 Property expenses 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Property expenses 260705 18450 Property service charges 337635 35828 Property repairs and maintenance costs 25960 41103 Property insurance 144276 19157 Property rates 68799 7991 Lease surrender payment 200000 1037375 122529 2 Principal accounting policies continued Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
6 Administrative expenses 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Staff costs 1060222 77913 Administration fees 251829 30797 Legal and professional fees 564685 110117 Audit fees 65724 32500 Accountancy fees 9918 1733 Rent rates and other office costs 57219 5696 Other overheads 97954 33304 Depreciation of tangible fixed assets 7414 1195 2114965 293255 7 Employees and Directors remuneration 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Staff costs during the yearperiod were as follows NonExecutive Directors fees 130000 15874 Wages and salaries 797000 50083 Social security costs 66009 7826 Pension contributions 31948 Other employment costs 35265 4130 1060222 77913 8 Finance income 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Bank interest 5220 4107 Loan interest 43291 13768 48511 17875 9 Finance costs 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Swap interest 70880 16749 Loan interest 1060234 164159 Loan commitment fees 42699 Loan arrangement fees 215136 Fair value movement on interest rate contracts 95565 2146 1293384 183054 36 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
10 Taxation 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Current tax 77031 Deferred tax 55119 32399 21912 32399 A reconciliation of the current tax charge applicable to the results at the statutory income tax rate to the charge for the yearperiod is as follows 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Current taxation Profit for the yearperiod before tax 9966209 1105804 UK income tax at a rate of 20% 1993242 221161 Effects of Nontaxable negative goodwill on acquisition of CPUT 39111 763453 Nontaxable impairment of goodwill on acquisition of CPML  423518 Nontaxable effective interest rate adjustment on borrowings 246461 Nontaxable gains on investment properties 1527886 Nontaxable fair value movement on interest rate contracts  429 Nontaxable income 9702 128197 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 120376 278168 Utilisation of capital allowances 168761 31626 Utilisation of losses brought forward 44666 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Deferred taxation Deferred taxes at 31 March relates to the following Deferred tax asset Capital allowances available to carry forward 1270126 1019453 Deferred tax asset brought forward 1019453 Deferred tax recognised on the acquisition of CPUT 195554 1051852 Deferred tax creditcharge for the yearperiod 55119 32399 Deferred tax asset carried forward 1270126 1019453 At 31 March 2017  the Group had capital allowances of 6350633 2016 5097 266 available to carry forward against future profits.
A deferred tax asset of 1270126 2016 1019453 has been recognised as it is expected to be utilised in the foreseeable future.
11 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share has been calculated on profit after tax attributable to ordinary shareholders for the period as shown on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Profit for the yearperiod 9944297 1073405 Weighted average number of shares excluding treasury shares 28296762 28165517 Earnings per ordinary share 0.35 0.04 For the purposes of the above calculation the comparative period is deemed to start from 16 February 2016 being the date on which operating revenue and expenditure commenced.
In the opinion of the Board treasury shares held to satisfy share awards to management as disclosed in note 21 currently do not have any material value and hence do not have any dilutive effect.
Therefore no diluted earnings per share has been presented.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
12 Listing Costs 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Nomad fees  307193 Legal and professional fees 72285 450987 Audit and advisory fees  232700 Administration fees  168114 Tax and accountancy fees 10350 65000 Valuation fees  49000 Other fees 24858 53060 107493 1326054 The costs listed above related to the Companys admission to AIM.
The costs may also include some elements relating to the acquisition of the subsidiary entities.
However as the acquisition of the subsidiary entities was conditional on the Company listing and due to the combined nature of the fees payable they have all been presented as listing costs in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Listing costs recognised in the year relate to expenses incurred in the period ended 31 March 2017.
13 Investment properties 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Opening fair value 77735000 Fair value of investment properties acquired  77 264267 Cost of additions to investment properties 3912856 420365 Disposal of investment properties 1000000 Gain on revaluation of investment properties 7360657 Lease incentive amortisation 5016487 50368 Fair value of investment properties per valuation report 93025000 77 735000 Unamortised lease incentives 6970664 1954176 Closing fair value 86054336 75780824 No properties were held for sale at 31 March 2017 and 2016.
As at 31 March 2017 the fair value of investment properties under development included in the above amount was nil 2016 nil.
89025000 2016 73735000 of the above properties value estimated by the valuer relate to property held on a freehold basis and 4000000 2016 4000000 on a long leasehold basis.
The fair value of the Groups investment properties per the Valuation Report amounted to 93025000 2016 77 735000.
The difference between the fair value of the investment properties per the Valuation Report and the fair value per the balance sheet of 6970664 2016 1954176 relates to unamortised lease incentives which are recorded in the financial statements within noncurrent and current assets.
The Group has pledged all of its investment properties to secure banking facilities granted to the Group as detailed in note 16.
The fair value of the Groups investment properties at 31 March 2017 has been arrived at on the basis of a valuation carried out by Savills UK Limited.
The valuation was carried out in accordance with the Practice Statements contained in the Appraisal and Valuation Standards as published by the RICS.
In forming their opinion of the fair value the independent valuers had regard to the current best use of the property its investment attributes and recent comparable transactions.
The valuation was carried out using the All Risks Yield method taking into consideration both sales and rental evidence and formulating the opinion of market value taking into account the properties locations specifications and specific characteristics.
All investment properties are categorised as Level 3 fair values as they use significant unobservable inputs.
There were no transfers between Levels during the year.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The following table shows the valuation technique used in measuring the fair value of investment properties as well as the significant unobservable inputs used.
Sector Year
Valuation technique Significant unobservable inputs Interrelationship between key unobservable inputs and fair value measurement Office 2016 67 150000 All Risks Yield  Estimated void periods range from 6 months to 24 months after the end of each lease 2016 no change.
Market rents have been based on the specific circumstances of each property.
Estimated rentfree periods range from 6 to 12 months on new leases 2016 no change.
Letting fees have been estimated on vacant units.
Rent per square foot ranges from 3 to 46 2016 2 to 46.
Net equivalent yields range from 5.97% to 8.74% 2016 5.66% to 9.63%.
Market conditions are considered based on the propertys location.
The estimated fair value would increasedecrease if void periods were shorterlonger market rents were higherlower rent free periods were shorter longer letting fees were lowerhigher rents per square foot were higher lower equivalent yields were lower higher or market conditions were to improvedecline.
2017 83450000 Retail warehousing 2016 3725000 2017 3800000 Retail 2016 1800000 2017 1700000 Industrial 2016 1125000 2017 1125000 Other 2016 3935000 2017 2950000 Total 2016 77 735000 2017 93025000 The ranges are based on averages per property.
Individual tenancies within properties may fall outside these ranges.
14 Trade and other receivables 31 March 2017 31 March 2016
Lease incentives 6518077 1771394
Circle Property Trading Maidstone Limited  1526167 Loan interest due from Circle Property Trading Maidstone Limited  22002 Lease incentives 452587 182782 Amounts due from property agents 68767 100956 Amounts due from tenants 153123 135276 VAT 352717 387031 Other receivables 168178 200823 1195372 2555037 On 29 September 2016 Compass Contract Services UK Limited Compass surrendered their existing 10 year lease relating to land and buildings at Kents Hill Park and entered into a new 25 year lease for the same property.
The Group made a payment of 4494955 inclusive of SDLT and land registry fees to Compass in relation to the surrender of their ten year lease.
This payment is recognised as a lease incentive and spread evenly to the statement of comprehensive income over the term of the lease.
The Group was party to a loan facility agreement with Circle Property Trading Maidstone Limited CPTML.
The purpose of the loan was to finance CPTMLs acquisition of a 999year lease of the residential elements of the Groups property located at 6977 Week Street Maidstone Kent and its subsequent refurbishment and development works.
Rent is charged under the lease at a rate of one peppercorn if demanded.
The loan was secured by a first legal mortgage over the property and a fixed charge over the assets of CPTML.
The loan was interestbearing at a rate of 8% per annum.
The loan and all interest thereon was repaid on 2 February 2017.
15 Cash and cash equivalents 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Royal Bank of Scotland International 4641977 3176679 National Westminster Bank plc 251830 1339187 Other cash  287 4893807 4516153 As at 31 March 2017 377 027 2016 382335 of cash was held on blocked accounts.
Of this 125204 2016 131048 relates to deposits received from tenants and 251830 2016 251287 is held on an interest deposit account in relation to the loan borrowings disclosed in note 16.
13 Investment properties continued Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
16 Loan borrowings 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Brought forward 40028371 Fair value of loans acquired  40902516 Loan repayments 39775343 827790 Loan drawdowns 46529563 Effective interest rate and amortisation adjustment 1232304 53578 Amortisation of lending costs 170068 7223 Unamortised lending costs 129932 45590423 40028371 The Group was party to a revolving credit facility the previous facility with National Westminster Bank Plc Natwest for a total commitment of The facility was secured by the investment properties and rental income detailed in notes 13 and 4 and a security interest agreement over the issued share capital of the wholly owned subsidiaries Circle Property Milton Keynes Limited and Circle Property Warrington Limited.
Interest was charged at a rate of 2.95% over LIBOR.
On 21 June 2016 the Directors agreed a 50m revolving facility the new facility with Natwest for the purpose of refinancing the previous facility.
The new facility has a threeyear term with two options at the absolute discretion of Natwest to extend for a further year.
Where the loan to value is less than 55% of the Groups gross portfolio value an interest rate of 1.85% over LIBOR is charged where the loan to value equals or exceeds 55% an interest rate of 2.75% over LIBOR is charged.
The new facility was drawn down on 22 June 2016 and the previous facility repaid.
The new facility is secured by a first and only legal charge over the Groups investment properties an assignment of rental income charges over specified bank accounts of the Group and a floating charge granted over all assets of the Group.
The financial covenants relating to the previous facility were 55% loan to value 2.251 interest cover and 111 debt to rent cover.
In relation to the new facility the financial covenants are 65% loan to value 1.751 interest cover to the second anniversary of the date of the facility agreement and 2.001 thereafter and 111 debt to rent cover to the second anniversary of the date of the facility agreement and 101 thereafter.
There were no breaches of any of these covenants during the year.
The undrawn facility as at 31 March 2017 was 4279645.
17 Financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Fair value brought forward 94855 Fair value of financial instruments acquired  92709 Fair value gainloss 95565 2146 Fair value carried forward 710 94855 The Group uses interest rate caps and swaps to manage its exposure to interest rate movements on a proportion of its variable rate borrowings.
An interest rate swap entered into with The Royal Bank of Scotland plc.
RBS had a notional value of 10000000 and a fixed interest rate of 1.98% to maturity on 29 September 2016.
An interest rate cap entered into with RBS has a notional value of 10000000 and a strike rate or 3% from 15 October 2016 to maturity on 31 January 2019.
At 31 March 2017 the fair value of the interest rate cap resulted in an asset of 710 2016 liability of 94855.
The interest rate cap is fair valued using recognised valuation techniques and the movement in fair value has been recorded in profit and loss.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
18 Trade and other payables 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Trade payables 384092 489873 Property improvement costs 471375 184333 Wages and salaries 411948 Deferred income 760364 639269 Rental deposit accounts 129591 137 705 Finance costs 215243 62756 Valuation fee 36000 28000 Listing costs 63885 338888 Current taxation 77031 Final distribution due to CPML shareholders  396670 SWAP interest payable  28929 2549529 2306423 Deferred income relates to deferred rental income of 689711 2016 532444 and deferred insurance recharges of 70653 2016 106825.
19 Stated capital Issued and fully paid share capital is as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Issued and fully paid shares of no par value 42542179 42542179 Number of shares in issue Brought forward 1.49 per share 28551796 Issued in the yearperiod  28551796 Carried forward 28551796 28551796 The Company has one class of ordinary share which carry no rights to fixed income.
Holders of these shares are entitled to dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at general meetings of the Company.
On admission to AIM the Company issued 255034 ordinary shares at a price of 1.49 each to be held in treasury subject to award under the LTIP described in note 21.
Whilst held in treasury these shares are not entitled to dividends and have no voting rights.
20 Capital management The Groups policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor creditor and market confidence and to sustain future development of the business.
The objective is to ensure that it will continue as a going concern and to maximise return to its equity shareholders through appropriate levels of gearing.
The Group is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements with the exception of the loan covenant requirements as disclosed in note 16.
The Groups debt and capital structure comprises the following 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Total liabilities 48139952 42429649 Less cash and cash equivalents 4893807 4516153 Net debt 43246145 37 913496 Total equity 51821635 43235583 Net debt to equity ratio 0.83 0.88 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
21 Sharebased payments 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP By a resolution of the Board dated 29 January 2016 the Company adopted the LTIP for the purpose of properly motivating and rewarding key employees of the Group in a manner that aligns their interests with that of the shareholders by measuring performance against shareholder returns over the three financial years ending 31 March 2019.
On admission to AIM the Company issued 255034 ordinary shares at a price of 1.49 each to be held in treasury subject to award under the LTIP.
A key employee of the Company may be invited to join the LTIP scheme the purpose of which is to align the longer term objectives of shareholders and management.
Awards take the form of a conditional right or nil cost option to acquire Ordinary shares.
These follow a three year vesting period over which the performance of the Group must satisfy the targets in order that the awards will vest at the end of that period.
There are two equally weighted targets being Total Shareholder Return TSR and a fixed hurdle rate for NAV.
TSR is a comparison of share price plus dividends paid with a bespoke basket of peer companies and REITs.
The NAV target is fixed such that a NAV Total Return NAVTR of less than 8% will not attract a vesting but where the NAVTR is between 8% and 14% the amount vesting will be calculated on a straight line basis between 30% and 100%.
The quantum of LTIP awards is restricted to 100% of the equivalent salary of the executive which will alter from time to time in line with the salary and share price.
In numeric terms the awards previously granted are capped at 255034 shares at a price of 1.49 per ordinary share.
There are standard good and bad leaver provisions included in the LTIP terms.
Where awards vest the beneficiary will be entitled to the notional dividends accrued over the three year period.
Standard claw back provisions are included as is the absolute discretion of the Board to deal with unvested shares.
At the reporting date no Ordinary Shares had vested and the board have concluded that the fair value of the options at the grant date and the period end are not material to these financial statements.
22 Financial risk management The strategy of the Group is to invest in UK commercial property with a view to holding it for capital appreciation whilst enhancing rental and capital growth opportunities.
Consistent with that objective the Group holds UK commercial property investments.
In addition the Groups financial instruments during the year comprised interestbearing receivable and payable loans cash and cash equivalents and trade receivables and payables that arise directly from its operations.
The Group does not have any exposure to any derivative instruments other than the interest rate cap entered into to hedge the interest paid on the interestbearing bank loans.
The Group is exposed to various types of risks that are associated with financial instruments.
The most important types are credit risk liquidity risk interest rate risk and market price risk.
There is no foreign currency risk as all assets and liabilities of the Group are maintained in pounds sterling.
The Directors review and agree policies for managing its risk exposure.
These policies are summarised on the following pages.
These disclosures include where appropriate consideration of the Groups investment properties which whilst not constituting financial instruments as defined by IFRS are considered by the Board to be integral to the Groups overall risk exposure.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or counterparty to an asset will be unable or unwilling to meet a commitment that it has entered into with the Group.
In the event of default by an occupational tenant the Group will suffer a rental shortfall and incur additional costs including legal expenses and in maintaining insuring and reletting the property.
The Board produces regular reports on any tenant arrears which are monitored by the Directors in order to anticipate and minimise the impact of defaults by occupational tenants.
The carrying amount of financial assets including cash balances recorded in the financial statements represents the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk.
The carrying amount of these assets at 31 March 2017 was 5283875 2016 6501377.
There were no financial assets which were past due or considered impaired at 31 March 2017 and 2016.
All of the Groups cash is placed with financial institutions with a Moodys longterm credit rating of A3.
Bankruptcy or insolvency of such financial institutions may cause the Groups ability to access cash placed on deposit to be delayed or limited.
Should the credit quality or the financial position of the banks currently employed significantly deteriorate cash holdings would be moved to another bank.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will encounter in realising assets or otherwise raising funds to meet financial commitments.
The Groups investments comprise UK commercial property.
Property and propertyrelated assets in which the Group invests are not traded in an organised public market and may be illiquid.
As a result the Group may not be able to liquidate quickly its investments in these properties at an amount close to their fair value in order to meet its liquidity requirements.
The Groups liquidity risk is managed on an ongoing basis by the Directors.
In order to mitigate liquidity risk the Group aims to have sufficient cash balances including the expected proceeds of any property sales to ensure that the Group is able to meet its obligations for a period of at least 12 months.
At the reporting date the maturity profile of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities were on a contractual basis Contractual value Carrying amount Within one year 12 years 25 years More than 5 years
31 March 2017 Financial assets Trade and other receivables 390068 390068    390068 Financial instruments at fair value 710  710   710 Cash and cash equivalents 4893807 4893807    4893807 5284585 5283875 710   5284585 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 1789165 1789165    1789165 Loan borrowings 45590423 999904 999904 45944991  47944799 47379588 2789069 999904 45944991  49733964 Contractual value Carrying amount Within one year 12 years 25 years More than 5 years
31 March 2016 Financial assets Trade and other receivables 1985224 1985224    1985224 Cash and cash equivalents 4516153 4516153    4516153 6501377 6501377    6501377 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 1604398 1604398    1604398 Financial liabilities at fair value 94855  98053 3198  94855 Loan borrowings 40091127 1441378 1378622 40121911  42941911 41790380 3045776 1476675 40118713  44641164 22 Financial risk management continued Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
Interest rate risk Some of the Groups financial instruments are interestbearing.
They are variable rate instruments with differing maturities.
As a consequence the Group is exposed to interest rate risk due to fluctuations in the prevailing market rate.
The Groups exposure to interest rate risk relates primarily to the Groups bank borrowings.
As detailed in note 16 the Group uses an interest rate cap to manage exposure to the interest on its bank borrowings.
The cap has been entered into with The Royal Bank of Scotland plc on a notional amount of 10m.
As a result the Group is exposed to changes in prevailing interest rates on the remaining balance of its borrowing detailed in note 16.
Having assessed the level of risk the Directors have concluded that it is within acceptable limits.
The interest profile of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities after the impact of the interest rate contracts held at the year end are as follows Floating rate Fixed rate
Total
31 March 2017 Financial assets Trade and other receivables   390068 390068 Financial instruments at fair value  710  710 Cash and cash equivalents 4893807   4893807 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables   1789165 1789165 Loan borrowings 45720355   45720355 Floating rate Fixed rate
Total
31 March 2016 Financial assets Trade and other receivables  1526167 459057 1985224 Cash and cash equivalents 4516153   4516153 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables   1667 154 1667 154 Financial instruments at fair value  94855  94855 Loan borrowings 28966135 10000000  38966135 When the Group retains cash balances they are ordinarily held on interestbearing deposit accounts.
The benchmark which determines the interest income received on interestbearing cash balances is the bank base rate which was 0.25% as at 31 March 2017 2016 0.5%.
The Groups policy is to hold cash on variable rate bank accounts.
The Group has borrowings amounting to 45720355 which have interest rates linked to the 3 month LIBOR interest rates.
A 1% increase in the LIBOR rate will have the effect of increasing interest payable by 457 204 2016 298661.
A decrease of 1% would have an equal but opposite effect.
22 Financial risk management continued 44 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Market price risk The Group holds a portfolio of UK commercial properties.
The Group invests in properties which the Directors believe will generate a combination of longterm growth in income and capital for shareholders.
Investment decisions are based on analysis of amongst other things prospects for future income and capital growth sector and geographic prospects tenant covenant strength lease length and initial and equivalent yields.
Investment risks are spread through letting properties to low risk tenants.
The management of market price risk is part of the investment management process and is typical of commercial property investment.
The portfolio is managed with an awareness of the effects of adverse valuation movements through detailed analysis with an objective of maximising overall returns to shareholders.
Investments in property and propertyrelated assets are inherently difficult to value due to the individual nature of each property.
As a result valuations are subject to substantial uncertainty.
There is no assurance that the estimates resulting from the valuation process will reflect the actual sales price even where such sales occur shortly after the valuation date.
Such risk is managed through the appointment of independent external property valuers Savills UK Limited.
Any changes in market conditions will directly affect the profit or loss reported through the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Details of the Groups investment portfolio held at the balance sheet date are disclosed in note 13.
A 10% increase in the fair value of the properties at 31 March 2017 would have increased net assets and profit for the year by 9302500 2016 7 773500.
A decrease of 10% would have an equal but opposite effect.
The calculations are based on the investment property valuations at the respective balance sheet dates.
Fair values Accounting standards recognise a hierarchy of fair value measurements for financial instruments which gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 1 and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs Level 3.
The classification of fair value measurements depends on the lowest significant applicable input as follows Level 1 Unadjusted fully accessible and current quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 Quoted prices for similar assets and or liabilities or other directly or indirectly observable inputs which exist for the duration of the period of investment.
Level 3 External inputs are unobservable.
Value is the Directors best estimate based on advice from relevant knowledgeable experts use of recognised valuation techniques and on assumptions as to what inputs other market participants would apply in pricing the same or similar instruments.
All investments in property would be included in Level 3.
All of the Groups investment properties are classified as Level 3.
There have been no transfers of investment properties in or out of Level 3 during the year.
The Group determines transfers between levels at the end of each accounting period.
A table reconciling opening and closing balances of Level 3 properties is included in note 13 of the financial statements.
The fair values of the Groups financial instruments are not materially different from their carrying values.
The classification of the fair value of the interest rate cap outstanding at the year end as detailed in note 17  is deemed Level 2.
23 Investment in subsidiaries Country of incorporation Ownership interest 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Circle Property Unit Trust Jersey 100% 100% Circle Property Warrington Limited Jersey  100% Circle Property Milton Keynes Limited Jersey 100% 100% Circle Property Management Limited England 100% 100% Circle Property Warrington Limited was dissolved on 15 February 2017.
Circle Property Management Limited was dissolved on 30 May 2017.
24 Commitments under construction contracts As at 31 March 2017 the Group had contracted capital expenditure on existing properties of 2156704 2016 533318.
This was committed but not yet provided for in the financial statements.
22 Financial risk management continued Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 March 2017 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
25 Operating leases The Group leases out its investment properties under operating leases.
As at the reporting date the future minimum lease payments under noncancellable leases are receivable as follows based on annual rentals 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Less than one year 5325385 4279104 Between two and five years 15339579 13700180 Over five years 26142360 11053958 Total 46807324 29033242 Operating lease payments in respect of rents payable on leasehold properties were payable as follows 31 March 2017 31 March 2016 Less than one year 137105 16829 26 Ultimate controlling party In the opinion of the Directors there is no ultimate controlling party as no one individual is deemed to satisfy this definition.
27 Related party disclosures Consortia Partnership Limited CPL and Consortia Trustees Limited CTL are joint trustees of CPUT and provide administration and accounting services to the Group.
Michael Farrow and Richard Hebert are Directors of CPL and CTL.
During the year CPL and CTL charged and received a total of 251829 2016 30797 for administration and accountancy services and nil 2016 168114 for administration services in relation to the Admission to AIM.
As disclosed in note 14 the Group was party to a loan facility agreement with Circle Property Trading Maidstone Limited CPTML .
John Arnold Edward Olins The Duke of Roxburghe and James Hambro are all Directors and shareholders of CPTML.
The loan and all interest thereon was repaid on 2 February 2017 .
Directors interests in the shares of the Company including relevant family interests Ordinary shares John Arnold 977 971 Edward Olins 128089 The Duke of Roxburghe 2483069 James Hambro 3267656 There have been no changes in the Directors shareholdings since the year end.
The remuneration of the Directors who are key management personnel of the Group is set out below in aggregate.
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the Remuneration Committee Report on pages 2324.
Key personnel of the Group are those persons who have responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Group either directly or indirectly including any Director whether Executive or otherwise.
1 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 4 December 2015 to 31 March 2016 Directors remuneration 953870 66020 A bonus was awarded to the Executive Directors Executives of the Company.
The Key Performance Indicators KPIs comprise the Net Asset Value Earnings EBITDA and maintenance of a progressive dividend policy each evenly weighted.
The bonus awards against KPIs takes regard of the individual performance of the Executives and of the business as a whole but remain at the absolute discretion of the Board.
Due to the performance of the Group over the year the bonus has achieved the capped amount of 100% of salary.
On 11 February 2016 two Directors were granted options under the Company Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP as described in note 21.
John Arnold was granted an option by deed to acquire 134229 shares and Edward Olins was granted an option to acquire 120805 shares both at nil cost.
28 Subsequent events There have been no events subsequent to the year end which require disclosure in the financial statements.
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes
Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financials Governance Strategic Report
Notes 48 Circle Property Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Notes Officers and Professional Advisers
Ian Henderson NonExecutive Chairman John Arnold Chief Executive Edward Olins Chief Operating Officer The Duke of Roxburghe NonExecutive Director James Hambro NonExecutive Director Michael Farrow NonExecutive Director Richard Hebert NonExecutive Director Company Secretary Consortia Secretaries Limited Registered Office 3rd Floor Standard Bank House 4749 La Motte Street St Helier
JE2 4SZ Independent Auditor KPMG Channel Islands Limited 37 Esplanade St Helier
JE4 8WQ Nominated Adviser and Broker Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall
W1G 0JD Independent Property Valuer
33 Margaret Street
W1G 0JD Independent Tax Advisers Lubbock Fine Paternoster House 65 St Pauls Churchyard
EC4M 8AB
Consortia Partnership Limited 3rd Floor Standard Bank House 4749 La Motte Street St Helier
JE2 4SZ UK Legal Advisers Charles Russell Speechlys LLP 5 Fleet Place
EC4M 7RD Jersey Legal Advisers Pinel Advocates 32 Commercial Street
JE2 3RU
Computershare Investor Services Jersey Limited Queensway House Hillgrove Street St Helier
