Annual
Report
2017 We are a leading integrated producer and marketer of commodities operating around the world.
Our commodities comprise metals and minerals energy products and agricultural products
Highlights
Cover photograph Copper anodes Altonorte copper smelter Chile Highlightstel Net income attributable to equity holders US million 5tel 2015 Earnings per share basic
Adjusted EBITDA US million 14tel 2015 Adjusted EBIT US million 8tel 2015 Total borrowings US million 33tel 2015 Funds from operations US million 11tel 2015 Net cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes US million 11tel 2015 Net debtFFO to net debt US million% 10FFO to net debt % A l t e r n a t iv e p e r f o r m an c e measures Adjusted measures referred to as Alternative performance measures APMs which are not defined or specified under the requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards refer to APMs section on page 197 for definition and reconciliations and note 2 of the financial statements for reconciliation of Adjusted EBITEBITDA.
Read more Page 197 Strategic report 02 At a glance
04 Chief Executive Officers review
08 Well positioned for the future Our market drivers Electric Vehicles  a disruptive force underpinning our commodities 16 Business model 20 Our strategy for a sustainable future 24 Sustainable development 40 Key performance indicators 42 Principal risks and uncertainties 52 Financial review B u s i n e s s rev i e w 60  Metals and minerals 72  Energy products 78  Agricultural products Corporate Governance 82 Directors and officers 84 Chairmans introduction 86 Corporate governance report 101 Directors remuneration report 106 Directors report Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report
Consolidated statement of income Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Consolidated statement of financial position Consolidated statement of cash flows Consolidated statement of changes of equity 128 Notes to the financial statements Additional information 197 Alternative performance measures 202 Other reconciliations Production by quarter  Q4 2016 to QResources and reserves 219 Shareholder informationtel Lost time injury frequency rate LTIFR el 2015 Carbon emissions million tonnes CO 2 Scope 1 Scope 2tel Community investment US million 90 Read more page 12 As we look forward the potential large scale roll out of electric vehicles and energy storage systems looks set to unlock material new sources of demand for enabling underlying commodities including copper cobalt zinc and nickel with a focus on tomorrow 4
Metal and minerals sites Energy products sites Number of assets where grouped Agriculture sites Corporate offices Marketing officeother We are one of the worlds largest natural resource companies.
Active at every stage of the commodity supply chain we are uniquely diversified by geography product and activity maximising the value we create for our business and its diverse stakeholders Revenue by geographic destination is based on the country of incorporation of the sales counterparty.
However this may not necessarily be the country of the counterpartys ultimate parent andor final destination of the product see note 2 of the financial statements.
2 Noncurrent assets are noncurrent assets excluding other investments advances and loans and deferred tax assets.
The percentage contributions are derived from the information included in note 2 of the financial statements.
Metals and minerals En e r g y
Americas
Asia
Europe
Africa
Oceania
Business segments Adjusted EBITDA 2017 % 14.8bn 2016 10.3bn At a glance Active at every stage of the commodity chain Exploration acquisition and development Extraction and production Processing and refining Blending and optimisation Logistics and delivery
Agriculture
Metals and minerals
Metal and minerals 80.5bn 2016 66.3bn Energy products 2016 89.0bn
12.6bn 2016 22.0bn Noncurrent assets by region % By region 78.2bn 2016 74.2bn
Business review
Page 60 Annual investment 201824 to secure longterm production at our Integrated Nickel operations Glencore Annual Report What makes us different Highquality lowcost assets in desirable commodities Entrepreneurial culture employees empowered to make decisions Longterm relationships with broad base of suppliers and customers Marketing business less correlated to commodity prices Maximum flexibility and economies of scale Investment in the Zhairem zinc brownfield development in Kazakhstan to add c.160ktpa zinc in concentrate from 2020 We are investing to grow our cobalt production 133% over the next three years Highly diversified commodities business segments Market insight c.4000 employees in marketing years experience Global scale countries sites offices 1 46000 people Sustainable focus 24% reduction in Total Recordable Injury Frequency Rate in 2017 5% reduction in carbon emissions in 2017 Well positioned for the future Page 08 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Our performance in 2017 is our strongest on record.
Glencores balance sheet has never been stronger and our investment case underpinned by our leading marketing and industrial asset businesses has never been better Capitalising on a strong operating environment After an encouraging end to 2016 which saw commodities recover from cycle lows positive momentum continued through 2017 resulting in prolonged outperformance of Glencores key commodities versus the broader markets.
Concerns of tightening financial conditions in China during the second quarter proved to be shortlived with commodities rallying once again through the second half of the year.
Strong economic performance in both major developing and developed markets has underpinned supportive commodity demand conditions.
The electric vehicle upheaval continues to unfold with the scale of market penetration and investment by battery and automotive manufacturers and infrastructure players adjusting progressively upwards.
This provides an additional dimension of future demand growth for a number of our key commodities.
Early signals of inflation and higher interest rates also bode well for commodities as an asset class.
Chinese supplyside reform aided by consistent environmental policy and compliance positively affected a number of commodities during 2017 including thermal coal zinc and aluminium.
Going forward those commodities where primary market balances are in deficit or trending towards deficit such as zinc copper nickel and thermal coal should see positive price divergence versus potentially oversupplied markets.
Delivering sectorleading returns for shareholders In 2017 Glencore outperformed all its UKlisted major diversified mining peers with shares up 41%.
Our balance sheet is robust and our investment case is increasingly compelling.
Financial performance was strong in 2017 with Adjusted EBITDA of 14.8 billion up 44% and net income attributable to equity holders increasing to 5.8 billion from 1.4 billion in 2016 reflecting healthy commodity prices and the continued robust earnings contribution from our highly cash generative Marketing and Industrial businesses.
Marketing resilient again Marketing Adjusted EBIT was 3.0 billion in 2017 3% higher than 2016 reflecting the benefits of continued supportive market conditions volume growth in key market segments and a positive end to the year eclipsing the 2.8 billion guidance provided during the Investor Update in early December.
Metals and Minerals and Energy Products both delivered strong contributions while Agricultural Products posted a resilient performance when compared to many peers.
Marketing has again proven its ability to generate consistently solid earnings with high cash conversion taking into account its low fixed capital requirements.
Chief Executive Officers review
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Looking ahead while we maintain our longterm Marketing Adjusted EBIT guidance range of 2.2 to 3.2 billion a continuation of recent healthy marketing conditions would suggest a 2018 performance in the upper half of the range.
Industrial margin expansion through higher prices and relentless cost focus Industrial Adjusted EBITDA of 1 1.5 billion in 2017 was 60% higher than 2016.
Our asset portfolio continued to deliver overall competitive allin unit costs which despite some minor production challenges during the year allowed the Company to capitalise on healthy commodity prices and generate higher Adjusted EBITDA mining margins of 38% and 41% respectively in our Metals and Energy operations.
Energy and mobility transformation forecast to unlock material new sources of commodity demand Commodity differentiation is increasingly important and Glencores commodity mix is becoming less dependent on demand generated by infrastructure related investment in developing markets.
Accelerating electric vehicle adoption requires an energy and mobility transformation that is forecast to unlock material new sources of demand for the enabling underlying commodities including copper nickel and cobalt.
We recently commissioned an independent study to gauge the potential incremental demand for these commodities under the Electric Vehicles Initiative scenario of 30 % electric vehicle market share by 2030.
The findings suggest an additional 4.1Mt of copper 1.1Mt of nickel and 314kt of cobalt supply will be required by 2030.
These potentially significant new demand sources offer compelling fundamentals particularly when coupled with persistent supply challenges.
Automaker investment in EVs 90 billion and counting The rate at which automotive and battery companies have scaled up electric vehicle investment plans speaks to our opportunity as a supplier of key metals.
Global automaker investments now total more than 90 billion with at least 19 billion attributed to the U.
21 billion to China and 52 billion to Germany.
Volkswagen alone plans to spend 40 billion by 2030 to build electrified versions of over 300 models.
Chinese automakers are ramping up focus on the EV story while a number have announced investment partnerships with the likes of Ford VW and General Motors.
Our resource base is well positioned to supply into this likely energy and mobility evolution particularly given our anticipated strong production growth in copper 25% nickel 30% and cobalt 133% over the next three years.
We discuss the electric vehicle theme in more detail on page 12.
Creating longterm sustainable returns for shareholders Electric Vehicles  a disruptive force underpinning our commodities Page 12 Capitalising on the strong economic performance in both major developing and developed markets that underpins supportive commodity demand conditions Wellpositioned to supply into the likely energy and mobility evolution including the rapidly evolving electric vehicle story Anticipated strong production growth in copper 25% nickel 30% and cobalt 133% over the next three years Conviction to create value through partnerships MandA and organic reinvestment while maintaining a conservative balance sheet Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Conviction to create value through partnerships MandA and organic reinvestment Over the past 15 months in our constant drive to create longterm value for shareholders we continued to leverage our trading and strategic relationships to source and structure both acquisitions and disposals including Acquisition of 49% of Rio Tintos Hunter Valley Operations thermal coal with Yancoal retaining 51% gaining access to sizeable high quality energy coal resources and marketing rights pending Sale of 51% of nonU.
U. portion pending Creation of BaseCore Metals alongside Ontario Teachers Pension Plan a growth vehicle for base metal streams royalties and commercial opportunities Sale of our African zinc assets to Trevali for mix of cash and shares thereby accelerating the development of a midsize zinc growth vehicle with Glencore retaining 25% equity participation and offtake agreements Acquisition of Chevrons South African and Botswana middown stream oil business pending Acquisition of majority of voting class shares in Volcan gaining exposureaccess to a premier zinc district and potential asset marketing synergies Acquisition of remaining 31% interest in Mutanda copper Increased Rosneft oil offtake alongside equity partnership structure with the QIA Additionally we have an attractive suite of organic growth options across the portfolio.
Key existing projects neared completion in 2017 including Katanga coppercobalt  now in commissioning Mopani copper commissioning late 2018 and Koniambo nickel Line 2 in commissioning.
A suite of lowcost lowrisk brownfield opportunities were approved or progressed during 2017 including Integrated Nickel Operations nickel Zhairem zinc Katanga acid plant and cobalt circuit debottlenecking coppercobalt Mutanda cobalt reclaim copper United Wambo Open Cut coal and Mt Owen extension coal.
2.9 billion shareholder distribution Consistent with new distribution policy and reflecting strong cash generation in 2017 we have declared a distribution of 2.9 billion 0.20 per share in respect of 2017 cash flows to be paid in two equal instalments in 2018.
This payment comprises a fixed 1 billion payout in respect of Marketing activities and a variable component of 1.9 billion representing c.36% of Industrial asset free cash flow compared to our policy minimum of 25%.
Corporate governance and sustainability Our ambition to integrate sustainability throughout our business remains a key strategic priority for the Group and reflects our commitment to operate transparently and responsibly.
It also encompasses our desire to protect the wellbeing of our people our host communities and the natural environment while sharing lasting benefits with the regions where we work and society as a whole.
Sadly we recorded nine fatalities at our operations in 2017.
Our goal remains zero fatalities and there is unrelenting focus on ensuring leading practice at all our operations.
Progress during 2017 included the publication of our commitment to preventing the occurrence of Modern Slavery and human trafficking within our operations and supply chains the release of our 2016 Sustainability report as well as updated reports on Payments to Governments and our Climate Change Considerations paper.
Chief Executive Officers review
2018 Shareholder distribution 2.9bn 0.20share Minimising our impact on the environment 5% reduction in carbon emissions intensity by 2020 vs 2016 Glencore Annual Report 2017 We continued to make progress on meeting our groupwide carbon emission intensity reduction target of at least 5% on 2016 levels by 2020 committed to the Task Force on Climaterelated Financial Disclosures and completed an assessment of sites at a high risk of waterrelated issues.
We were delighted to appoint Ms Gill Marcus to the Board as an Independent NonExecutive Director with effect from 1 January 2018.
Gill was Governor of the South African Reserve Bank from November 2009 to November 2014 and her long record of public service coupled with her finance experience geo political insights and nonexecutive board experience will be a great benefit to us.
Due to sustained low levels of liquidity and the general ability and preference for prospective investors to access Glencores primary exchange we sought to delist from Hong Kong which took effect in January 2018.
Looking forward We look ahead with confidence noting the synchronised global economic growth supportive commodity fundamentals and the emerging electric vehicle story.
We believe our unrivalled positioning in Tier 1 commodities and Tier 1 assets will continue to create compelling value for shareholders.
Ivan Glasenberg
Chief Executive Officer
1 March 2018 2.9bn distribution recommended in respect of 2017 cash flows above the minimum policy threshold given robust balance sheet progression Our ambition to integrate sustainability throughout our business remains a key strategic priority for the Group Structural industry supply side challenges coupled with robust demand generate compelling fundamentals in our commodities Unrivalled positioning in Tier 1 commodities and Tier 1 assets will continue to create compelling value Creating longterm sustainable returns for shareholders Strategic priorities Integration of sustainability throughout our business Maintain a robust and flexible balance sheet Focus on cost control and operational efficiencies Our strategy for a sustainable future Page 20 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Following our successful efforts to reposition the capital structure and optimise our asset base we remain focused on our strategy to sustainably grow total shareholder return while operating responsibly.
We are confident we can offer a differentiated value proposition to investors Uniquely diversified by commodity geography and activity The right commodity mix for changing needs
Fully integrated from mine to customer Presence in 50 countries across 150 operating sites Producing and marketing more than 90 commodities across three business segments Diversified across multiple suppliers and customers Future demand patterns for maturing economies are likely to favour mid and late cycle commodities Major producer of later cycle commodities including the enabling materials copper cobalt nickel that underpin the battery chemistry and infrastructure likely to power electric vehicles and energy storage systems Since 2009 over 39 billion has been spent on industrial assets Lowcost longlife assets in many of the worlds premier mining districts support sustainable longterm cash flows Minelife extension potential embedded in key commodities Industrial Adjusted EBITDA mining margins 38% Metals and minerals up from 33% 41% Energy products up from 32% Volume of commodities required to enable 30% EV sales by 2030 4.1mt
1.1mt
314kt
Well positioned for the future Adjusted EBITDA diversified by commodity and geography % CRU Green Scenario  see page 14.
Copper 28% Zinc 17% Nickel 4% Ferroalloys 4% Coal 25% Oil 1% Marketing 21% Americas 32% EuropeAsia 8% Africa 14% Oceania 25% Marketing 21% Glencore Annual Report 2017 A unique marketing business that extracts value across the entire supply chain An entrepreneurial culture and a conviction to create value Generate significant cash flow and distribution potential As a marketer of commodities we can extract value from the fullrange of arbitrage opportunities We create value from our economies of scale our extensive including third parties supply base our logistics risk management and working capital financing capabilities Capital allocation framework balances preservation of capital structure with attractive investment and growth opportunities Conviction to create value through partnerships MandA and organic investment Unique ability to source and structure deals using trading and strategic relationships Funds from operations FFO up 49% to 1 1.6 billion in 2017 FF O  N et d e b t of 108% Distribution policy based on a fixedvariable payout of prior year cash flow comprising a fixed 1 billion from marketing and a minimum payout ratio of 25% of Industrial asset free cash flow Earnings per share up 310% YoY 2018 distribution recommended 2.9bn 0.20share 186% YoY Investing in capital efficient growth 1.6bn Including Volcan Zn Mutanda CuCo Yancoal equity coal Recycling capital through disposals 1.0bn Trevali Zn HG Storage Oil BaseCore Metals base metals streamsroyalties Resilience of marketing earnings Resilience of marketing earningsteltel Marketing Adjusted EBIT Indexed Industrial Adjusted EBITDA Indexed See page 202.
Business review
Page 60 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Our market drivers We are dependent upon the supply of and demand for our commodities Key market drivers Impact on our industry Future commodity supply The procyclical nature of mining investment means that new mines are usually approved when commodity prices are higher Given the long development time frames required to bring new mine supply on line the timing as to when this appears in the economic cycle is difficult to predict and could appear at low points in the economic cycle creating excess supply in the market Overinvestment creates oversupply and with it a prolonged period of low commodity prices Although commodity prices have increased significantly from the lows seen in early 2016 the experience of the last economic cycle has provided investor pressure on companies to be more cautious about investing in new supply Balancing a finite declining resource base with the need to grow to meet expected future demand is an inherent challenge for companies in the resource sector Demand for the commodities we produce The industrialisation and urbanisation of developing economies over the last decade has driven significant growth in commodity demand Chinas rapid growth over this period now means that it accounts for up to half of global demand for most commodities As developing economies mature the commodities that drive their growth change Increased levels of industrialisation and urbanisation suggest demand growth rates for commodities may be lower in the future Negative demand could generate excess supply along with lower commodity prices Earlycycle commodities such as iron ore coking coal and cement may become less important as demand patterns shift in favour of mid and late cycle commodities such as copper zinc cobalt nickel thermal coal and agricultural products Energy and emissions transformation Momentum to decarbonise the global economy is gathering pace as nations increasingly coordinate efforts aimed at minimising emissions of carbon dioxide to achieve climate change goals and transition the world to a lowcarbon economy This transition is likely to increase the cost for fossil fuels impose levies for emissions and increase costs for monitoring and reporting and to reduce demand for fossil fuels Third parties including potential or actual investors may also introduce policies adverse to Glencore due to our interest in fossil fuels particularly coal Technological advances are making renewable energy sources more competitive with fossil fuels and are likely to displace them over the longer run.
In particular many analysts believe that demand for coal may reduce sooner than previously expected Glencore Annual Report 2017 How we are responding Our disciplined approach to capital allocation attempts to ensure that supply and demand forces retain a level of balance Given the unpredictability of costs risks and timing of large scale greenfield projects we prefer to add supply via targeted capital efficientlow risk brownfield expansions when required With the expectation that the global economy will continue to progress towards a consumption based economy and therefore commodity demand growth will be focused in the higherend fast growing consumer sectors our diverse commodity portfolio supplying this demand is well placed to benefit from this transition We are a major producer of the commodities that underpin the current battery chemistry and infrastructure initiatives that are expected to power electric vehicles and energy storage systems and this new source of demand We continuously assess the risks and opportunities presented by decarbonisation of energy and mobility across our product and operational portfolio As a major producer and consumer of fossil fuels we recognise our responsibility to understand and manage our greenhouse gas emissions and support the global transition to a lowcarbon economy Widespread adoption of electric vehicles and energy storage systems will create material new sources of demand for enabling commodities Electric Vehicles a disruptive force underpinning our commodities Page 12 Principal risks and uncertainties Page 42
Financial review
Page 52 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Electric Vehicles  a disruptive force underpinning our commodities Metals and minerals The Electric Vehicle Initiative is a multigovernment policy forum targeting 30% market share for electric vehicle sales by 2030 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Glencore Annual Report 2017 The energy and mobility transformation currently underway is unlocking material new sources of demand for enabling commodities such as copper nickel and cobalt The emergence of electric vehicles EVs is set to transform the mobility space due to a combination of factors Environmental considerations Momentum to decarbonise the economy is gathering pace as nations increasingly coordinate efforts on this transition.
Bloomberg New Energy Finance forecasts investment in zero carbon energy at c.
8.7 trillion by 2040 with an estimated 530 million electric vehicles on the road.
Political mandate A growing consensus highlighted by the Paris Accord and the Electric Vehicle Initiative EVI is seeking to coordinate national and regional policies towards a low carbon future.
Specifically on transportation the EVI is a multigovernment policy forum comprising 16 major global economies.
The initiative seeks to facilitate the global deployment of 20 million EVs by 2020.
A further campaign announced in 2017 led by China targets at least 30% new electric vehicle sales by 2030 collectively across all EVI countries.
Technological progress Rapid advances in technology are emerging across the EV supply chain from power generation and storage to charging and vehicles.
With technological progress comes cost efficiencies enhanced performance and ultimately products that can compete with traditional internal combustion engine ICE alternatives.
Industry commentators now expect the total cost of ownership TCO for EVs to reach parity with ICE vehicles in the early part of the next decade CRU Mobility and Energy Futures Perspectives towards 2035 prepared for Glencore by CRU Consulting.
Consumer experience While the EV story is clearly in its early days existing EV models and those under development are already demonstrating performance comparable to or exceeding equivalent ICEs.
Average EV range acceleration and speed are increasing while targeted charging times and TCO are rapidly decreasing all enhancing the consumer experience.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Electric Vehicles  a disruptive force underpinning our commodities continued Driving demand Rapid technology advances in battery chemistry along with strong government support is accelerating the economic breakeven point of electric vehicles and building demand for our key commodities Leading to additional metal demand by 2030 The impact of this growth in demand for metals has implications across the value chain
55% of 2017 global supply
314ktpa 332% of 2017 global supply
4.1Mtpa 18% of 2017 global supply Estimated average metal use per vehicle
84kg
Nickel
30kg
Cobalt
8kg
Based on estimated 53kWh global average battery pack size.
Source CRU Green Scenario.
30% CAGR in battery electric vehicle sales to 2030 leads to an increase in demand for metals Charging infrastructure kttel Generation and grid infrastructure kttel NonICE vehicles kttel Cu 304 1068 2972 Grid storage kttel Predicted growth in EV sales 30% EV by 2030 Source CRU Green Scenario Source CRU Total cost of ownership  closing the economic gap with conventional vehicles ICE 94% Hybrid EV 4% Battery EV 2% ICE 85% Hybrid EV 5% Battery EV 10% ICE 64% Hybrid EV 6% Battery EV 30% Fuel cell EV 1% ICE  petrol BEV without subsidy BEV with subsidy 45telteltelteltel Glencore Annual Report 2017 Potential supply Glencore is wellpositioned to supply into the energy and mobility evolution On the cusp of mainstream EV rollout The rate at which automotive and battery companies have scaled up electric vehicle investment plans speaks to our opportunity as a supplier of key metals.
Global automaker investment now totals over 90 billion with at least 19 billion attributed to the U.
21 billion to China and 52 billion to Germany.
Volkswagen alone plans to spend 40 billion by 2030 to build electrified versions of over 300 models.
Chinese automakers are ramping up focus on the EV story while a number have announced investment partnerships with the likes of Ford VW and General Motors.
Global planned and existing battery cell production capacity amounts to over 300GWh which compares to Teslas Gigafactory target capacity of 35GWh.
China accounts for approximately twothirds of the total.
How much metal is required To illustrate the demand potential for a number of our key commodities we commissioned CRU to model the metal requirements across the supply chain to achieve the EVI target of 30% EV market share by 2030.
Unsurprisingly the forecast metal requirements are significant as early as 2020.
An additional c.4.1Mt of copper 18% of 2017 supply c.1.1Mt of nickel 55% of 2017 supply and 314kt of cobalt 332% of 2017 supply will be required to enable 30M EV sales by 2030.
Our commodities are crucial to the electric vehicle EV story The energy and mobility transformation currently underway is forecast to unlock material new sources of demand for enabling underlying commodities including copper nickel and cobalt.
We are uniquely positioned with our commodity mix having strong production growth across these three core EV metals over the next three years.
Glencore own source copper 25% growth in production totel 1.6Mt 1.3Mt Glencore own source nickel 30% growth in production totel 142kt 109kt Glencore own source cobalt 13 3 % growth in production totel 63kt 27kt Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Exploration acquisition and development Our focus on brownfield sites and exploration close to existing assets lowers our risk profile and lets us use existing infrastructure realise synergies and control costs.
Extraction and production We mine and beneficiate minerals across a range of commodities mining techniques and countries for processing or refining at our own facilities or for sale.
Processing and refining Our expertise and technological advancement in processing and refining mean we can optimise our end products to suit a wider customer base and provide a security of supply as well as valuable market knowledge.
Blending and optimisation Our ability to blend and optimise allows us to offer a wide range of product specifications resulting in a superior service and an ability to meet our customer specific requirements.
Our business activities are driven to achieve our strategic imperatives and our commitment to developing a sustainable business
The safety of our people is our top priority.
We aim to eliminate fatalities and provide a safe workplace.
Health
We want to protect and improve the health of our workforce and local communities.
Business model As a global producer and marketer of commodities we are uniquely diversified by geography products and activities.
Integrating our marketing and industrial business sets us apart from our competitors and helps us generate value 3 business segments spanning the metals energy and agricultural markets producing 90 commodities from 150 sites Inputs and resources on which our business model depends Assets and natural resources Our resources and reserves are overall longlife and of a high quality enhancing the scale and value of our marketing business We are a disciplined producer aligning supply to demand and margin over volume Our people and partners We have established longterm relationships with a broad range of suppliers and customers across diverse industries and geographies 146000 employees and contractors spread across 90 offices and 6 continents Financial discipline We deploy capital in a disciplined manner creating value for all our stakeholders Our hedging strategies protect us against price risks and ensure that our marketing profitability is primarily determined by volumedriven activities and valueadded services rather than absolute price Unique market knowledge As an integrated commodity producer and marketer we are uniquely positioned to generate value at every stage of the commodity chain Glencore Annual Report 2017 Outputs Protecting our people 24% reduction in total recordable injury frequency rate Income taxes paid to host countries 1.4bn Minimising our impact on the environment 5% reduction in carbon emissions scopes 1 and 2
We aim to minimise any negative environmental impact from our activities and promote efficient use of resources such as energy and water.
Antibribery and corruption Offering paying soliciting or accepting bribes is unacceptable.
We work to identify and reduce the risks of bribery and corruption across all our business.
Community and human rights We foster sustainable growth and respect human rights wherever we operate.
Adjusted EBITDA 14.8bn 2017 distributions to shareholders 2.9bn paid in 2018 basis 2017 cash flows Our logistics assets allow us to handle large volumes of commodities both to fulfil our obligations and to take advantage of demand and supply imbalances.
These value added services make us a preferred counterparty for customers without such capabilities.
Sustainability framework Page 25 Our strategy for a sustainable future Page 20 Principal risks and uncertainties Page 42
Time arbitrage
Geographic arbitrage Our commodities in everyday products Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Business model continued
Metals and minerals Energy Agriculture Our scale and presence both as a producer and marketer of commodities is unrivalled We are present at every point of the value chain from where commodities are sourced to where they are consumed Global scale Longterm relationships Unique insights Differentiated opportunities Vessels on the ocean at any one time Longterm relationships with suppliers and customers 4.0mt Copper metal and concentrates marketed 2.8mt Zinc metal and concentrates marketed 2.1bn bbl Crude oil and oil products marketed 1 Estimated metal unit contained.
Traditional miner Marketer
Logistics marketing
Processing refining
Exploration
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Our marketing business We move commodities from where they are plentiful to where they are needed G e o g ra p h i c arbitrage
Different prices for the same product in different geographic regions taking into account transportation and transaction costs.
Execution
Leverage global relationships and production processing and logistical capabilities to source product in one location and deliver in another.
P r od u ct arbitrage
Pricing differences between blends grades or types of commodity taking into account processing and substitution costs.
Execution
Ensure optionality with commodity supply contracts and look to lockin profitable price differentials through blending processing or endproduct substitution.
T im e arbitrage
Different prices for a commodity depending on whether delivery is immediate or at a future date taking into account storage and financing costs.
Execution
Book carry trades that benefit from competitive sources of storage insurance and financing.
Market insight and customer understanding Our global scale and presence in more than 90 commodities across 50 countries gives us extensive market knowledge and insight to help us fully understand the needs of our customers.
Anticipating supply and demand Our integrated marketing and industrial businesses work sidebyside to give us presence across the entire supply chain delivering indepth knowledge of physical market supply and demand dynamics and an ability to rapidly adjust to market conditions.
Creating opportunities The significant scale of both our own production and the volumes secured from third parties allows us to create margin opportunities from our ability to supply the exact commodities the market needs through processing andor blending and optimisation of qualities.
Generating revenue We generate revenues as a feelike income from physical asset handling and arbitrage as well as blending and optimisation opportunities.
Our use of hedging instruments results in profitability being largely determined by these activities rather than by absolute price movements.
Arbitrage opportunities Many of the physical commodity markets in which we operate are fragmented or periodically volatile.
This can result in arbitrage price discrepancies between the prices for the same commodities in different geographic locations or time periods.
Other factors with arbitrage opportunities include freight and product quality.
A supportive strategy Our Marketing Business supports the creation of incremental value from a pool of allocated capital through critical mass blending storage and arbitrage opportunities.
Our presence at every stage of the value chain allows us to leverage our scale and diversity.
How we manage risk We mitigate credit risks through application of measures including credit insurance letters of credit security arrangements and bank or corporate guarantees.
We manage market exposure by reducing price risks arising from timing differences to acceptably low levels.
Our policiesprocedures seek to ensure we comply with applicable sanctions laws and regulations.
Strategy and risk Our strategy for a sustainable future Page 20 Principal risks and uncertainties Page 42 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Strategic objective To sustainably grow total shareholder return while maintaining a strong investment grade rating and acting as a responsible operator Our strategy for a sustainable future We recognise our ongoing responsibility to not only deliver financial performance but also make a positive contribution to society and create lasting benefits for stakeholders in a manner that is responsible transparent and respectful to the rights of all Glencore Annual Report 2017 We believe that by being a better operator with a reputation for doing things the right way we will be seen by our stakeholders as a partner of choice.
We are achieving this through taking an approach of continuous improvement.
This approach is delivered through our health and safety programmes advancing our environmental performance respecting human rights and by developing maintaining and strengthening our relationships with all of our stakeholders.
We recognise that a robust and sufficiently flexible balance sheet contributes to the delivery of sustainable longterm shareholder returns and ensures that Glencore is well placed to withstand the cyclical nature of the natural resource industry.
We aim to increase returns on capital and cash flows while targeting a maximum 2x Net debtAdjusted EBITDA ratio throughout the cycle.
We aim to only deploy capital when strict and clearly defined financial criteria relating to returns and payback can be met.
Our major industrial assets are mainly longlife and lowcost reflecting our substantial investment into existing assets as well as our appetite capabilities and belief in some commodities and geographies where our peers are not materially present.
Our industrial assets provide a consistent source of volumes for our marketing operations which are supplemented by third party production.
Our marketing activities use their scale and capabilities to extract additional margin throughout our business model and provide a superior service to our customers and a reliable supply of quality product.
We seek to increase the value of our business by improving the competitiveness of our assets through an ongoing focus on cost management and logistical capabilities including operating safely and efficiently.
We take a disciplined approach towards all of our assets and will divest when another operator places greater value on them or curtail production in response to oversupply when it makes sense to do so.
Strategic priority Integration of sustainability throughout our business Strategic priority
Strategic priority Focus on cost control and operational efficiencies CEOs review Page 04 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Our strategy for a sustainable future continued Performance in 2017
Increased Adjusted EBITDA mining margins of 38% and 41% respectively in our metals and energy operations reflect the benefit of higher prices that more than offset modest inflationary and cost pressures as well as the optimisation of cost structures and efficiencies over the past two years.
Marketing
Achieved c.
3.0 billion Adjusted EBIT across our marketing business underlining both supportive market conditions during the year as well as upside to a positive commodity cycle.
Supply
Continued our disciplined approach to supply.
Partial restart of idled zinc production planned for 2018.
The balance of this capacity will be restarted at the right time.
Performance in 2017 Conservatively repositioned Revised capital structure and credit profile managed through targeting a maximum 2x Net debtAdjusted EBITDA through the cycle augmented by an upper Net debt cap of c.
16 billion.
Yearend Net debt and FFONet debt were 10.7 billion and 108.3% respectively.
Conviction to create value Targeted bolton acquisitions low costrisk organic growth and recycling of capital enabled capital efficient growth in compelling commodities.
Bonds
Issued 2.1 billion of bonds with maturities of 5 and 10 years.
Post2018 maturities capped at c.
3 billion in any one year.
Credit rating Credit rating upgraded to Baa2 stable by Moodys and BBB positive outlook by Standard and Poors in line with lower leverage.
Credit facility Revolving credit facility refinanced and resized to reflect reduced funding needs.
Committed available liquidity of c12.9 billion at year end covers more than 3 years of bond maturities.
Performance in 2017 SafeWork programme Continued to progress our SafeWork programme an initiative that focuses on eliminating fatalities and serious injuries.
Regrettably there were nine fatalities from nine incidents during the year.
We continue to work towards the elimination of fatalities from our business.
More positively our TRIFR and LTIFR improved by 24% and 27% respectively compared to 2016.
Climate change On track for meeting groupwide carbon emission intensity reduction target of at least 5% on 2016 levels by 2020.
Committed to Task Force on Climate related Financial Disclosures.
Updated our progress in integrating climate change issues into our business through our second report on climate change considerations for our business.
Water management Completed assessment of sites at a high risk of waterrelated issues and finalised our water management guideline which aligns with the ICMMs position statement on water and its water management framework.
Community engagement Our community development programmes are an integral part of our community and stakeholder engagement strategies.
In 2017 we spent 90 million on these programmes 2016 84 million.
Strategic priority
Managed Net debt range Strategic priority Integration of sustainability throughout our business Improved our TRIFR by 24% Strategic priority Focus on cost control and operational efficiencies Adjusted EBITDA 60% across industrial business Glencore Annual Report 2017 Key performance indicator Page 40 Principal risks and uncertainties Page 42 Priorities going forward KPIs Principal risks
We will continue to implement activities that further integrate sustainability throughout our business to support our commitment to continuously improve our standards of health safety environmental and community performance.
Transparency
We are committed to operating transparently responsibly and meeting or exceeding applicable laws or external requirements.
Safe and healthy workplace  reduce TRIFR LTIFR and occupational disease cases
Longterm value for communities community investment spend Health safety and environment including potential catastrophes Emissions and climate change Community relations and human rights Skills availability and retention KPIs Principal risks Priorities going forward Balance sheet strength We are committed to maintaining our balance sheet strength to ensure it is capable of supporting growth and shareholder returns regardless of the commodity price environment.
Investment grade rating We will preserve a robust capital structure and business portfolio that reflects our commitment to targeting receiving and maintaining a strong BBBBaa investment grade rating.
In this regard we are targeting a maximum 2x Net debtAdjusted EBITDA through the cycle augmented by an upper Net debt cap of c.
16 billion.
Returns to shareholders Funds from operations Net funding and Net debt Value for our shareholders Adjusted EBITEBITDA Net income attributable to equity holders Reductions in commodity prices Fluctuations in supply of or demand for commodities in which we operate Fluctuations in currency exchange rates L iq u id i t y r i s k Counterparty credit and performance KPIs Principal risks Priorities going forward Industrial activities Our industrial activities will continue to focus on controlling costs and generating sustainable operating and capital efficiencies.
Our marketing business supports the creation of incremental value through critical mass blending storage and geographical arbitrage.
Positioned to leverage our scale and diversity Our marketing activities priorities are to maximise the returns and cash flows from the pool of allocated capital which in turn supports the strengthening of our balance sheet.
Our
Returns to shareholders  Funds from operations Net funding and debt Value for our shareholders Adjusted EBITEBITDA Net income attributable to equity holders Geopolitical risk including social unrest Laws regulations enforcement permits and licences to operate Operating and cost risk Cyber risk Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Sustainable development
We are continuing to implement activities and processes that support the full integration of sustainability throughout our business.
This is complemented by the groupwide application of the principle of continuous improvement.
We are committed to operate transparently and responsibly.
Our sustainability strategy policies and procedures support good business practice and drive positive change throughout our business.
We are committed to protecting the wellbeing of our people our host communities and the natural environment while sharing lasting benefits with the regions where we work and society as a whole.
1 2015 data is not directly comparable to later periods due to changes in data reporting methodology as set out in our 2016 Sustainability Report.
Water withdrawn million m 1tel Total recordable injury frequency rate per million hours workedtel Lost time injury frequency rate per million hours workedtel Community investment spend US milliontel CO2 Scope 2 million tonnestel CO2e Scope 1 million tonnestel Glencore Annual Report 2017 The commodities that we produce and market have an essential role in everyday life and support the development of emerging economies.
Our activities and our presence deliver lasting benefits to our stakeholders and to society creating value both locally and globally.
We are committed to creating value for our stakeholders in a manner that is responsible transparent and respectful to the rights of all Our approach to sustainability reflects our commitment to operate in a responsible and transparent manner.
We recognise our role in protecting the wellbeing of our people our host communities and the natural environment.
We believe that our presence delivers lasting benefits within the regions where we operate and society as a whole.
Through the integration of sustainability throughout our business practices we aim to embody Glencores five values that define our purpose our priorities and the fundamental principles by which we conduct business.
Our sustainability strategy policies and procedures support good business practice and meet or exceed applicable laws and external requirements.
Our sustainability strategy sets out our ambitions against four core pillars with clearly defined imperatives objectives priority areas and targets.
Our sustainability strategy is reviewed annually to confirm that it is continuing to fulfil the needs of our business.
Committed to creating a sustainable future Sustainability framework Management data reporting risk management and assurance to monitor compliance Corporate strategy Integration of sustainability throughout our business
Focus on cost control and operational efficiencies
Safety  Entreprenuerialism Simplicity  Responsibility  Openness Code of Conduct Group sustainability strategy
Become a leader in the protection and improvement of our peoples and communities wellbeing
Become a leader in workplace safety eliminating fatalities and injuries
Minimise any negative environmental impact from our operations and apply the precautionary principle in decisionmaking Community and human rights Foster sustainable growth and respect human rights wherever we operate Group HSEC policies Operational policies Developed for the specific needs of individual assets Board HSEC Committee Oversight and ultimate responsibility.
Our Board receives regular updates and has detailed oversight of how our business is performing across all our internally defined sustainabilityrelated material risk areas.
Sustainability principles guidance and policies Integrated throughout the business and give guidance on the standards we expect.
Material topics Internal and external materiality assessment process to identify material topics Material topics are the focus of our sustainability strategy review and reporting Operational activities focus on addressing and progressing the material topics Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Further details on our sustainability strategy our approach to its implementation performance and ambitions are available in our sustainabilityrelated publications which include an annual sustainability report published in accordance with the core requirements of Global Reporting Initiative GRI Our approach to sustainability Sustainability report and highlights Data book and GRI references Payments to governments report Modern slavery statement All of our sustainability communications are available on our website site sustainability.
External commitments We are signatories to the United Nations Global Compact UNGC aligning our strategies and operations with its principles which cover human rights labour environment and anticorruption.
In line with the UNGCs requirements we publish an annual communication on our progress.
The UNGC also encourages participants to support the Sustainable Development Goals SDGs with an emphasis on collaboration and innovation.
We welcome the SDGs and the advent of a systematic global approach to societys overall development.
We believe that we can play a role in supporting our host governments to meet the SDGs.
In addition we uphold the International Labour Organization ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and the UN Universal Declaration of Human
We work in accordance with a number of specific international frameworks including the Core Conventions of the ILO and the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
We are members of the Plenary of the UNs Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.
Progress against our core sustainability strategy pillars 201520 Strategic priorities Progress in 2017 Status Safety No fatalities Nine fatalities occurred at Glencore assets during 2017 50% reduction of Group LTIFR by the end of 2020 against 2015 baseline of 1.34 Our LTIFR improved by 24% compared to our 2015 baseline mainly due to the exclusion of Glencore Agriculture.
In 2017 our LTIFR was 1.02 per million hours worked 2016 1.40 including Glencore Agriculture 50% reduction in TRIFR by 2020 using 2014 figure of 5.02 as a baseline Our TRIFR improved by 38% compared to our 2014 baseline mainly due to the exclusion of Glencore Agriculture.
Our 2017 TRIFR was 3.09 per million hours worked 2016 4.05 including Glencore Agriculture Health Yearonyear reduction in the number of new cases of occupational disease 46 new cases of occupational disease recorded a 48% decrease on 2016 89 cases recorded includes Glencore Agriculture Environment No major or catastrophic environmental incidents Zero major or catastrophic environmental incidents Established a groupwide carbon emissionintensity reduction target of 5% on 2016 baseline by 2020 Our 2017 carbon emission intensity increased marginally to 4.78tGHGtCu from 4.75tGHGtCu in 2016.
We are implementing initiatives to deliver our 2020 carbon target.
High water risk assets to implement fiveyear water targets for 201721 The identified high risk sites are currently carrying out operational changes which are intended to result in overall improvements Continue internal and external audit programme for highrisk tailings storage facilities Our internal and external audit programme for highrisk tailings storage facilities was ongoing throughout the year
No serious human rights incidents Zero serious human rights incidents Implement our social value creation strategy Identified material assets to report their socioeconomic contribution data Distribute the Community Leadership Programme Toolkit to all assets The toolkit was distributed to all assets.
Training on the toolkit took place in Australia and South Africa.
Further training sessions will be held in Canada and South America in 2018 1 Baseline figures include Glencore Agriculture.
Performance overview
On track Not achieved Sustainable development continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 We have been a member of the International Council on Mining and Metals since 2014.
We endorse its sustainable development framework principles and are an active member of its working groups.
We strongly support transparency in the redistribution and reinvestment of the payments we make to local and national governments.
We are active participants in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative EITI.
We comply with the EU Accounting and Transparency Directives in line with those provisions we publish separate annual reports detailing material payments made to governments broken down by country and project.
As part of our commitment to responsible product stewardship we follow the UN globally harmonised system for classification and labelling of chemicals GHS the EU REACH regulations on the registration evaluation authorisation and restriction of chemicals and the London Bullion Market Association LBMA Responsible Gold guidance.
Where appropriate we participate in the REACH consortia related to the materials we produce these include the consortia for zinc cadmium sulphuric acid lead and precious metals.
We submit annual reports to the CDP climate change and water programmes.
Risk management and assurance The identification assessment and mitigation of risk determines our approach to sustainability management.
All of our assets apply our risk management framework and its supporting guidelines.
We align our framework with international standards and it provides a harmonised approach to managing our health safety environment community human rights and reputational risks as well as those linked to the management of financial and legal issues.
Our assets use the framework to identify hazards particularly those with potentially major or catastrophic consequences and to develop plans to address and eliminate or mitigate the related risks.
For each of the identified catastrophic hazards we have implemented a standardised approach to identifying and understanding their causes and controls.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Materiality assessment We focus the reporting of our sustainability performance and progress on topics identified as being material to Glencores development performance position andor future prospects.
Every two years we undertake a materiality assessment to establish the material topics for our sustainability strategy review and sustainability reporting  these topics have the potential to have the greatest impact on Glencores business activities.
In line with the GRI guidance on materiality our materiality assessment involves a groupwide Our internal HSEC assurance programme has a primary focus on our systematic management of the catastrophic hazards and their relevant controls and critical controls.
Senior subject matter experts participate in the assurance programme our Board receives reports on its findings which are actively followed up and verified.
The assurance programme is contributing to improving standards and performance groupwide.
Stakeholder engagement We engage with all relevant stakeholder groups to build meaningful relationships and understand their expectations and aspirations.
Through recognising the importance of open and transparent engagement we are able to minimise our negative societal impact optimise the value we bring to local communities and maintain our licence to operate.
The geographies and markets in which we operate are extremely complex and we conduct dialogues on local national regional and international levels.
As a result we engage on a broad variety of topics with a wide range of stakeholders with diverse interests and opinions.
Where appropriate we take an informed and constructive role in public policy development processes.
For example we are working with policy makers directly and through trade associations on issues related to clean energy carbon reporting and carbon pricing recognising that governments and industry must work together to establish policy frameworks that deliver the optimal balance of social environmental and economic considerations appropriate for individual nations. and local levels.
It also includes information that reflects our understanding of the issues that affect our business and the natural resources sector our regulatory requirements and the topics raised during engagement with our people and external stakeholders including local communities investors the media governments and NGOs.
We consider a topic material if senior management determines that it may significantly affect our business operations or have a significant impact on any of our stakeholders.
We need constructive relationships with our stakeholders to optimise our business.
We listen to and work with others to explore the challenges we face as a business.
Our stakeholders include our employees and contractors host communities civil society unions governments business partners nongovernmental organisations investors and the media.
We reach out to them on local national regional and international levels.
We engage with all stakeholder groups to build meaningful relationships and understand their expectations and aspirations.
This minimises any potential negative societal impact optimises the value we bring to local communities and maintains our licence to operate.
We hold regular facetoface meetings conference calls and participate in multistakeholder discussions.
We participate in roundtables with government and other industry representatives to discuss new policies as well as amendments to existing legislation.
We hold transparent negotiations with union officials to discuss wage and benefit agreements.
Our employees receive regular briefings on health and safety matters.
Many of our assets hold regular open days when local community members can visit our sites and interact with our operational teams.
These activities are complementary together they form part of our response to global business issues and help us to identify the issues that are of most importance to our stakeholders.
Engaging with our stakeholders Sustainable development continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Workplace health and safety The health and safety of our people is our top priority.
Our ambition is to become a health and safety leader and to create a workplace without fatalities injuries or occupational diseases.
We take a proactive preventative approach towards health and safety.
Our aim is to establish a positive safety culture that supports all of our employees and contractors being empowered to have the authority to stop work if they consider a workplace or situation unsafe.
We believe that all occupational fatalities diseases and injuries are preventable.
An important tool in improving safety at our operations has been the recording of high potential risk incidents HPRIs.
The reporting of HPRIs represents a positive part of our strategy to reduce fatalities and as such we do not target a reduction in this metric.
During 2017 78% of our recorded HPRIs related to six hazards mobile equipment 30% groundstrata failure 13% lifting and cranage 9% working at heights 8% energy isolation 7% and fire and explosions 4%.
For each of these hazards we have developed protocols that detail the actions necessary to identify and Our progress in 2017 Catastrophic hazard management We are committed to ensuring the safety and wellbeing of our people and the communities and environment around us.
Catastrophic events that take place in the natural resource sector can have disastrous impacts on workers communities the environment and corporate reputation as well as having substantial financial cost.
We are actively identifying monitoring and mitigating the catastrophic hazards within our business.
The Board receives regular updates on this area and actively encourages an approach of ongoing improvement.
Business model Page 16 Material topics The topics identified as being material to Glencores development performance position and future prospects
Exploration
Processing and refining
Blending and optimisation
Catastrophic hazard management Health and safety Climate change Water and effluents Waste and air emissions Human rights Product stewardship HSEC pillars key Health Safety Environment Community and human rights Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Climate change The impact on our business As a significant producer of energy products and a significant energy consumer we are aware that energy is a key input and cost to our business as well as being a material source of our carbon emissions.
We are working to mitigate the physical impacts of climate change where we can and consider resource efficiency when making operational decisions.
Wherever we operate we seek to optimise our energy and carbon footprint.
We recognise the global climate change science as laid out by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and acknowledge the global climate change goals outlined in the United Nations Convention on Climate Change Paris Agreement.
Following the broad consensus reached by nation states we anticipate a global shift towards a lowercarbon economy supported by appropriate policies and bringing significant economic changes.
We believe the implementation of measures by national and intra national governments as well as public sentiment will continue to drive public policy developments and programmes to restrict global greenhouse gas emissions GHGs.
This is likely to affect our business and represents both risks and opportunities that our company needs to manage.
We support a leastcost pathway to achieving climate change goals that considers the cost and consequences of all available policy options and does not hinder socioeconomic development.
Addressing climate change across our business To address the impacts opportunities and risks relating to climate change within our business we have established an internal cross functional and crosscommodity working group led by our Chairman with Board oversight to consider and examine climate change issues. mitigate their associated risk.
The reported HPRIs also help us to identify the activities that we need to prioritise in order to advance further our safety performance.
We are encouraging our workforce to recognise the need to record and report HPRIs through the promotion of a riskbased safety culture.
It is with deep regret that we have not met our goal of zero fatalities.
In
2017 nine people lost their lives at our operations compared to 16 during 2016.
All loss of life is unacceptable and we are determined to eliminate fatalities across our Group.
Our lost time injury frequency rate LTIFR reflects the total number of LTIs per million hours worked and does not include restricted work injuries or fatalities.
Our LTIFR are recorded when an employee or contractor is unable to work following an incident days recorded begin on the first rostered shift that the worker is absent after the day of the injury.
In 2017 our LTIFR was 1.02 per million hours worked 2016 1.40 including and 1.22 excluding Glencore Agriculture and reflects the continuing progress we are making to embed a culture of safety at all our assets.
We are progressing well against our longterm goal of reducing employee and contractor losttime injuries by 50% by the end of 2020 against a 2015 figure of 1.34.
The total recordable injury frequency rate TRIFR is the sum of fatalities lost time injuries restricted work injuries and medical treatment injuries per million hours worked.
The metric represents all injuries that require medical treatment beyond first aid.
We are on track to meet the progressive improvement required to achieve our longterm goal of achieving a 50% reduction in TRIFR by the end of 2020 using our 2014 TRIFR of 5.02 as the baseline.
Our 2017 TRIFR of 3.09 is a 38% improvement against the 2014 baseline.
Total recordable injury frequency rate el Lost time injury frequency rate el Number of HPRIs reported 368tel New occupational disease cases 46tel Per million hours worked.
Sustainable development continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 The working group is overseeing the ongoing integration of carbon emissions and energy into our annual business planning process and the mapping to 2020 of our forward projected energy and carbon footprint.
This work is feeding into a detailed review of our carbon emissions and energy profile.
It includes an assessment of potential mitigation and abatement projects and underpins the basis of our internal Marginal Abatement Cost Curve MACC.
In mid2017 the work undertaken by our climate change working group resulted in Glencore establishing an initial groupwide carbon emission intensity reduction target of at least 5% on 2016 levels by 2020 measured in terms of tonnes of greenhouse gases emitted per tonne of copper equivalent industrial production tGHGtCu.
In line with our expectations our 2017 energy emission intensity increased marginally compared with 2016 from 4.75tGHGtCu to 4.78tGHGtCu.
This slight increase reflects energy use relating to prestripping activity and construction work for future production improvements.
The small increase in 2017 was anticipated when our 2020 target was established.
Structural carbon intensity improvements are planned for 2018 to 2020.
Our 2018 carbon budget process showed that we are on track to meet our 2020 target as we progress towards higher energy efficiency levels and carbonefficient operational changes.
How we are taking action We use renewable energy sources where possible renewable sources deliver 13.5% of our total energy needs 2016 14% excluding Glencore
In Australia we use coal seam gas from our mines to supplement power generation at a number of our assets and have flares installed at those underground coal mines with the necessary supply and concentration of methane.
CO2e Scope 1 million tonnes CO2 Scope 2 million tonnes Total energy use petajoules teltel We play an active role in engaging with governments and other interested stakeholders to develop strategies for reducing the impact of climate change.
We actively support the development of low emission technologies and some renewable energy sources.
We are investing in a number of low carbon energy projects that address direct and indirect emissions from our operations.
They include treatment of fugitive emissions from coal processing and ventilation air methane and the largescale CCS coal energy demonstration project feasibility stage in Australia described on page 32.
Reporting on our emissions We divide CO emissions reporting into three different scopes in line with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol and measure both the direct and indirect emissions generated by the industrial activities entities and facilities where we have operational control.
During 2017 we emitted 21.6 million tonnes CO e of Scope 1 direct emissions from our consumed fuel.
This figure includes emissions from reductants used in our metallurgical smelters.
It also includes CO of methane emissions from our operations which is around 36% of our Scope 1 emissions.
The reduction in Scope 1 emissions is mainly due to lower coal seam emissions at our Australian coal operations.
In 2017 we emitted 1 1.9 million tonnes CO of Scope 2 locationbased indirect emissions which applied appropriate countrybycountry grid emission factors to all of our purchased electricity regardless of specific renewable electricity contracts.
Our Scope 2 reduction was mainly due to the closure of our Alumina operations in early 2016 as well as some energy efficiency gains at our ferroalloys smelters.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Our Scope 3 emissions include those from a broad range of sources including use of fossil energy that we produce and shipping transportation.
We report our Scope 3 emissions in our 2017 Sustainability Report.
In 2017 The Transition Pathway Initiative TPI which aims to define what the transition to a low carbon economy looks like for companies in highimpact sectors such as oil and gas mining and electricity generation awarded Glencore a Level Four  Strategic Assessment.
This is the TPIs highest score and recognises the work that we have undertaken to identify and address the risks to our business posed by climate change.
We publicly report to the CDP Carbon Disclosure programme.
In 2017 Glencore achieved a CDP score of B 2016 B.
Cross reference table to Task Force on Climaterelated Financial Disclosures Governance Disclose the organisations governance around climaterelated risks and opportunities Describe the Boards oversight of climaterelated risks and opportunities.
Board Committees Page 87 Risk  Board leadership Page 90 Describe managements role in assessing and managing climaterelated risks and opportunities.
Work at Board meetings Page 89 HSEC Committee report Page 100 Strategy Disclose the actual and potential impacts of climaterelated risks and opportunities on the organisations businesses strategy and financial planning where such information is material Describe the climaterelated risks and opportunities the organisation has identified over the short medium and long term.
Principal risks and uncertaintiesclimate change Page 50 Describe the impact of climaterelated risks and opportunities on the organisations businesses strategy and financial planning.
Principal risks and uncertaintiesclimate change Page 50 Describe the resilience of the organisations strategy taking into consideration different climate related scenarios including a 2C or lower scenario.
2017 Climate Change Considerations for Our Business Page 20 Risk management Disclose how the organisation identifies assesses and manages climaterelated risks Describe the organisations processes for identifying and assessing climaterelated risks.
Principal risks and uncertaintiesclimate change Page 50 2017 Climate Change Considerations for Our Business Page 14 Describe the organisations processes for managing climaterelated risks.
Addressing climate change across our business Page 30 Describe the targets used by the organisation to manage climaterelated risks and opportunities and performance against targets.
Principal risks and uncertainties Page 50 Key performance indicators Page 41 Metrics and targets Disclose the metrics and targets used to assess and manage relevant climaterelated risks and opportunities where such information is material Disclose the metrics used by the organisation to assess climaterelated risks and opportunities in line with its strategy and risk management process.
Reporting on our emissions Page 31 Key performance indicators Page 41 Disclose Scope 1 Scope 2 and if appropriate Scope 3 greenhouse gas GHG emissions and the related risks.
Reporting on our emissions Page 31 Key performance indicators Page 41 Describe the targets used by the organisation to manage climaterelated risks and opportunities and performance against targets.
Addressing climate change across our business Page 30 Sustainable development continued The International Energy Agency has identified CCS as a vital technology if the world is to meet its greenhouse gas reduction targets.
Since 2009 Glencore has participated in a number of Australian lowemission technology projects.
One of these is the Integrated Surat Basin CCS project which was established in 2010 to demonstrate the effectiveness of CCS technology in the region.
The purpose of the study is to deliver an integrated CCS project incorporating carbon capture transport and sequestration to establish a basis for permitting of longterm CO storage in a suitable location in Queensland.
This study will provide a framework for a genuine best practice model to deliver a viable commercial approach to reducing CO emissions in Queensland and elsewhere in Australia reducing Australias overall carbon footprint and benefiting all emitters of CO requiring storage.
For more information about CTSCo visit siteau.
Carbon capture and storage CCS Glencore Annual Report 2017 Financial Stability Boards Task Force on Climaterelated Financial Disclosures TCFD We support the recently published recommendations of the Financial Stability Boards TCFD.
The TCFD has developed a voluntary framework for the reporting of climaterelated financial risk disclosures for use by lenders insurers investors and other stakeholders.
We welcome the opportunity to engage with our stakeholders on climate change matters and report on our progress against the Aiming for A initiative.
During 2017 we produced the second edition of our Climate Change Considerations for our Business publication.
This publication analyses the robustness of our portfolio against climate related scenarios and provides an assessment of the risks and opportunities available to Glencore in a lowcarbon economy.
In response to the guidance produced by the TCFD we have provided a crossreference table on page 32.
The table references the sections in this report and other publications that meet the guidance of the TCFD.
Water and effluents Water is an essential component of our business activities.
We recognise that water is a shared and finite resource and we are conscious of the increasing concerns of our local stakeholders and other local water users regarding ongoing availability of water security of access and the potential for impacts on water supply.
We are committed to managing our impact on water resources responsibly.
We prioritise efficient water use water reuserecycling responsible waste water disposal and maintaining any equipment that may pose a hazard to water quality.
We engage with local water users to avoid material adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of local water sources or compromising their access to water.
In 2017 we withdrew 924 million m of water 2016 971 million m or 829 million m excluding Glencore
The likeforlike increase is mainly due to two assets increasing their dewatering efforts as their operational profiles reached groundwater aquifers and all assets aligning with our revised water reporting requirements.
We are an active member of the International Council on Mining and Metals ICMMs water management working group and participated in the development of its Position Statement on Water Stewardship.
During 2017 our internal water working group finalised our water management guideline in line with the ICMMs position statement on water and water management framework.
Furthermore we completed our highrisk site assessments related to water and set up a process for the internal sharing of best waterrelated practices.
In 2017 we harmonised our water metrics to align with the Water Accounting Framework WAF of the Minerals Council of Australia.
Going forward we will pilot the ICMMs catchmentbased approach to water management during the first half of 2018.
Catchmentbased water management is a comprehensive systematic approach to identifying evaluating and responding to local waterrelated risks through the lifecycle of an asset as well as capturing an assets impact on other local water users.
We publicly report to the CDP Water Disclosure programme.
Water withdrawn million m teltel 2015 data is not directly comparable to later periods due to changes in data reporting methodology disclosed in our 2016 Sustainability Report.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Community engagement and social commitment compliance The communities surrounding our operations are our neighbours employees business partners and future workforce.
Through our commitment to twoway dialogue with our local communities we aim to secure a broad base of support for our activities.
We aim to foster sustainable growth where we operate.
We work with communities to deliver socioeconomic development through investment in infrastructure procurement health and education projects.
We contribute to society throughout our value chain via employment procurement enterprise development infrastructure and social investment programmes.
Our community development programmes are an integral part of our community and stakeholder engagement strategies.
We design our programmes to help reduce dependency on our operations encourage selfreliance and contribute to sustainable growth in our host regions.
In 2017 we spent 90 million on these programmes 2016 84 million.
Human rights and grievance mechanisms We prioritise respect for human rights everywhere that we operate.
We uphold the human rights of our people and our local communities including vulnerable groups such as women children indigenous people and victims of conflict.
Respect for human rights is enshrined in Glencores Code of Conduct which lays out the essential requirements for our people and stems from our values.
It also Waste and air emissions Our operations emit emissions such as sulphur dioxide SO dust and nitrogen oxide as well as generate waste which can affect the environment and nearby communities.
We monitor all material emissions and continuously look for ways to reduce those that pollute the air around us.
Wherever we operate we comply with relevant regulatory limits andor international standards for air emissions regarding SO Our open cut operations emit dust from excavation and movement of material.
We monitor dust levels at affected communities and minimise dust in a number of ways.
Our metal and coal assets generate tailings which are stored in purpose built tailings storage facilities.
We continuously monitor our tailings facilities for integrity and structural stability.
Flooding and seismic activity are the main natural phenomena that may affect them.
We have an ongoing assurance programme that specifically focuses on our tailings facilities.
Our assets continually review their waste management procedures and identify opportunities for improvement to minimise the impact of the waste we produce.
The increase in waste produced during 2017 was primarily due to increased stripping ratios at a number of assets and the reopening of an Australian coal operation.
Community investment spend US million 94tel Community complaints 1tel Sustainable development continued 2tel Total amount of hazardous and nonhazardous mineral waste generated million tonnes teltel Sulphur dioxide emissions thousand tonnes Glencore Annual Report 2017 explicitly aligns our security procedures with the United Nations Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights Voluntary Principles.
We also endorse the Voluntary Principles within our public Group Human Rights Policy.
As a member of the Voluntary Principles Initiative we are working with the member governments companies and NGOs to develop further our approach towards human rights.
We have implemented the Voluntary Principles at our assets with a high risk of human rights breaches since 2013.
Our Group Human Rights Policy applies to all Glencore operations and offices over which we have operational control.
The policy requires our operations to identify and assess risks of human rights breaches as part of our general risk assessment processes which include baseline and impact studies at existing operations and due diligence on new operations and business partners.
Assets conduct regular human rights training for their workforce.
This covers general human rights awareness during daytoday activities for our wider workforce as well as focused Voluntary Principles training for our security employees and contractors.
At operations with a relatively high risk of breaches of securityrelated human rights we require our own employees and private security contractors to undergo specific training on human rights aligned with the Voluntary Principles.
Where possible we also provide awareness raising sessions on the Voluntary Principles to public security forces deployed on our concessions.
All our operations are required to have in place grievance mechanisms that are accessible accountable and fair and that enable our stakeholders to raise concerns without fear of recrimination.
We align our grievance mechanisms with the requirements of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
As a member of the Voluntary Principles Initiative we are working with the member governments companies and NGOs to further develop our approach towards human rights.
During 2017 we received 1063 complaints from the communities living around our operations.
The majority of the complaints received related to three assets Chad EandP Mount Isa Mines and Pasar and concerned impacts from construction works Chad and emissions Mount Isa and Pasar.
Further details of such will be set out in our Sustainability Report.
We take all complaints seriously and continuously look for new ways to minimise our impacts.
Product stewardship Our products are vital to todays society creating devices used daily all over the world.
Our goal is to provide competitively priced commodities that meet our customers needs and contribute to global society while addressing any associated health societal and environmental risks.
We work with experts industry consortia and our peers to study the properties and impacts of our products throughout their lifecycles to spread understanding of our products.
We engage with a broad range of stakeholders including civil society governments and our customers to promote responsible commodity sourcing.
In 2017 Glencore did not produce process or market any conflict minerals originating from the conflict areas as defined under the DoddFrank Act tin tungsten tantalum and gold from the DRC and adjoining countries.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Not only do we have a diversified portfolio of commodities and services our presence in 90 marketing offices and 150 assets in more than 50 countries means our people are varied too.
In our Baar corporate office we employ people from 54 different nationalities with the gender balance approaching 40% female.
Details of senior management diversity is set out on page 90.
Our people We are proud of our people and our shared commitment to who we are what we do and to continuously improving the impact of our actions.
We recognise that our presence can bring significant economic benefits to our operating countries and the communities living near to our assets.
Where possible we employ locally and our training and skills development programmes support this ambition.
Reflecting the diversity of our business and workforce we tailor our training programmes to meet the skills needed in the communities that support our assets.
The success of our business is reliant on attracting and retaining the best people at every level.
We offer regular assessments of skill levels and competence with the aim of identifying good performance talent and potential and offering suitable rewards development opportunities and support.
We periodically review the skills of our current workforce against future business requirements and take the necessary steps to match available talent against our current and future requirements.
When appropriate employees receive training and skills development to support their advancement.
During the year a number of our regional businesses were recognised for their efforts to develop and support their employees our Australian copper business received industry awards recognising its outstanding achievement in vocational education and training our Canadian Raglan nickel mine was recognised by the Conseil du Patronat of Quebec for high rates of job retention.
This is particularly pleasing considering the harsh operating environment in the far north of Canada Our global rate of turnover was 9% similar to that experienced in 2016 10%.
Union relations We recognise and uphold the rights of our workforce to a safe workplace and collective representation and freedom of association.
We are committed to working honestly and openly with labour unions at all of our locations and treating all employees with respect.
While several of our assets successfully engaged in labour renegotiations during 2017 there were various instances where labour disputes occurred.
Although where we find ourselves in dispute with our labour force or a part of it we usually can find an acceptable solution through negotiation occasionally a situation can be challenging.
Our people Our employees and contractors are fundamental to our success.
At Glencore our people are at the heart of everything we do.
We foster an environment where our different backgrounds cultures and beliefs are supported and encouraged.
We recognise that diversity brings new ideas innovation and different ways of working and that mutual respect leads to a driven workforce dedicated to our common goals.
We respect and implement relevant local regulations and the International Labour Organization Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work.
Diversity
Reflecting the wide geographic footprint of our workplaces diversity is at the core of Glencores approach to its people.
Our diversity policy promotes a diverse and inclusive workforce.
We have established guiding principles to improve gender balance encourage and support diversity and to prevent discrimination of gender or any other diverse attribute.
Our principles support increased diversity awareness throughout our business.
Groupwide we employ 12037 women which is 14% of our employees.
Sustainable development continued Workforce numbers at year endtel excluding agriculture Employees 100614 95958 83679 Contractors 55854 58874 62298 Total workforce 156468 154832 145977 % of female employees Glencore Annual Report 2017 At CEZ a zinc refinery in Canada owned by the Noranda Income Fund NIF and in which Glencore has a 25% stake and operates members of the United Steelworkers Union USW went on strike in February.
The labour dispute resulted from the NIFs cost reduction initiatives to adjust to market terms after the conclusion of a 15year term where the NIF enjoyed the advantage of fixed processing fees.
In November the 371 members of the USW voted in favour of a new sixyear collective agreement.
The agreement was a compromise between the NIFs need to restructure its cost base and the USWs goal of keeping its members pension benefits unchanged.
During 2017 in Australia we negotiated new enterprise agreements EAs with local Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union CFMEU lodges at 13 of our coal operations.
At our Oaky North mine we have been negotiating with the CFMEU on a new agreement for nearly three years.
In early 2018 following an extended labour dispute we reached an inprinciple agreement with national state and local CFMEU leaders regrettably Oaky Norths union members voted against the proposed agreement that would have resulted in a return to work.
The inprinciple agreed EA positions the mine for a successful future.
Wellbeing
Our entire workforce shares responsibility for creating fostering and maintaining a culture of safe work.
Our goal is a trained competent and motivated workforce.
We actively promote and support health and wellness programmes for all of our workers.
Additionally confidential and voluntary counselling services are made available to our employees and their dependents to help resolve both personal and work related problems.
Our progress in 2017 During the year we continued to advance the perception of our employer brand.
We took steps to improve the consistency of our employee communications to address transparently public concerns and to engage actively with interested stakeholders.
Together these efforts are reinforcing Glencores position as an employer of choice in the main markets in which we operate.
Our Fundamental Values Our objectives and policies towards our people reflect our values
Our first priority in the workplace is to protect the health and wellbeing of all our people.
We take a proactive approach to health and safety our goal is continuous improvement in the prevention of occupational disease and injuries
Our approach fosters the highest level of professionalism personal ownership and entrepreneurial spirit in all our people while never compromising on their safety and wellbeing.
This is important to our success and the superior returns we aim to achieve for all our stakeholders.
Simplicity
We aim to achieve our key deliverables efficiently as a path to industryleading returns while maintaining a clear focus on excellence quality sustainability and continuous improvement in everything we do.
Responsibility
We recognise that our work can have an impact on our society and the environment.
We care about our performance in relation to environmental protection human rights and health and safety.
Openness
We value open relationships and communication based on integrity cooperation transparency and mutual benefit with our people our customers our suppliers governments and society in general.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Sustainable development continued
Glencores success is founded on a reputation built over many years as being an honest and reliable business partner.
By upholding our commitment to ethical business practices we seek to maintain this reputation and meet our longterm objectives through being regarded as a business partner of choice.
Our Approach We seek to maintain a culture of ethical behaviour and compliance throughout the Group rather than simply performing the minimum required by laws and regulations.
We will not knowingly assist any third party in breaching the law or participate in any criminal fraudulent or corrupt practice in any country.
To support this we have implemented a Group compliance programme that includes a range of policies procedures guidelines training and monitoring.
Our permanent and temporary employees directors and officers as well as contractors where they are under a relevant contractual obligation must comply with our compliance policies procedures and guidelines that apply to their work in addition to complying with applicable laws and regulations.
When we enter into joint ventures where we are not the operator we seek to influence our partners to adopt similar policies to ours.
Group Policy Framework Our policy framework encompasses our values Code of Conduct and policies procedures and guidelines on various compliance topics including anticorruption sanctions antimoney laundering the prevention of fraud market abuse the prevention of the facilitation of tax evasion antitrust data protection and conflict of interest.
This framework reflects our commitment to uphold good business practices and to meet or exceed applicable laws and external requirements.
We emphasise their importance in our business activities including recruitment induction supplier briefings and external engagement activities.
Training and awareness on our policies procedures and guidelines as well as strong leadership are critical components of our compliance programme.
They ensure our employees understand the behaviour expected of them and provide guidance on how they can identify and practically approach legal and ethical dilemmas in their daily work lives.
Compliance officers are full time compliance employees who provide dedicated compliance support to the business.
Compliance coordinators guided by the Group compliance team take on the role in addition to their primary role.
They support our employees in daytoday business considerations particularly those seeking advice on ethical lawful behaviour or policy implementation.
The Group currently has 1 1 1 compliance officers and coordinators.
Employees may access the telephone email and postal contact details of our compliance officers and coordinators via the Group intranet their local intranet and notice boards.
Employees can access the compliance policies procedures and guidelines through various channels including via the compliance team the Group intranet or local intranet of the specific asset at which they work.
Our managers and supervisors are responsible for ensuring employees understand and comply with the policies and procedures.
We monitor and test their implementation on a regular basis.
Employees and contractors who have access to a work computer must confirm their awareness and understanding of our compliance requirements electronically every year.
Certain assets implement their own policies and procedures in addition to those of the Group.
These are designed to address specific local requirements while being consistent with our policy framework.
In accordance with our Code of Conduct anybody working for Glencore who breaches the law the Code of Conduct or other policies or procedures may face disciplinary action including dismissal.
In 2017 Glencore dismissed 284 employees 2016 318 and 2015 523 for breaching the Code of Conduct.
The dismissals predominantly related to failures to follow safety instructions or policies or misappropriation of company property.
The Group Business Ethics Committee BEC The BEC comprises Glencores CEO senior management and members of the compliance team as well as external counsel.
The BEC considers compliance issues relevant to the Group and reviews and approves our policies procedures and guidelines.
The BEC reports to the Audit
The policies procedures and guidelines approved by the BEC are implemented by our compliance team.
The BEC meets two times per year and its subcommittee meets four times per year to consider in more detail matters addressed by the BEC.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Training and Awareness Our employees receive induction sessions and ongoing training on a range of compliance issues.
In 2017 31737 employees and contractors 2016 29569 completed our Code of Conduct elearning which includes guidance on raising concerns.
In addition 22872 2016 201 19 completed elearning training on our global anticorruption policy which includes guidance on giving and receiving gifts and entertainment.
The target audience of the Code of Conduct eLearning is employees with regular access to a work computer and the training on anticorruption targets those whose function may require them to interact with third parties.
For those employees who do not have regular access to a work computer we provide training in other ways including induction sessions preshift general training and toolbox talks.
In addition compliance officers and coordinators conduct facetoface training for relevant employees to raise awareness about compliance risks related to their functions and to train them on Glencores compliance policies and procedures.
Monitoring
As part of the Group compliance programme we conduct monitoring to test and verify compliance with the Group policies procedures and guidelines and with the laws and regulations applicable to Glencores marketing and industrial activities.
This entails performing periodic and ad hoc testing reviews in accordance with the corporate testing and monitoring plans analysing documents and procedures and in the case of findings collaborating with the relevant marketing office or industrial operation to determine the most appropriate course of action including any required corrective action.
Bribery and corruption Glencores Global AntiCorruption Policy is available on the Group website.
It contains our clear position on bribery and corruption the offering paying authorising soliciting or accepting of bribes is unacceptable.
We conduct analysis for corruption risks within our businesses and seek to address these risks through policies and procedures training and awareness raising monitoring and controls.
Glencore is a member of the Partnering Against Corruption Initiative PACI.
Members collaborate on collective action and share leading practice in organisational compliance.
The initiative is based on a commitment to zero tolerance on bribery and implementation of practical and effective anticorruption programmes.
We are also an associate member of the Maritime AntiCorruption Network MACN.
The Group has also implemented the Third Party Due Diligence Procedures which seek to ensure that our third party relationships are in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and the Global AntiCorruption Policy.
The procedures set out a process whereby circumstances that may pose a corruption risk are reviewed addressed and taken into consideration when deciding whether and on which conditions to proceed with a third party relationship particularly intermediaries jointventures and service providers on a risk basis.
Sanctions
Glencore is committed to respecting upholding and complying with all sanctions applicable to our business and to all transactions in which we engage regardless of our role or location.
The applicability and scope of the applicable sanctions can differ per transaction jurisdiction and other factors.
The Glencore Global Sanctions Policy sets our approach to sanctions and how we seek to comply with applicable sanctions and appropriately manage sanctions risk.
The Glencore Sanctions Procedures outline the steps and procedures we take to ensure compliance with the Global Sanctions Policy.
Prevention of Facilitation of Tax Evasion The Group does not tolerate tax evasion of any kind including facilitation of tax evasion by any person employed or contracted to the Group or acting on its behalf and has procedures which seek to prevent any such facilitation.
Reporting Misconduct If one of our people encounters a situation that appears to breach our policy framework that individual must raise this promptly with his or her immediate supervisor or manager.
Alternatively the individual may raise the concern with another appropriate manager compliance officer or coordinator or a member of the BEC.
If a concern remains unresolved through local channels it can be referred to the Groups Raising Concerns programme.
In countries with low levels of internet access we have telephone numbers made known to our people via notice boards.
Those who call or use the online form may choose to raise their concerns anonymously.
Nobody working for Glencore suffers demotion penalty or any other disciplinary action for raising a concern in good faith.
In 2017 the Raising Concerns programme received 183 2016 153 reports from employees contractors or third parties regarding situations in which Group policies appeared to be breached.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Key performance indicators Our financial and nonfinancial key performance indicators KPIs provide a measure of our performance against the key drivers of our strategy Financial key performance indicators Adjusted EBITEBITDA US milliontel
EBIT
Definition
Adjusted EBITEBITDA provide insight into our overall business performance a combination of cost management seizing market opportunities and growth and are the corresponding flow drivers towards our objective of achieving industry leading returns.
Adjusted EBIT is the net result of revenue less cost of goods sold and selling and administrative expenses plus share of income from associates and joint ventures dividend income and the attributable share of Adjusted EBIT of relevant material associates and joint ventures which are accounted for internally by means of proportionate consolidation excluding Significant items Adjusted EBITDA consists of Adjusted EBIT plus depreciation and amortisation including the related Proportionate adjustments.
2017 performance Adjusted EBITDA was 14762 million and Adjusted EBIT was 8552 million increases of 44% and 118% respectively compared to 2016 primarily driven by higher commodity prices.
Market sentiment and commodity prices continued to improve over 2017 following the cyclical lows reached over H1 2016.
The positive impact of the higher prices on Adjusted EBITDA was somewhat tempered by moderate cost inflation and the effects of a weaker US dollar against most producer country currencies.
Funds from operations FFO US million 11tel 2015
Funds from operations FFO is a measure that reflects our ability to generate cash for investment debt servicing and distributions to shareholders.
It comprises cash provided by operating activities before working capital changes less tax and net interest payments plus dividends received related Proportionate adjustments and Significant items mainly comprising movements in coal related marktomarket items.
2017 performance FFO of 11.6 billion was 49% up on 2016 reflecting the improved Adjusted EBITDA noted above and a tax payments cycle reflective of last years lower earnings.
Net fundingNet debt and FFO to net debt US million 1 0673 Net debt Net fundingtel FFO to net debt %
Net fundingNet debt demonstrates how our debt is being managed and is an important factor in ensuring we maintain an investment grade rating status and a competitive cost of capital.
Net debt is defined as total current and noncurrent borrowings less cash and cash equivalents readily marketable inventories and related Proportionate adjustments.
The net debt assumed in the Volcan acquisition completed midNovember 2017 has also been adjusted to provide a more consistent and comparative analysis but mostly to reflect the Groups relatively low 23.3% economic ownership compared to its 63.0% voting interest in this still fully ringfenced listed entity with its standalone independent and separate capital structure.
The relationship of FFO to net debt is an indication of our financial flexibility and strength.
2017 performance Net funding as at 31 December 2017 increased by 279 million to 32898 million whereas net debt net funding less readily marketable inventories decreased by 4853 million over the year to 10673 million.
The latter measurement reflecting the increase in readily marketable inventories 5132 million of the working capital outflow of 5245 million over the year due to a combination of increased commodity prices and further investments into the strengthening commodity market environment.
FFO to Net debt more than doubled to 108.3% in line with higher FFO and lower Net debt over the period.
Net income attributable to equity holders US million 4964tel
Net income attributable to equity shareholders is a measure of our ability to generate shareholder returns.
2017 performance Net income attributable to equity holders increased from a profit of 1379 million in 2016 to a profit of 5777 million in 2017 reflecting the Adjusted EBIT increase described above as well as lower impairment charges net of gains on disposals.
Refer to APMs section on page 197 for definition and reconciliations.
Links to strategy Links to strategy Links to strategy Links to strategy Glencore Annual Report 2017 Nonfinancial key performance indicators Safety Total recordable injury frequency rate TRIFR per million hours workedtel
We believe that every workrelated incident illness and injury is preventable and we are committed to providing a safe workplace.
TRIFR is the sum of fatalities lost time injuries restricted work injuries and medical treatment injuries per million hours worked.
The metric represents all injuries that require medical treatment beyond first aid.
2017 performance We are saddened to report that in 2017 nine people lost their lives at our operations 2016 16 people.
All loss of life is unacceptable and we are determined to eliminate fatalities across our Group.
Our TRIFR is 3.09 per million hours worked an improvement over 4.05 recorded in 2016.
We remain on track to meet our longterm TRIFR goal of a 50% reduction by 2020 using our 2014 TRIFR of 5.02 as a baseline.
Water withdrawn million m tel 2015 data is not directly comparable to later periods due to changes in data reporting methodology.
Definition
Water withdrawal is a measure of our operational resource efficiency.
Our operations have an ongoing responsibility to increase the reuse of processed and use of recycled waste water in order to reduce our impact on local water supplies.
Recycled water is predominantly used in place of fresh water for processes such as dust suppression.
2017 performance In 2017 we withdrew 924 million m of water 2016 971 million m We are committed to managing our impact on water resources responsibly.
We prioritise efficient water use water reuserecycling responsible waste water disposal and maintaining any equipment that may pose a hazard to water quality.
Scope 1 Scope 2 location based Scope 1 emissions are measured in CO 2e Carbon emissions million tonnes CO
Our CO2 emissions reporting is separated into Scope 1 and Scope 2  locationbased emissions.
Scope 1 includes emissions from combustion in owned or controlled boilers furnaces and vehicles vessels and coal seam emissions.
Scope 2  locationbased emissions applies the grid emission factor to all our purchased electricity regardless of specific renewable electricity contracts.
We monitor and report both the direct and indirect emissions generated by the industrial activities entities and facilities where we have operational control.
2017 performance During 2017 we emitted 21.6 million tonnes CO2e of Scope 1 direct emissions.
The improvement over 2016 is mainly as a result of lower coal seam emissions in our Australian coal operations.
We emitted 11.9 million tonnes CO2 of Scope 2 location based indirect emissions.
The small reduction in Scope 2 emissions was caused by the closure of Sherwin Alumina and some energy efficiency gains in our Ferroalloys smelters.
Community investment spend US milliontel
Community investments are our contributions to and financial support of the broader communities in the regions where we operate.
Funds are set aside to support initiatives that benefit communities and local sustainable development.
We also make inkind contributions such as equipment and management.
We support programmes for community development enterprise and job creation health education and the environment.
2017 performance In 2017 the funds we made available for community investments were 90 million an increase on the amount invested in 2016 84 million.
Our community development programmes are an integral part of our community and stakeholder engagement strategies and our investments supported various initiatives in all of our operating regions.
Nonfinancial indicators includes information and data from our industrial activities including only assets where we have operational control and excluding investment marketing and holding companies.
The community investments spend also includes our marketing activities.
For some 2016 and 2015 indicators data has been restated to reflect improvements in our data collection analysis and validation systems.
Links to strategy Links to strategy Links to strategy Links to strategy Our strategy for a sustainable future Page 20 Strategic priorities Integration of sustainability throughout our business Maintain a robust and flexible balance sheet Focus on cost control and operational efficiencies Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Principal risks and uncertainties Glencore is exposed to a variety of risks that can have an impact on our business and prospects future performance financial position liquidity asset values growth potential sustainable development and reputation Therefore risk management is one of the key responsibilities of the Board and its Audit and HSEC Committees.
Our principal risks and uncertainties  whether under our control or not  are highly dynamic and our assessment and our responses to them are critical to our future business and prospects Our risk management framework identifies and manages risk in a way that is supportive of our strategic priorities of opportunistically deploying capital while protecting our future financial security and flexibility.
Our approach towards risk management is framed by our ongoing understanding of the risks that we are exposed to our risk appetite and how these risks change over time.
The Board assesses and approves our overall risk appetite monitors our risk exposure and sets the Groupwide limits which are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
This process is supported by the Audit and HSEC Committees whose roles include evaluating and monitoring the risks inherent in their respective areas as described on pages 9293.
The current assessment of our principal risks according to exposure and impact is detailed on the following pages.
In accordance with UK Financial Reporting Council guidance we define a principal risk as a risk or combination of risks that can seriously affect the performance future prospects or reputation of
These include those risks which would threaten the business model future performance solvency or liquidity of the Group.
We look at risk appetite from the context of severity of the consequences should the risk materialise factors influencing the risk and the Companys ability to mitigate it.
In compiling this assessment we have indicated the impact and likelihood of these risks in comparison with a year ago in the chart below.
The commentary on the risks in this section should be read in conjunction with the explanatory text under Understanding the information on risks which is set out on the following page.
The natural diversification of our portfolio of commodities geographies currencies assets and liabilities is a source of mitigation for some of the risks we face.
In addition through our governance processes and our proactive management approach we seek to mitigate where possible the impacts of certain risks should they materialise.
In particular our liquidity risk management policy requires us to maintain via a 3 billion minimum prescribed level sufficient cash and cash equivalents and other sources of committed funding available to meet anticipated and unanticipated funding needs making use of credit enhancement products such as letters of credit insurance policies and bank guarantees and imposing limits on open accounts extended our management of marketing risk including daily analysis of Group value at risk VaR 2017 developments The following remain the leading risks i.
Group faces Reduction in commodity prices there has been a general rise in commodity prices over the past 18 months.
Notwithstanding these firmer price conditions we remain mindful that underlying markets can be volatile and we continue to focus on the partially controllable element of the margin equation costs.
Any significant downturn in the current commodity price environment especially in zinc copper or coal would have a severe drag on our financial performance.
As a result this continues to be the Groups foremost risk.
Fluctuations in supply of or demand for commodities the depression of commodity prices reflects the actual perceived or prospective increases in supply of commodities andor reductions in demand.
Fluctuations in currency exchange rates the rise in commodity prices noted above is associated with a generally weaker U. producer country currencies.
Although strong producer currencies are generally detrimental over the short term to our locally denominated operating costs this can be outweighed by stronger Glencore Annual Report 2017 world economic conditions and the associated increases in commodity prices that may derive from this.
Additionally currency rates can change for political and economic reasons unlinked to the commodities markets which could result in a mismatched impact of pricing and currency movements resulting in income volatility.
Health safety environment including catastrophic hazards a serious failure in safety health and environmental management could result in an operational emergency or catastrophe injuries or fatalities and a negative impact on our corporate reputation.
In particular catastrophic hazards such as tailings leakages and collapses of pit walls or underground tunnels represent significant unquantifiable risks for resources companies.
During
2017 the HSEC Committee continued to concentrate on the management and mitigation of the Groups catastrophic hazards  see page 100.
Liquidity risk while our net debt has further reduced in 2017 we remain cognisant that access to credit is vital and that debt markets can be volatile.
Changes in risk exposure and analysis As a result of the strong economic growth momentum seen over the past 18 months and the repositioning of our balance sheet and reduction in the cost and capex structures of our portfolio the probability of liquidity risk and counterparty credit and performance exposures materialising has reduced.
Climate change initiatives continue to be at the forefront during 2017.
Many countries began to implement their commitments to address climate change e. industries.
These events have led to an increase compared to 2016 both in the probability of risk exposure and its impact related to emissions and climate change.
In reassessing our risk analysis we have concluded that cyber should now be a standalone risk sourcing freight storage infrastructure and logistics related risks no longer merit inclusion as a separate risk and we have combined development and operating risks and cost control as Operating and cost risks as they are largely interrelated.
2017 developments and overview of principal risks and uncertainties
Risk impact
Moderate
Major
Severe
External risks Reductions in commodity prices Fluctuations in the supply of or demand for the commodities in which we operate Fluctuations in currency exchange rates Geopolitical risk including social unrest Laws regulations enforcement permits and licences to operate Liquidity risk Business risks Counterparty credit and performance Operating and cost risks Cyber risk Sustainability risks Emissions and climate change Community relations and human rights Skills availability and retention Health safety environment including potential catastrophes Indicates change in Impact Moderate Minor Major Severe Possible Unlikely Likely Almost certain
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Principal risks and uncertainties continued There are many risks and uncertainties which have the potential to significantly impact our business including competitive economic political legal regulatory social business and financial risk.
The order in which these risks and uncertainties appear does not necessarily reflect the likelihood of their occurrence or the relative magnitude of their potential material adverse effect on our business.
We have sought to provide examples of specific risks.
However in every case these do not attempt to be an exhaustive list.
These principal risks and uncertainties should be considered in connection with any forward looking statements in this document as explained on page 220.
Identifying quantifying and managing risk is complex and challenging.
Although it is our policy to identify and where appropriate and practical actively manage risk our policies and procedures may not adequately identify monitor and quantify all risks.
This section describes our attempts to manage balance or offset risk.
Risk is however by its very nature uncertain and inevitably events may lead to our policies and procedures not having a material mitigating effect on the negative impacts of the occurrence of a particular event.
Our scenario planning and stress testing may accordingly prove to be optimistic particularly in situations where material negative events occur in close proximity.
Since many risks are connected our analysis should be read against all risks to which it may be relevant.
In this section we have sought to update our explanations reflecting our current outlook.
Mostly this entails emphasising certain risks more strongly than other risks rather than the elimination of or creation of risks.
Certain investors may also be familiar with the risk factors that are published in the Group debt or equity prospectuses or listing documents.
These provide in part some differing descriptions of our principal risks.
A recent example is available on our website at httpsitewhowearegovernance Understanding the information on risks In addition more information on our risks is available in the relevant sections of our website.
To provide for concise text where we hold minority interests in certain businesses although these entities are not generally subsidiaries the interests are mostly taken as being referred to in analysing these risks and business refers to these and any business of the Group where we refer to natural hazards events of nature or similar phraseology we are referring to matters such as earthquake flood severe weather and other natural phenomena where we refer to mitigation we do not intend to suggest that we eliminate the risk but rather it shows the Groups attempt to reduce or manage the risk.
Our mitigation of risks will usually include the taking out of insurance where it is customary and economic to do so this section should be read as a whole  often commentary in one section is relevant to other risks commodityies will usually refer to those commodities which the Group produces or sells law includes regulation of any type risk includes uncertainty and hazard and together with material adverse effect on the business should be understood as a negative change which can seriously affect the performance future prospects or reputation of the
These include those risks which would threaten the business model future performance reputation solvency or liquidity of the Group a reference to a note is a note to the 2017 financial statements a reference to the sustainability report is our 2017 sustainability report to be published in May 2018 Longerterm viability In accordance with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Board has assessed the prospects of the Groups viability over the fouryear period from 1 January 2018.
This period is consistent with the Groups established annual business planning and forecasting processes and cycle which is subject to review and approval each year by the Board.
The fouryear plan considers Glencores Adjusted EBITDA Capital expenditure Funds from operations FFO and Net debt and the key financial ratios of Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA and FFO to Net debt over the forecasted years and incorporates stress tests to simulate the potential impacts of exposure to the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
These scenarios included a prolonged downturn in the price and demand of commodities most impacting Glencores operations foreign exchange movements to which the Group is exposed as a result of its global operations consideration of the potential impact of adverse movements in macroeconomic assumptions and their effect on certain key financial KPIs and ratios which could increase the Groups access to or cost of funding The scenarios were assessed taking into account current risk appetite and any mitigating actions Glencore could take as required in response to the potential realisation of any of the stressed scenarios.
Based on the results of the related analysis the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the fouryear period of this assessment.
They also believe that the review period of four years is appropriate having regard to the Groups business model strategy principal risks and uncertainties and viability.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite External risks Reductions in commodity prices Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
Outside of the inherent risk of commodity prices on unmined reserves resources flat price exposure on extracted or trading related positions is to be hedged.
The revenue and earnings of substantial parts of our industrial activities and to a lesser extent our marketing activities are dependent upon prevailing commodity prices.
Commodity prices are influenced by a number of external factors including the supply of and demand for commodities speculative activities by market participants global political and economic conditions related industry cycles and production costs in major producing countries.
A significant downturn in the price of commodities generally results in a decline in our profitability and could potentially result in impairment and balance sheet constraints.
It is especially harmful to profitability in the industrial activities which are more directly exposed to price risk due to the higher level of fixed costs.
The dependence of the Group especially our industrial business on commodity prices make this the Groups foremost risk.
See the Chief Executive Officers review on page 4 and the financial review on page 52.
Any economic developments particularly impacting China and other fast growing countries could lead to reductions in demand for and consequently prices of commodities.
Diversification of our portfolio of commodities geographies currencies assets and liabilities.
Government policy decisions can be very important e. see Emissions and climate change below.
New or improved energy production or technologies can also reduce the demand for some commodities such as coal.
Also see our longerterm viability analysis above and the business review on page 60.
Fluctuations in the supply of or demand for the commodities in which we operate Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
Although an inherent risk in the extractive and marketing industries we seek to ensure this risk is minimised through scale of operations and diversity of product.
We are dependent on the expected volumes of supply or demand for commodities which can vary for many reasons such as competitor supply policies changes in resource availability government policies and regulation costs of production global and regional economic conditions demand in end markets for products in which the commodities are used.
These also include technological developments e. and demand for commodities.
Furthermore changes in expected supply and demand conditions impact the expected future prices and thus the price curve of each commodity.
Future demand for certain commodities might decline fossil fuels whereas others might increase such as copper cobalt and nickel for their use in electric vehicles and batteries taking into consideration the greening of the global economy.
This risk is currently prevalent in various commodities such as steel coal and oil.
In particular many analysts believe that demand for coal will reduce sooner than previously expected due to significant cost reductions in renewable capacity and greater efficiencies from coal power plants.
Also see Emissions and climate change below.
Market price responses to such changes are neither instantaneous nor perfectly calibrated nor can the sustained implementation of such policies be certain.
Diversification of our portfolio of commodities geographies currencies assets and liabilities.
Making sure we are prepared for the shift in commodity demand by putting a special focus on the parts of the business that will potentially grow with the anticipated increase of electric vehicles and battery production and closely monitor fossil fuel particularly thermal coal demands.
See the Chief Executive Officers review on
Strategic priorities Integration of sustainability throughout our business Maintain a robust and flexible balance sheet Focus on cost control and operational efficiencies Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite Fluctuations in currency exchange rates Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
Where possible foreign exchange exposure to non operating foreign exchange risk are to be hedged.
The vast majority of our transactions are denominated in U. against the U. dollar.
A depreciation in the value of the U. in U. dollar terms.
The main currency exchange rate exposure is through our industrial assets as a large proportion of the costs incurred by these operations is denominated in the currency of the country in which each asset is located.
The largest of these exposures are to the currencies listed on page 61.
Currency fluctuations tend to move in symmetry with those in commodity prices and supply and demand fundamentals as noted above such that decreases in commodity prices are generally associated with increases in the U. local producer currencies and vice versa.
If this occurs then it is detrimental to us through higher equivalent U. operating costs at the relevant operations.
This negative however would usually be offset to some extent by the increases in commodity prices which had caused this change.
In respect of commodity purchase and sale transactions denominated in currencies other than U. a forward exchange contract.
From time to time the Group may hedge a portion of its currency exposures and requirements in an attempt to limit any adverse effect of exchange rate fluctuations.
Geopolitical risk including social unrest Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite High.
We operate in countries with less developed political regimes.
To be considered a truly diversified commodities group operations in these jurisdictions are required.
We operate and own assets in a large number of geographic regions and countries some of which are categorised as developing complex or having unstable political or social climates.
As a result we are exposed to a wide range of political economic regulatory social and tax environments.
The Group transacts business in locations where it is exposed to a risk of overt or effective expropriation  resource nationalism continues to be a challenging issue in many countries.
Our operations may also be affected by political and economic instability including terrorism civil disorder violent crime war and social unrest.
Increased scrutiny by governments and tax authorities in pursuit of perceived aggressive tax structuring by multinational companies has elevated potential tax exposures for the Group.
Policies or laws in the countries in which we do business may change in a manner that may be adverse for us even those with stable political environments e. royalties or resource rent taxes.
We have no control over changes to policies laws and taxes.
The OECD tax reporting initiative on Base Erosion and Profit Sharing BEPS is now effective and in 2018 the Group will report for the first time with regard to the 2017 tax year.
The continued operation of our existing assets and future plans are in part dependent upon broad support our social licence to operate and a healthy relationship with the respective local communities  see further Community Relations and Skills availability and retention concerning workforce disputes.
The Groups industrial assets are diversified across various countries.
Also the Group continues to actively engage with governmental authorities in light of upcoming changes and developments in legislation and enforcement policies.
See map on page 3 which sets out our global operational footprint.
In 2017 we also published our second Payments to Governments report.
This detailed total government contributions in 2016 of around 4 billion.
We also continue to be an active member of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative EITI.
Principal risks and uncertainties continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite Laws regulations enforcement permits and licences to operate Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Medium.
The Group maintains programmes which seek to ensure that we comply with or exceed the laws and external requirements applicable to our operations and products.
However some of our industrial activities are located in countries that are categorised as developing complex or having political or social climates andor where corruption is generally understood to exist.
We are exposed to extensive laws including those relating to bribery and corruption sanctions taxation antitrust financial markets regulation environmental protection use of hazardous substances product safety and dangerous goods regulations development of natural resources licences over resources exploration production and postclosure reclamation employment of labour and occupational health and safety standards and preservation.
The terms attaching to any permit or licence to operate may also be onerous and obtaining these and other approvals which may be revoked can be particularly onerous to comply with.
Furthermore in certain countries title to land and rights and permits in respect of resources are not always clear or may be challenged.
The legal system and dispute resolution mechanisms in some countries may be uncertain so that we may be unable to enforce our understanding of our rights.
Successful lawsuits based upon damage resulting from operations could lead to the imposition of substantial penalties the cessation of operations compensation and remedial andor preventative orders.
Moreover the costs associated with legal compliance including regulatory permits are substantial and increasing.
Any changes to these laws or their more stringent enforcement or restrictive interpretation could cause additional significant expenditure to be incurred or cause suspensions of operations and delays in the development of industrial assets.
Failure to obtain or renew a necessary permit or the occurrence of other disputes could mean that we would be unable to proceed with the development or continued operation of an asset andor impede our ability to develop new industrial properties.
As a diversified sourcing marketing and distribution company conducting complex transactions globally we are exposed to the risks of fraud corruption sanctions breaches and other unlawful activities both internally and externally.
Our marketing operations are large in scale which may make fraudulent or accidental transactions difficult to detect.
In addition some of our industrial activities are located in countries such as the DRC where corruption is generally understood to exist.
Corruption and sanctions risks remain highly relevant for businesses operating in international markets as shown by recent regulatory enforcement actions both inside and outside the resources sector.
Since 2007 the Group has had various business dealings with entities associated with Dan Gertler in connection with its copper assets in the DRC.
In December 2017 the United States government designated Dan Gertler and affiliated companies as Specially Designated Nationals SDNs thereby imposing blocking sanctions on them and companies owned 50% or more by them under Executive Order 13818 titled Blocking the Property of Persons Involved in Serious Human Rights Abuses or Corruption.
The Group has preexisting contractual obligations to make royalty and pasdeporte payments in respect of KCC and Mutanda to certain of these companies which predate the SDN designation and which arose when the companies acquired rights from
The Group has not made any payment to the companies since the SDN designation.
The Group is still considering how best to mitigate its risks in relation to these obligations.
In January 2018 the DRC parliament adopted a revised Mining Code.
This includes significant increases in royalties taxes government ownership requirements and repatriation restrictions and terminates retroactively the 10year stability clause that exists in the current Mining Code.
If the revised Mining Code is promulgated and implemented in this form it would have a significant impact on the investments of the Group in the DRC and their value.
During the year a restatement of past financial statements at Katanga Mining Limited a subsidiary of the Group was required and the Ontario Securities Commission is investigating various matters relating to Katanga see pages 92 and 97.
As KCC Katangas 75% held main operating subsidiary did not rectify a capital deficiency by 31 December 2017 as required by DRC corporate laws an interested party may commence legal action before DRC judicial authorities.
Katanga continues to assess options to address the capital deficiency including options which may partially adversely impact its entitlement to KCCs future cash flows.
We seek to ensure full compliance through our commitment to complying with or exceeding the laws and external requirements applicable to our operations and products and through monitoring of legislative requirements engagement with government and regulators and compliance with the terms of permits and licences.
We keep informed of new regulations and legal requirements.
We seek to manage the risk of breaching applicable laws and external requirements through our policy framework which is described on page 91.
However there can be no assurance that such policies procedures and controls will adequately protect the Group against fraud corruption sanctions breaches or other unlawful activities.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite Liquidity risk Risk movement in 2017 Decrease Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
It is the Groups policy to operate a BBB rating or above balance sheet and to ensure a minimum level of cash or committed funding is available at any given time.
Our failure to access funds liquidity would severely limit our ability to engage in desired activities.
Liquidity risk is the risk that we are unable to meet our payment obligations when due or are unable on an ongoing basis to borrow funds in the market at an acceptable price to fund our commitments.
While we adjust our minimum internal liquidity threshold from time to time in response to changes in market conditions this minimum internal liquidity target may be breached due to circumstances we are unable to control such as general market disruptions sharp movements in commodity prices or an operational problem that affects our suppliers customers or ourselves.
A lack of liquidity may mean that we will not have sufficient funds available for our marketing and industrial activities both of which employ substantial amounts of capital.
If we do not have funds available for these activities then they will decrease.
Note 25 details our financial and capital risk management including liquidity risk.
The Financial Review on page 52 sets out the Groups Net Funding and Net Debt in 2017 which are both currently within our targets.
We also issued during the year the following bonds with applicable coupon and redemption dates 500 million 3% 2022 500 million 3.875% 2027 and 1.0 billion 4% 2027.
While we have delevered and repositioned the Groups balance sheet in the past two years we remain cognisant that access to credit is vital and that market conditions can change rapidly.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group had available undrawn committed credit facilities and cash amounting to 12.9 billion 31 December 2016 16.7 billion comfortably ahead of our 3 billion minimum prescribed level.
Standard and Poors and Moodys latest assessments for the Companys investment grade credit are BBB positive outlook and Baa2 stable respectively.
Business risks Counterparty credit and performance Risk movement in 2017 Decrease Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
Where possible credit exposure are to be covered through credit mitigation products.
Financial assets consisting principally of receivables and advances derivative instruments and longterm advances and loans can expose us to concentrations of credit risk.
Furthermore we are subject to non performance risk by our suppliers customers and hedging counterparties in particular via our marketing activities.
Nonperformance by suppliers customers and hedging counterparties may occur and cause losses in a range of situations such as a significant increase in commodity prices resulting in suppliers being unwilling to honour their contractual commitments to sell commodities at preagreed prices a significant reduction in commodity prices resulting in customers being unwilling or unable to honour their contractual commitments to purchase commodities at preagreed prices suppliers subject to prepayment or hedging counterparties may find themselves unable to honour their contractual obligations due to financial distress or other reasons We monitor the credit quality of our counterparties and seek to reduce the risk of customer nonperformance by requiring credit support from creditworthy financial institutions including making extensive use of credit enhancement products such as letters of credit bank guarantees and insurance policies.
Specific credit risk policy rules apply to open account risk with an established threshold for referral of credit positions by departments to central management.
In addition note 25 details our financial and capital risk management approach.
Principal risks and uncertainties continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite Operating and cost risks Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
It is the Companys strategic objective to focus on cost control and operating efficiencies.
Our industrial activities are subject to numerous risks and hazards normally associated with the initiation development operation andor expansion of natural resource projects many of which are beyond our control.
These include unanticipated variations in grade and other geological problems so that anticipated or stated reserves may not conform to expectations.
Other examples include natural hazards processing problems technical malfunctions unavailability of materials and equipment unreliability andor constraints of infrastructure industrial accidents labour force challenges disasters protests force majeure factors cost overruns delays in permitting or other regulatory matters vandalism and crime.
The development and operating of assets may lead to future upward revisions in estimated costs delays or other operational difficulties or damage to properties or facilities.
This may cause production to be reduced or to cease and may further result in a decrease in production personal injury or death third party damage or loss or require greater infrastructure spending.
Also the realisation of these risks could require significant and additional capital and operating expenditures.
Some of the Groups interests in industrial assets do not constitute controlling stakes.
Although the Group has various structures in place which seek to protect its position where it does not exercise control these other shareholders may have interests or goals that are inconsistent with ours.
They may take action contrary to the Groups interests or be unable or unwilling to fulfil their obligations.
Infrastructure availability remains a key risk e.
Democratic Republic of Congo.
We are continuing to seek longterm power solutions via the Inga dam refurbishment.
Development and operating risks and hazards are managed through our continuous development status evaluation and reporting processes and ongoing assessment reporting and communication of the risks that affect our operations along with updates to the risk register.
We publish quarterly our production results and annually our assessment of reserves and resources based on available drilling and other data sources.
Conversion of resources to reserves and eventually reserves to production is an ongoing process that takes into account technical and operational challenges economics of the particular commodities concerned and the impact on the communities in which we operate.
Local cost control measures are complemented by global procurement that leverages our scale to seek to achieve favourable terms on highconsumption materials such as fuel explosives and tyres.
Details of the significant impairments recorded during the year are contained in note 5.
Deterioration in the price outlook or operating difficulties may result in additional impairments.
Cyber risk Risk movement in 2017 New principal risk Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
Where possible cyber exposures are to be mitigated through proactive monitoring and routing test to confirm security of systems.
A cyber security breach incident or failure of Glencores IT systems could disrupt our businesses result in the disclosure of confidential information damage our reputation and create significant financial and legal exposures.
Although Glencore invests heavily to monitor maintain and regularly upgrade its systems processes and networks absolute security is not possible.
Cyber risks for firms have increased significantly in recent years owing in part to the proliferation of new technologies the use of the internet and the increasing degree of connectivity telecommunications technologies and major increase in cybercrime.
Our activities depend on technology for industrial production efficient operations environmental management health and safety communications transaction processing and risk management.
We see the increasing convergence of IT and OT Operational Technology networks that will create new risks and demand additional management time and focus.
We also depend on third parties in long supply chains that are exposed to the same cyber risks but which are largely outside our control.
We have invested in global IT security platforms in order to seek to proactively monitor and manage our cyber risks.
We conduct routine third party penetration tests to confirm the security of our systems.
Our designated IT Security Council sets the global cyber security strategy conducts regular risk assessments and designs targeted cyber security packages that seek to thwart emerging malware virus vulnerabilities etc.
Our incident response team is established and responsible to respond in the event of any major cyber incident.
We conduct ongoing training of our employees in order to raise the awareness of cyber security threats.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite Sustainability risks Emissions and climate change Risk movement in 2017 Increase Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite High.
Our business involves mining and consuming fossil fuels along with processing minerals which inevitably entails emitting harmful emissions.
Our global presence exposes us to a number of jurisdictions in which regulations have been or are being considered to reduce emissions.
The likely effect of these changes will be to increase the cost for fossil fuels impose levies for emissions and increase costs for monitoring and reporting and to reduce demand for fossil fuels.
Third parties including potential or actual investors may also introduce policies adverse to the Company due to its interest in fossil fuels.
A number of national governments have already introduced or are contemplating the introduction of regulatory responses to greenhouse gas emissions.
This includes countries where we have assets such as Australia Canada and Chile as well as customer markets such as China India and Europe.
Many countries are also pledging to stop using fossil fuels specifically coal in power generation e. undertook to do so by 2030.
As a result of these factors some other market participants and analysts have a more bearish view some strongly so in relation to coal and oil and believe that many fossil fuel assets could become stranded i. being irretrievably lost.
We are one of the major producers of key metals including copper cobalt nickel that are currently essential for electric vehicles and the transition to a low carbon economy although technological change may over time reduce their requirement.
Through our sustainability programme we strive to ensure emissions and climate change issues are identified understood and monitored in order to meet international best practice standards and ensure regulatory compliance.
We seek to ensure that there is a balanced debate with regard to the ongoing use of fossil fuels.
During 2017 we published our second Climate Change Considerations for our Business which sets out information about how our business operates our position on climate change and how we are managing the opportunities and challenges of climate change across our business.
In order to understand and plan for the effects of climate change on our business we are seeking to provide a framework for identifying understanding and ultimately managing to the extent possible climaterelated challenges and opportunities facing our portfolio.
This covers in particular government policy energy costs physical impacts stakeholder perceptions and market impacts.
Further information is available at sitesustainability climatechange Community relations and human rights Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
It is our policy to ensure we proactively engage with local communities to maintain our social licence to operate.
The continued success of our existing operations and our future projects are in part dependent upon broad support and a healthy relationship with the respective local communities.
A perception that we are not respecting or advancing the interests of the communities in which we operate could have a negative impact on our social licence to operate our ability to secure access to new resources and our financial performance.
The consequences of negative community reaction could also have a material adverse impact on the cost profitability ability to finance or even the viability of an operation and the safety and security of our workforce and assets.
Such events could lead to disputes with governments with local communities or any other stakeholders and give rise to reputational damage.
Even in cases where no adverse action is actually taken the uncertainty associated with this instability could negatively impact the perceived value of our assets.
We believe that the best way to manage these vital relationships is to adhere to the principles of open dialogue and cooperation.
In doing so we engage with local communities to demonstrate our operations contribution to socioeconomic development and seek to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to prevent or mitigate possible adverse impacts on the communities along with the regular reporting as outlined on our website at site sustainabilitycommunityandhumanrights.
Some of our mine sites are in remote locations where they are a  or the  key employer in the region.
Inevitably every mine will reach a point of depletion where it is no longer economic to operate and must be closed in an orderly fashion.
We are working with all stakeholders at our mine sites to operate for as long as it is economically viable to do so and to prepare longterm plans that provide for a gradual transition to the end of mine life.
Principal risks and uncertainties continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Risk description Commentsimpacts to the Group Mitigation and risk appetite Skills availability and retention Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
It is a key strategic objective of the Company to maintain positive employee relationships and to attract and retain skilled workers.
The maintenance of positive employee and union relations and the ability to attract and retain skilled workers including senior management are key to our success.
This attraction and retention of highly qualified and skilled personnel can be challenging especially but not only in locations experiencing political or civil unrest or in which they may be exposed to other hazardous conditions.
Many employees especially at the Groups industrial activities are represented by labour unions under various collective labour agreements.
Their employing company may not be able to satisfactorily renegotiate its collective labour agreements when they expire and may face tougher negotiations or higher wage demands than would be the case for nonunionised labour.
In addition existing labour agreements may not prevent a strike or work stoppage.
We understand that one of the key factors in our success is a good and trustworthy relationship with our people.
This priority is reflected in the principles of our sustainability programme and related guidance which require regular open fair and respectful communication zero tolerance for human rights violations fair remuneration and above all a safe working environment as outlined on our website at sitecareersOurculture and in our People section on page www. lencore. comsustainabilityourpeople.
Various union strike action has occurred at several of our operations during the year e.
Coal Australia.
Group companies seek negotiated outcomes with employee representatives based on reasonableness and fairness however unfortunately and occasionally strike action can occur.
Health safety environment including potential catastrophes Risk movement in 2017 Stable Link to strategic priorities Risk appetite Low.
It is our policy to ensure we comply with or exceed the health safety and environmental laws and external requirements applicable to our operations and products.
Our operations are subject to health safety and environmental laws along with compliance with our corporate sustainability framework.
The processes and chemicals used in extraction and production methods as well as transport and storage may impose environmental hazards.
A serious failure in these areas could lead to an emergency or catastrophe at a site which could result in injuries or fatalities and also impact production and our corporate reputation.
The storage of tailings at our industrial assets and the storage and transport of oil are material examples of these risks.
Environmental including those associated with particular environmental hazards and health and safety laws may result in increased costs or in the event of noncompliance or incidents causing injury or death or other damage at or to our facilities or surrounding areas may result in significant losses including those arising from 1 interruptions in production litigation and imposition of penalties and sanctions and 2 having licences and permits withdrawn or suspended or being forced to undertake extensive remedial cleanup action or to pay for governmentordered remedial cleanup actions.
In each case liability may arise where the hazards have been caused by any previous or subsequent owners or operators of the property by any past or present owners of adjacent properties or by third parties.
We regret we recorded nine fatalities at our operations from nine separate incidents.
Our approach to sustainability and our expectations of our workers and our business partners are outlined in our sustainability framework.
This underpins our approach towards social environmental safety and compliance indicators providing clear guidance on the standards we expect all our operations to achieve.
Through the reporting function within the programme our Board and senior management receive regular updates and have a detailed oversight on how our business is performing across all of the sustainability indicators.
We monitor catastrophic risks in particular across our portfolio and operate emergency response programmes.
Compliance with international and local regulations and standards are top priorities.
We remain focused on the significant risks facing our industry arising from operational catastrophes such as the examples of tailings dam collapses in Canada and Brazil and the coal mine explosions experienced in the last five years.
We seek to learn from these events and proactively assess our exposure to similar incidents and implement measures to avoid these.
Considerable ongoing investment continues in the Groups SafeWork health and safety programme.
See also the Sustainable development review on page 24 and the HSEC Committee report on page 100.
Further details will also be published in our 2017 sustainability report.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Financial review
Highlights
US million 2017 2016 Change % Key statement of income and cash flows highlights Net income attributable to equity holders 5777 1379 319 Adjusted EBITDA 14762 10268 44 Adjusted EBIT 8552 3930 118 Earnings per share Basic US 0.41 0.10 310 Funds from operations FFO 11556 7770 49 Net cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 11866 7868 51 Capital expenditure 4234 3497 21 US million 31.12.2017 31.12.2016 Change % Key financial position highlights Total assets 135593 124600 9 Net funding 32898 32619 1 Net debt 10673 15526 31
FFO to Net debt 108.3% 50.0% 119 Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA 1 Refer to basis of preparation below.
Refer to page 56.
Adjusted measures referred to as Alternative performance measures APMs which are not defined or specified under the requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards refer to APMs section on page 197 for definition and reconciliations and note 2 of the financial statements for reconciliation of Adjusted EBITEBITDA and capital expenditure.
Basis of presentation The financial information in the Financial and Business Review is on a segmental measurement basis including all references to revenue see note 2 and has been prepared on the basis as outlined in note 1 of the financial statements with the exception of the accounting treatment applied to relevant material associates and joint ventures for which Glencores attributable share of revenues and expenses are presented.
The Groups results are presented on an adjusted basis using alternative performance measures APMs which are not defined or specified under the requirements of IFRS but are derived from the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS reflecting how Glencores management assess the performance of the Group.
The APMs are used to improve the comparability of information between reporting periods and segments and to aid in the understanding of the activities taking place across the Group by adjusting for Significant items aggregating or disaggregating notably in the case of relevant material Associates accounted for on an equity basis certain IFRS measures.
APMs are also used to approximate the underlying operating cash flow generation of the operations Adjusted EBITDA.
Significant items see reconciliation below are items of income and expense which due to their variable financial impact or the expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them are separated for internal reporting and analysis of Glencores results.
Alternative performance measures are denoted by the symbol  and are further defined and reconciled to the underlying IFRS measures in the APMs section on page 197.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Financial results Net income attributable to equity holders increased from 1379 million in 2016 to 5777 million in 2017 and EPS increased from 0.10 per share to 0.41 per share driven by the factors discussed below.
Adjusted EBITDA was 14762 million and Adjusted EBIT was 8552 million increases of 44% and 1 18% respectively compared to 2016 primarily driven by higher commodity prices.
Market sentiment and commodity prices continued to improve over 2017 following the cyclical lows seen in early 2016.
Notable year over year average price increases were cobalt 108% zinc 38% coal GC Newc.
34% and copper 27%.
The positive impact of the higher prices on Adjusted EBITDA was somewhat tempered by upward trending albeit until now relatively moderate cost inflation and the effects of a weaker U.
Adjusted EBITDAEBIT Adjusted EBITDA by business segment is as follows 2017 2016 US million
Industrial
Adjusted
EBITDA
Marketing activities
Adjusted
EBITDA
Change % Metals and minerals 2029 8281 10310 1586 6030 7616 35 Energy products 1054 3599 4653 959 1503 2462 89 Agricultural products Corporate and other 175 342 517 74 328 402 29 Total 3224 11538 14762 3063 7205 10268 44 Adjusted EBIT by business segment is as follows 2017 2016 US million
Industrial
Adjusted
EBIT
Marketing activities
Adjusted
EBIT
Change % Metals and minerals 2005 4496 6501 1562 2182 3744 74 Energy products 990 1424 2414 909 842 67 n.
Agricultural products Corporate and other 175 380 555 74 329 403 38 Total 3012 5540 8552 2919 1011 3930 118 1 The above balances represent Glencores interest in Glencore Agri being 49.9% post 1 December 2016 and 100% pre the sale date.
Following completion of the sale the results from Agricultural products have been combined under Marketing activities and the 2016 comparatives relating to Industrial 2016 EBITDAEBIT of 138 million and 104 million respectively have been reclassified from Industrial to Marketing activities.
See page 78 and note 2.
Australian dollar 3%.
Adjusted
EBITDA mining margins were robust at 38% and 41% in our metals and energy operations up respectively from 33% and 32% in 2016.
Marketing Adjusted EBITDA and EBIT increased by 5% and 3% to 3224 million and 3012 million respectively Metals and minerals Adjusted Marketing EBIT was up 28% over 2016 with strong contributions from most commodity departments reflecting the improved physical commodity market conditions and solid growth in volumes handled particularly copper cobalt zinc and ferroalloys.
Energy products Adjusted Marketing EBIT was up 9% compared to 2016 with healthy contributions from both oil and coal.
The oil result was augmented by a substantial volume increase during the year notably crude up 33%.
Likeforlike Agricultural products Adjusted Marketing EBIT was down 26% compared to 2016 but up 7% at the Adjusted EBITDA level due to a higher depreciation charge in 2017.
This was an overall satisfactory result given the general industry margin pressures following a succession of global bumper crops.
Following the sale of a 50% interest in December 2016 Adjusted EBIT on a reported basis was down 63% compared to 2016.
Industrial Adjusted EBITDA increased by 60% to 1 1538 million Adjusted EBIT was 5540 million compared to 101 1 million in 2016.
As noted above the increase was primarily driven by stronger average yearover year commodity prices offset by volume related impacts including temporary industrial action acid supply and weather related factors moderate cost inflation and adverse foreign currency impacts given the generally weaker U. in our key operating jurisdictions.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Financial review
Earnings
A summary of the differences between reported Adjusted EBIT and income attributable to equity holders including significant items is set out in the following table US million 2017 2016 Adjusted EBIT 8552 3930 Net finance and income tax expense in relevant material associates and joint ventures Net finance and income tax expense of discontinued operations Net finance costs 1451 1533 Income tax expense 1572 362 Noncontrolling interests 570 422 Income attributable to equity holders of the Parent from continuing and discontinued operations presignificant items 5508 1992 Earnings per share Basic presignificant items US 0.39 0.14 Significant items Share of Associates significant items Marktomarket valuation on certain coal hedging contracts Unrealised intergroup profit elimination Gain on disposals and investments 1309 2370 Other expense  net 594 1997 Income tax expense Noncontrolling interests share of significant items Total significant items 269 613 Income attributable to equity holders of the Parent from continuing and discontinued operations 5777 1379 Earnings per share Basic US 0.41 0.10 1 Refer to note 2 of the financial statements and to APMs section for reconciliations.
2 Refer to note 24 of the financial statements.
3 Refer to other reconciliations section for the allocation of the total income tax expense between presignificant and significant items.
4 Recognised within share of income from associates and joint ventures see note 2 of the financial statements.
5 Recognised within cost of goods sold see note 2 of the financial statements.
6 Refer to notes 3 and 24 of the financial statements and to APMs section for reconciliations.
7 Recognised within other expense  net see notes 4 and 24 of the financial statements and to APMs section for reconciliations.
8 Recognised within noncontrolling interests refer to APMs section.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Significant items Significant items are items of income and expense which due to their variable financial impact or the expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them are separated for internal reporting and analysis of Glencores results to provide a better understanding and comparative basis of the underlying financial performance.
In 2017 Glencore recognised a net 269 million gain 2016 net expenses of 613 million in significant items including 187 million of income tax related expense items mainly related to the substantial reductions in U. corporate income tax rates.
The net gain comprises primarily Income of 225 million 2016 225 million expense relating to the accounting period matching of certain coal derivative positions open at 31 December 2016 and subsequently fully settled during 2017.
These positions related to portfolio risk management hedging activities initiated in Q2 2016 to manage forward sales price exposure relating to future coal production.
The transactions were not able to be designated as hedging instruments under IFRS which would have allowed for the deferment of any income statement effect until performance of the underlying future sale transactions.
The fair value movements were offset against revenue in the segment information as the related sales of production were realised.
A 6 million expense 2016 132 million representing Glencores share of significant expenses recognised directly by our associates primarily impairment charges recognised within Century.
Gain on disposals and investments of 1309 million 2016 2370 million see note 3.
In 2017 the gain primarily relates to the disposal of Zinc Africa 232 million an oil storage business HG Storage 674 million and a royalty portfolio 210 million.
In 2016 the balance is primarily comprised of gains on disposals of 430 million related to GRail and 1848 million related to Glencore Agri.
Other expenses  net 594 million 2016 1923 million see notes 4 and 5.
Balance primarily comprises impairments of 628 million 2016 1268 million.
Chad oil 278 million Cameroon oil 81 million and junior loans extended to a coal terminal facility 149 million.
These impairments were partially offset by a reversal of 243 million related to the Equatorial Guinea oil operations.
2016 impairments related primarily to Chad oil 622 million Equatorial Guinea oil operations 31 1 million Cerrejn coal recognised within share of income from associates 345 million and various coal shipping investments 61 million.
290 million 2016 121 million of marktomarket gains on investments held for trading.
80 million 2016 70 million of net foreign exchange losses.
75 million 2016 92 million relating to certain legal matters.
The 2017 balance is a cost estimate for potential settlement of claims brought against the Group related to an operation disposed in 2005.
The 2016 amount relates to expenses incurred to settle a compliance matter in respect of a U.
78 million 2016 Nil relating to the cumulative effect of certain accounting issues that resulted in Katanga an 86.3% controlled subsidiary listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange restating its 2014 2015 and 2016 results.
The cumulative effect has been corrected in Glencores 2017 financial statements.
Had the Groups results been restated income before taxes for the year ended 2016 would have been lower by 10 million.
Net finance costs Net finance costs were 1451 million in 2017 compared to 1533 million incurred during the comparable reporting period.
Interest expense in 2017 was 1619 million a 4% decrease from 1688 million in 2016 owing mainly to the repayment of higher margin debt.
Interest income in 2017 was 168 million consistent with the prior year.
Income taxes An income tax expense of 1759 million was recognised during 2017 compared to an income tax expense of 638 million in 2016.
Adjusting for a net 187 million 2016 276 million of income tax expense related to significant items  30 million 2016 19 million due to currency translation effects and a net 157 million of income tax arising primarily from the substantial reduction in US tax rates following the announced US tax reform the 2017 presignificant items income tax expense was 1572 million 2016 362 million.
The 2017 effective tax rate presignificant items was 30.3% consistent with a calculated effective tax rate of 32.4% in 2016.
Assets leverage and working capital Total assets were 135593 million as at 31 December 2017 compared to 124600 million as at 31 December 2016 a period over which current assets increased from 43412 million to 49726 million due to increases in inventories primarily as a result of commodity price increases notably in our metals and minerals segment.
Noncurrent assets increased from 81188 million to 85867 million primarily due to the acquisition of Volcan as outlined in note 24 of the financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Financial review
Cash flow and net fundingdebt Net funding US million 31.12.2017 31.12.2016 Total borrowings as per financial statements 33934 33218 Relevant associates and joint ventures net funding 1792 1919 Cash and cash equivalents 2124 2518 Volcan net funding 704 Net funding 32898 32619 Cash and noncash movements in net funding US million 31.12.2017 31.12.2016 Cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 11866 7868 Coal related hedging and legal settlement costs included above via statement of income 225 368 Relevant associates and joint ventures Adjusted EBITDA 2440 1447 Share in earnings from other associates included within EBITDA 39 Net interest paid 1199 1271 Tax paid 1372 680 Dividends received from associates Funds from operations 11556 7770 Net working capital changes excluding gold and silver streaming proceeds 5073 2371 Gold and silver streaming proceeds  971 Acquisition and disposal of subsidiaries  net 8 5944 Purchase and sale of investments  net Purchase and sale of property plant and equipment  net 3898 3306 Net margin receiptscalls in respect of financing related hedging activities 1255 695 Acquisition of additional interests in subsidiaries 561 7 Distributions paid and transactions of own shares  net 1175 88 Coal related hedging and legal settlement costs refer above 225 368 Cash movement in net funding 1987 7837 Foreign currency revaluation of borrowings and other noncash items 2266 789 Total movement in net funding 279 8626 Net funding beginning of period 32619 41245 Net funding end of period 32898 32619 Less Readily marketable inventories 22225 17093 Net debt end of period 10673 15526 1 Adjusted to include the impacts of proportionate consolidation of relevant material associates and joint ventures as outlined in the APMs and other reconciliations section.
2 Refer to APMs section for definition and reconciliations.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 The reconciliation in the table above is the method by which management reviews movements in net funding and net debt and comprises key movements in cash and any significant noncash movements on net funding items.
Excluding 704 million of net debt assumed in the Volcan acquisition completed midNovember 2017 net funding as at 31 December 2017 increased by 279 million to 32898 million whereas net debt net funding less readily marketable inventories decreased by 4853 million over the year to 10673 million.
The Volcan assumed debt has been adjustedexcluded to provide a more consistent and comparative analysis but mostly to reflect the Groups relatively low 23.3% economic ownership compared to its 63.0% voting interest in this still fully ringfenced listed entity with its standalone independent and separate capital structure.
The cash outlay in respect of the 2017 share purchase is included in acquisition of subsidiaries above.
It is the Groups current intention to internally report ontreat this investment in accordance with equity accounting principles in parallel with full consolidation for IFRS reporting purposes.
The net funding movement reflects the increase in readily marketable inventories 5132 million of the net working capital outflow of 5073 million over the year primarily due to the substantially higher commodity prices but also to proactive seizing of further shortterm capital deployment opportunities in the buoyant commodity market environment.
It is contextually noteworthy given the earnings enhancing controllable inventory build that funds from operations significantly exceeded nearly double the 3898 million of net capital expenditure 342 million of net acquisitions of subsidiaries and investments 561 million of acquisitions of noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries African copper and payment of 1175 million of dividends to shareholders and noncontrolling interests.
The ratio of Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA improved to 0.72 times in 2017 from 1.51 times in 2016 and the ratio of FFO to Net debt improved to 108.3% in 2017 from 50.0% in 2016.
Business and investment acquisitions and disposals Net outflows from business acquisitions and divestures was 903 million compared to an inflow on disposals of 5944 million in 2016.
The net outflow in 2017 is primarily due to the acquisition of an additional interest in Volcan 653 million the acquisition of the remaining 31% interest of Mutanda not previously owned 524 million an increase in our interest in Katanga to 86.3% from 75.3% 38 million and a 300 million investment in
These are offset by disposals and ongoing smaller stake retentions in HG Storage 502 million Zinc Africa 222 million and BaseCore Metals 150 million.
The 2016 net inflow from divestitures resulted primarily from the disposal of a 50% interest in Glencore Agri.
See note 24 for further explanations.
Liquidity and funding activities In 2017 the following significant financing activities took place In May 2017 Glencore signed new oneyear revolving credit facilities for a total amount of 7335 million refinancing the 7700 million oneyear revolving credit facilities signed in February 2016.
Funds drawn under the facilities bear interest at U.
LIBOR plus a margin of 40 basis points.
Glencore also voluntarily reduced the medium term facility size from 6800 million to 5425 million and extended its maturity by 24 months to 2022.
As at 31 December 2017 the facilities comprise a 7335 million one year revolving credit facility with a 12 month termout borrowers option to May 2019 and a 12month extension option and a 5425 million mediumterm revolving credit facility to May 2022.
In March 2017 issued a 10 year 1000 million 4% coupon bond.
In October issued a 5 year 500 million 3% coupon bond and a 10 year 500 million 3.875% coupon bond.
As at 31 December 2017 Glencore had available committed undrawn credit facilities and cash amounting to 12.9 billion.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Financial review
Credit ratings In light of the Groups extensive funding activities maintaining investment grade credit rating status is a financial priority.
The Groups credit ratings are currently Baa2 stable from Moodys and BBB positive outlook from Standard and
Glencores publicly stated objective as part of its overall financial policy package is to seek and maintain strong BaaBBB credit ratings from Moodys and Standard and Poors respectively.
In support thereof Glencore targets a maximum 2x Net debtAdjusted EBITDA ratio through the cycle.
Value at risk One of the tools used by Glencore to monitor and limit its primary market risk exposure namely commodity price risk related to its physical marketing activities is the use of a value at risk VaR computation.
VaR is a risk measurement technique which estimates the potential loss that could occur on risk positions as a result of movements in risk factors over a specified time horizon given a specific level of confidence.
The VaR methodology is a statistically defined probability based approach that takes into account market volatilities as well as risk diversification by recognising offsetting positions and correlations between commodities and markets.
In this way risks can be measured consistently across all markets and commodities and risk measures can be aggregated to derive a single risk value.
Glencore has set a consolidated VaR limit 1 day 95% of 100 million representing some 0.2% of equity.
In Q2 2016 this limit was technically breached for 1 day by 1 million as the VaR calculation did not account for the future physical coal production that was economically hedged with the corresponding derivatives captured and reported on.
If such underlying hedged exposure had been included in the VaR calculation the actual VaR number would have been substantially lower with no resulting technical breach.
This hedge book has now fully rolled off as noted above.
Glencore uses a VaR approach based on Monte Carlo simulations and is either a one day or one week time horizon computed at a 95% confidence level with a weighted data history.
Average market risk VaR 1 day 95% during 2017 was 25 million representing less than 0.1% of equity.
Average equivalent VaR during 2016 was 42 million.
Distributions
The directors have recommended a 2017 financial year cash distribution of 0.20 per share amounting to 2.9 billion excluding any distribution on own shares and ignoring any attribution of shares which may take place prior to the record dates.
Payment will be effected as a 0.10 per share distribution in May 2018 see below and a 0.10 per share distribution in September 2018 in accordance with the Companys announcement on the 2018 Distribution timetable also made on 21 February 2018.
The distribution is proposed to be effected as a reduction of the capital contribution reserves of the
As such this distribution would be exempt from Swiss withholding tax.
As at 31 December 2017 Glencore plc had CHF 37 billion of such capital contribution reserves in its statutory accounts.
The distribution is subject to shareholders approval at its AGM on 2 May 2018.
The distribution is ordinarily paid in US dollars.
Shareholders on the Jersey register may elect to receive the distribution in sterling euros or Swiss francs the exchange rates of which will be determined by reference to the rates applicable to the US dollar as stated above.
Shareholders on the Johannesburg register will receive their distribution in South African rand.
Further details on distribution payments together with currency election and distribution mandate forms are available from the Groups website site or from the Companys Registrars.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 First tranche of proposed distribution 2018 Applicable exchange rate reference date Johannesburg Stock Exchange JSE Close of business UK 12 April Applicable exchange rate announced on the JSE 13 April Last day to effect removal of shares cum distribution between Jersey and JSE registers at commencement of trade 13 April Last time to trade on JSE to be recorded in the register for distribution 23 April Exdistribution date JSE 24 April Exdistribution date Jersey 26 April Distribution record date for JSE Close of business SA 26 April Distribution record date in Jersey Close of business UK 27 April Deadline for return of currency elections form Shareholders on Jersey Register only 30 April Removal of shares between the Jersey and JSE registers permissible from 30 April Applicable exchange rate reference date Jersey 2 May Annual General Meeting shareholder vote to approve aggregate 2018 distribution 2 May H1 distribution payment date 23 May Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Metals and minerals
Adjusted EBITDA of 10.3 billion was 2.7 billion 36% over 2016.
Marketing and Industrial activities each contributed strongly to the yearoveryear growth with a 28% and 37% increase respectively.
These strong results were fuelled by solid underlying global economic growth which combined with overall industry capital discipline and generally muted production growth resulted in commodity markets tightening over the year with a corresponding increase in prices and premiums.
Such market conditions together with continued Industrial cost and productivity focus contributed to the increase in Adjusted EBITDA mining margin from 33% to 38% while increased marketing base metals volumes aided the segments overall strong performance improvement compared to 2016.
Adjusted EBITDA US million tel Adjusted EBIT US million tel Mining margin 38% Strong cash flow generationconversion Marketing Adjusted EBIT 2005m Robust demand for our commodities amid tightening supply Glencore Annual Report 2017 Metals and minerals US million
Industrial
Marketing activities
Revenue
51017 29448 80465 42142 24196 66338 Adjusted EBITDA 2029 8281 10310 1586 6030 7616 Adjusted EBIT 2005 4496 6501 1562 2182 3744 Adjusted EBITDA margin 4.0% 28.1% 12.8% 3.8% 24.9% 11.5% Market conditions Selected average commodity prices 2017 2016 Change % SandP GSCI Industrial Metals Index 341 272 25 LME cash copper price t 6173 4867 27 LME cash zinc price t 2893 2094 38 LME cash lead price t 2315 1868 24 LME cash nickel price t 10414 9606 8 Gold price oz 1258 1248 1 Silver price oz 17 17 Metal Bulletin cobalt price 99.3% lb 25 12 108 Metal Bulletin ferrochrome 6  8.5% C basis 60  70% Cr max 1.5% Si lb 129 90 43 Iron ore Platts 62% CFR North China price DMT 71 58 22 Currency table
31 Dec 2017
31 Dec 2016
Average
Change in average % USD  COP 2986 3002 2952 3052 3 USD  KZT 33tel5 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Metals and minerals continued
Highlights
Base metals prices continued their positive momentum from the second half of 2016 into and through 2017.
Indeed yearend prices for most of the selected commodities in the table above were considerably higher than the annual averages with copper around 7200t zinc at 3300t nickel at 12700t and equivalent cobalt at 34lb.
LME stocks of copper zinc nickel and lead all reduced over the year.
Market concerns related to heightened Chinese economic risks proved shortlived and by year end a level of consensus had emerged that growth in both developed and emerging markets was more sustainable.
Reflecting these improved fundamental physical commodity market conditions with solid growth in volumes handled particularly copper cobalt zinc and ferroalloys Marketings Adjusted EBIT was 2.0 billion up 28% compared to 2016.
Financial information US million 2017 2016 Change %
51017 42142 21 Adjusted EBITDA 2029 1586 28 Adjusted EBIT 2005 1562 28 Selected marketing volumes sold Units 2017 2016 Change % Copper metal and concentrates Zinc metal and concentrates Lead metal and concentrates Gold moz 2.0 2.1 5 Silver moz 89.1 92.1 3 Nickel kt 204 221 8 Cobalt kt 42 39 8 Ferroalloys incl.
Aluminaaluminium mt 10.7 11.4 6 Iron ore mt 47.7 47.1 1 1 Estimated metal unit contained.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Copper Zinc Robust price growth driven by both demand and supply c.390ktpa EV demand projected by 2030 c.2% Supply contraction in 2017 In 2017 the copper price averaged 6173t increasing 27% yearover year.
The rally was most apparent in the second half with a 2017 high of 7254t in late December marking levels last seen in early 2014.
Over
Mine supply challenges continued to exceed market expectations resulting in a c.2% contraction in mined volumes yearonyear the first decline in over 15 years.
Copper scrap flows played an important role in the first half of the year as higher prices triggered the release of stockpiled scrap into the market and contributed to a short period of apparent demand weakness.
Combined with misplaced Global supply increases comfortably absorbed by the market 59% YoY increase in Chinese metal imports 9% NonChina supply increase in 2017 In 2017 the zinc price recorded a 38% yearoveryear increase benefiting from the combination of synchronised global growth strong orders from the steel industry and continuing tightness in the concentrate market which progressively spread to the metal market during the course of the year.
Despite the higher prices for a range of reasons China did not contribute to any mine supply growth which meant that the 9% 650kt increase in concentrate supply from the Rest of the World was comfortably absorbed by the market.
Chinese mine production dropped by 8.6% 300kt.
The environmental drive in China continued to put pressure on extractive industries limiting domestic zinc mine output.
In response Chinese zinc concentrates imports rose by 21.9% 140kt despite the lower spot TC levels 38dmt in 2017 vs 102dmt in 2016. temporary pullback in the price rally.
Copper scrap inventory reverted to normalised levels by midyear with drawdowns in copper units across the value chain through to yearend.
Looking ahead global supply is expected to be impacted by ageing assets limited sector reinvestment a diminished project pipeline and elevated risk of mine disruptions.
With global economic growth pointing to healthy demand the copper market is likely to remain in substantial supply deficit which if it occurs will in turn result in further inventory drawdowns.
The emerging battery and electric vehicle trend adds further uplift to the demand outlook and attractive fundamentals.
Copper and cobalt are expected to play important roles across the value chain of the energy and mobility evolution from power generation and distribution to energy storage and vehicles.
During 2017 Glencore commissioned CRU to model the metal requirements to realise the Electric Vehicle Initiative target of 30 million electric vehicle sales by 2030.
CRU forecast that 4.1Mt of copper 18% of 2016 supply 1.1Mt of nickel 56% of 2016 supply and 314kt of cobalt 314% of 2016 supply will be required annually by 2030.
As early as 2020 forecast EV related metal demand becomes material requiring an additional c.390kt of copper and c.24kt of cobalt.
In 2017 the pricing impact expectation of this new demand dynamic was clearly evident in cobalt with the spot price rallying 130% through the year.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Nickel Solid demand increases in stainless and nonstainless steels plus emerging battery demand 10% Estimated demand growth in 2017 5% Estimated output growth In 2017 a record supply deficit was evident in the nickel market as strong synchronised demand growth across all regions and industry segments offset supply gains.
Such positive fundamentals backed by strong physical activity and significant draws in global inventory drove nickel premiums to record highs.
Growth in global stainless steel the dominant driver of nickel demand  is estimated at 6% fuelled by a 9% increase in 300series stainless.
Positive developments in nonstainless further supported demand growth including orders from the oil and gas industry and a solid upswing in the European automotive market while nickel demand from the battery sector accelerated through 2017 with annual growth estimated at 30%.
Overall we estimate primary nickel demand in 2017 of 2.2Mt representing a 10% increase on 2016.
Priceinduced closures production issues and general supply disruptions prompted widespread under performance in nonnickel pig iron supply.
This was nevertheless offset by the ramp up of Indonesian NPI capacity and the acceleration of Chinese NPI supply through year end.
While Indonesias reversal of a ban on ore exports incited fears of unconstrained ore availability boosting Chinese NPI supply growth actual shipments were c.5Mt wet ore for the year.
Global nickel output in 2017 is estimated at 2.1Mt marking a 5% increase on 2016 which masks a 2% decline in nonNPI supply.
Consequently the nickel market remained in material supply deficit for a second year running enabling global stocks to draw down quickly despite headline LME inventory suggesting otherwise.
Even with a conservative forecast for 2018 demand the outlook is for continued sizeable deficits and further draws in primary nickel stocks.
Forecast supply increases are based on Indonesia exporting more nickel units in ore or NPI with production elsewhere expected to be flat or fall.
On the metal front Chinese production was down by 0.7% in 2017 40kt.
With local stocks already at low levels Chinese consumers resorted to higher metal imports up 59.3% yearonyear.
2017 Chinese zinc metal imports were a record 676kt.
Both LME and SHFE zinc stocks continued to draw down LME stocks fell to 182kt at December 2017 2016 428kt while SHFE stocks more than halved to 69kt at December 2017 2016 153kt.
The lead supply trend is similar recording a yearoveryear price increase of 24%.
Spot TCs are also at a historical low at 26dmt in 2017 2016 1 19dmt.
Going forward higher prices will incentivise higher concentrate production easing TCs in the mid term and eventually resulting in higher metal production.
However the environmental constraints in China and the slower than anticipated pace of mine restarts or new mines means that the current zinc tightness may remain for some time.
As there is also a time lag before concentrates units convert into metal units we expect the current strong pricing environment to be supported in the near to midterm.
Metals and minerals continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Large demand swings and volatile pricing with overall growth led by the steel sector 6% Estimated stainless steel market growth The 2017 chrome market was characterised by large demand swings and volatile pricing for both chrome ore and ferrochrome.
The year started with a series of environmental and pricedriven Chinese stainless steel mill closures which temporarily impacted chrome demand.
This reversed in the second half when global stainless steel melts reached record volumes partly through the commissioning of a new major Indonesian project.
Overall
Carbon steel market fundamentals continued to improve throughout 2017 resulting in increased demand for manganese units which supported manganese ore and alloy prices globally.
Vanadium demand continued to strengthen across product applications.
Ongoing Chinese commitment to reducing pollution levels resulted in a reduction of local vanadium output lower exports and an increased drawdown of stock.
This boosted vanadium prices by 50% in H2 2017.
Quality differentials dominated product pricing 21% YoY increase in iron ore spot price index 62% CFR North China In 2017 we believe iron ore prices decoupled from iron ore fundamentals by following steel margins instead.
Iron ore split further into different market segments the price of low grade iron ore continued to decrease throughout the year while higher grades benefited from improving steel markets hence overall prices remained at fairly high levels.
Discounts for lower grade and high silica cargoes have now reached a level that is starting to elicit a supply response.
For 2018 while overall supply of iron ore may increase we could see a decrease in low grade cargoes exported to China.
Ferroalloys
Chinese government following through on environmental commitments 23% Increase in LME aluminium price YoY Unprecedented supplyside events in China shaped the aluminium market in the second half of 2017 helping aluminium and its raw material prices gather further momentum.
Shutdown of illegal capacities and winter production cuts in China demonstrated the governments willingness to enforce its environmental policies.
The alumina market was balanced in 2017 but supplyside concerns as a result of the winter production cuts caused large scale stockpiling and panic buying in China during Q4.
Prices rallied to a 10year high of 480t FOB Australia in November.
The average H2 2017 price was 45% higher than the same period last year.
Meanwhile metal prices showed more modest gains with the average H2 2017 LME 3Month price 24% higher than H2 2016.
Divergent sentiment about the scale of reductions undertaken by Chinese producers led to a brief drop in December 2017 but the price recovered ending the year at 2268t.
AluminaAluminium
Iron ore global premium levels.
In the second half of 2017 inwarehouse Rotterdam premiums fluctuated between 75  95t CIF Main Japanese Ports between 74  103t and delivered Midwest USA ranging from Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Industrial activities
The metals price increases noted above partially offset by the generally lower production volumes and some inflationary cost pressures over prior year resulted in Adjusted EBITDA of 8.3 billion a 37% increase over 2016.
The net positive development led to an increase in Adjusted EBITDA mining margin from 33% to 38%.
Looking forward train one of Katangas whole ore leach project commissioned in Q4 2017 and is planned to ramp up through 2018 while Lady Loretta Mount Isa zinc is expected to restart production in H1 2018 following its shutdown in 2015.
Financial information US million 2017 2016 Change %
Copper assets African copper Katanga Mutanda Mopani 2695 1839 47
1303 1006 30
1199 820 46 Other South America Alumbrera Lomas Bayas Antapaccay Punitaqui 2394 2257 6 Australia Mount Isa Ernest Henry Townsville Cobar 1965 1799 9 Custom metallurgical Altonorte Pasar Horne CCR 7957 6572 21 Intergroup revenue elimination 295 429 n.
Copper 17218 13864 24 Zinc assets Kazzinc 3075 2602 18 Australia Mount Isa McArthur River 1362 1133 20 European custom metallurgical Portovesme San Juan de Nieva Nordenham Northfleet 1273 1209 5 North America Matagami Kidd Brunswick CEZ Refinery 1790 1030 74 Other Zinc Argentina Bolivia Peru Rosh Pinah
Zinc 8195 6511 26 Nickel assets Integrated Nickel Operations Sudbury Raglan Nikkelverk 1323 1432 8 Australia Murrin Murrin 598 503 19 Nickel 1921 1935 1 Ferroalloys 2111 1873 13 AluminiumAlumina 3 13 77 Metals and minerals revenue 29448 24196 22 Represents the Groups share of these JVs.
Disposed of in August 2017.
Metals and minerals continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBIT US million 2017 2016 Change % 2017 2016 Change % Copper assets African copper 240 n.
Collahuasi
Antamina
Other South America 1088 1 Australia Custom metallurgical 343 407 16 194 280 31 Copper 4360 3333 31 2215 1159 91 Adjusted EBITDA mining margin 42% 38% Zinc assets Kazzinc 1Australia 645 454 4telEuropean custom metallurgical 169 174 3 78 84 7 North America 359 184 9telOther Zinc 24tel1 n.
Zinc 2620 1916 37 1630 871 87 Adjusted EBITDA mining margin 35% 33% Nickel assets Integrated Nickel Operations 28 n.
Australia 78 19 n.
Nickel 89 n.
Adjusted EBITDA margin 33% 22% Ferroalloys AluminiumAlumina 5 60 n.
Iron ore 8 9 n.
Metals and minerals Adjusted EBITDAEBIT 8281 6030 37 4496 2182 106 Adjusted EBITDA mining margin 38% 33% 1 Represents the Groups share of these JVs.
Adjusted EBITDA mining margin is Adjusted EBITDA excluding custom metallurgical assets divided by Revenue excluding custom metallurgical assets and intergroup revenue elimination i. the weighted average EBITDA margin of the mining assets.
Custom metallurgical assets include the Copper custom metallurgical assets and Zinc European custom metallurgical assets and the AluminiumAlumina group as noted in the table above.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 2017 2016 US million Sustaining Expansion Total Sustaining Expansion Total Capital expenditure Copper assets African copper 35tel357 627
Antamina
180  Other South America Australia Custom metallurgical 161  Copper 1433 484 1917 1237 401 1638 Zinc assets Kazzinc Australia 256  256 209  209 European custom metallurgical 74  74 54  54 North America Other Zinc 77  77 55  55 Zinc Nickel assets Integrated Nickel Operations Australia 14  14 14  14 Koniambo  241 241  263 263 Nickel 14tel297 407 Ferroalloys AluminiumAlumina 2  2 Capital expenditure 2336 896 3232 1954 741 2695 1 Represents the Groups share of these JVs.
Metals and minerals continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Production data Production from own sources  Total 2017 2016
Copper kt 1309.7 1425.8 8 Zinc kt 1090.2 1094.1 Lead kt 272.5 294.2 7 Nickel kt 109.1 115.1 5 Gold koz 1033 1027 1 Silver koz 37743 39069 3 Cobalt kt 27.4 28.3 3 Ferrochrome kt 1531 1523 1 Platinum koz 116 148 22 Palladium koz 161 209 23 Rhodium koz 13 16 19 Vanadium Pentoxide mlb 20.9 21.1 1 Production from own sources  Copper assets 2017 2016
African Copper Katanga Mutanda Mopani Copper metal kt 236.0 254.4 7 Copper in concentrates kt 2.7  n.
Cobalt
Collahuasi
Copper metal kt  2.1 100 Copper in concentrates kt 230.5 220.8 4 Silver in concentrates koz 3103 3276 5
Copper in concentrates kt 142.6 145.5 2 Zinc in concentrates kt 128.1 66.8 92 Silver in concentrates koz 6579 6778 3 Other South America Alumbrera Lomas Bayas Antapaccay Punitaqui Copper metal kt 78.1 80.0 2 Copper in concentrates kt 245.3 308.8 21 Gold in concentrates and in dor koz 348 382 9 Silver in concentrates and in dor koz 1821 2366 23 Australia Mount Isa Ernest Henry Townsville Cobar Copper metal kt 164.6 205.1 20 Copper in concentrates kt 65.9 53.9 22 Gold koz 67 86 22 Silver koz 1721 1794 4 Total Copper department Copper kt 1165.7 1270.6 8 Cobalt kt 23.9 24.5 2 Zinc kt 128.1 66.8 92 Gold koz 415 468 11 Silver koz 13224 14214 7 Production from own sources  Zinc assets 2017 2016
Kazzinc
Zinc metal kt 210.5 187.6 12 Lead metal kt 52.9 44.0 20 Lead in concentrates kt 4.7 15.2 69 Copper metal Gold koz 585 521 12 Silver koz 5780 4510 28 Silver in concentrates koz 132 469 72 Australia Mount Isa McArthur River Zinc in concentrates kt 436.0 488.4 11 Lead in concentrates kt 156.4 185.4 16 Silver in concentrates koz 7114 8741 19 North America Matagami Kidd Zinc in concentrates kt 123.7 130.1 5 Copper in concentrates kt 47.3 48.0 1 Silver in concentrates koz 2271 2292 1 Other Zinc South America Argentina Bolivia Peru Zinc in concentrates kt 99.8 99.0 1 Lead metal kt 13.6 12.7 7 Lead in concentrates kt 41.2 29.7 39 Copper in concentrates kt 3.4 2.1 62 Silver metal koz 637 666 4 Silver in concentrates koz 7775 7271 7 Other Zinc Africa Rosh Pinah Perkoa Zinc in concentrates kt 92.1 122.2 25 Lead in concentrates kt 3.7 7.2 49 Silver in concentrates koz 157 282 44 Total Zinc department Zinc kt 962.1 1027.3 6 Lead kt 272.5 294.2 7 Copper kt 100.4 104.0 3 Gold koz 585 521 12 Silver koz 23866 24231 2 South American production above excludes Volcan Compania Minera.
Owing to the recent timing of the share tender in Q4 2017 Glencore now has 63% of the voting shares and a 23% overall economic interest management is in preliminary stages of reviewing the operations and the associated reporting framework.
Therefore production data has been excluded which currently provides a more consistent comparative analysis.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Production from own sources  Nickel assets 2017 2016
Integrated Nickel Operations INO Sudbury Raglan Nikkelverk Nickel metal kt 57.0 65.6 13 Nickel in concentrates kt 0.5 0.6 17 Copper metal kt 15.6 16.6 6 Copper in concentrates kt 28.0 34.6 19 Cobalt metal kt 0.8 1.0 20 Gold koz 32 37 14 Silver koz 653 624 5 Platinum koz 75 90 17 Palladium koz 136 173 21 Rhodium koz 6 6 Murrin Murrin Nickel metal kt 34.1 35.3 3 Cobalt metal kt 2.7 2.8 4
Nickel in ferronickel kt 17.5 13.6 29 Total Nickel department Nickel kt 109.1 115.1 5 Copper kt 43.6 51.2 15 Cobalt kt 3.5 3.8 8 Gold koz 32 37 14 Silver koz 653 624 5 Platinum koz 75 90 17 Palladium koz 136 173 21 Rhodium koz 6 6 Metals and minerals continued Production from own sources  Ferroalloys assets 2017 2016
Ferrochrome kt 1531 1523 1
Platinum koz 41 58 29 Palladium koz 25 36 31 Rhodium koz 7 10 30 Gold koz 1 1 Vanadium Pentoxide mlb 20.9 21.1 1 Total production  Custom metallurgical assets 2017 2016
Copper Altonorte Pasar Horne CCR Copper metal kt 526.8 489.1 8 Copper anode kt 535.7 522.5 3 Zinc Portovesme San Juan de Nieva Nordenham Northfleet Zinc metal kt 788.0 789.8 Lead metal kt 193.8 216.6 11 Silver koz 13656 14845 8 1 Controlled industrial assets and joint ventures only.
Production is on a 100% basis except as stated.
2 Copper metal includes copper contained in copper concentrates and blister.
3 Cobalt contained in concentrates and hydroxides.
4 The Groups prorata share of Collahuasi production 44%.
5 The Groups prorata share of Antamina production 33.75%.
6 The Groups attributable 79.5% share of the GlencoreMerafe Chrome Venture.
7 Consolidated 50% of Mototolo and 100% of the Groups PGM recovery plant.
Operating highlights Copper assets Own sourced copper production of 1309700 tonnes was 1 16100 tonnes 8% lower than in 2016 reflecting the Ernest Henry minority sale in Q4 2016 end of life production declines at Alumbrera and various temporary effects including lower throughput at Mutanda due to constrained supply of sulphuric acid and smelter maintenance at Mount
Q4 production of 363200 tonnes was 59600 tonnes 20% higher than in Q3 reflecting the resolution of such temporary impacts.
African copper Own sourced copper production of 238700 tonnes was 15700 tonnes 6% lower than in 2016 reflecting throughput restrictions at Mutanda initially related to unusually wet weather and in Q3 due to an interruption in sulphuric acid supply
Glencores share of copper production was 142600 tonnes in line with 2016 and the share of zinc production was 128100 tonnes an increase of 61300 tonnes 92% on 2016 reflecting the higher proportion of copperzinc ores being mined and the inherent nature of the Antamina deposit.
Other South America Own sourced copper production of 323400 tonnes was 65400 tonnes 17% down on 2016 mainly relating to Alumbrera as it nears end of life.
Antapaccay mined and processed on average lower grades for the year but performed strongly in Q4 as the mine sequenced to a new phase of production with higher grades. supply constraints.
Mutandas Q4 own sourced production of 51500 tonnes was in line with historical performance levels.
Cobalt production of 23900 tonnes was broadly in line with 2016.
Katanga commissioned phase 1 of its new whole ore leach processing project in December 2017 with 2200 tonnes of copper cathode produced by the end of December.
Prior to such commissioning 2700 tonnes of copper in concentrates were produced and sold originating from the KITD Tailings project.
Collahuasi
Glencores share of copper production was 230500 tonnes up 7600 tonnes 3% on 2016 mainly reflecting marginally improved ore grades and consistently strong milling performance.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Australia Own sourced copper production of 230500 tonnes was 28500 tonnes 1 1% lower than in 2016 reflecting the sale of a minority stake in the Ernest Henry mine in late 2016 and smelter maintenance in Q3 2017.
Q4 production postmaintenance was substantially stronger.
Custom metallurgical assets Copper cathode production of 526800 tonnes was 37700 tonnes 8% higher than in 2016 mainly reflecting Pasars expansion project.
Copper anode production of 535700 tonnes was within 3% of 2016 levels.
Zinc assets Own sourced zinc production of 1090200 tonnes was in line with 2016 as the stepup in Antamina zinc production noted above was offset by the disposals of the African mines to Trevali Mining and lower production as expected at Mount Isa.
Kazzinc
Own sourced zinc production of 210500 tonnes was 22900 tonnes 12% higher than in 2016 reflecting the increased mix of processing some site workinprocess compared to third party material.
Production including third party material was 316800 tonnes up 4% reflecting various process improvements.
Own sourced lead production of 57600 tonnes was 1600 tonnes 3% lower than in 2016.
Total lead production including third party feed was 151000 tonnes in line with the comparable period.
Own sourced copper production of 49700 tonnes was 4200 tonnes 8% lower than in 2016 due to a planned smelter shutdown in Q3 2017.
Own sourced gold production of 585000 ounces was 64000 ounces 12% higher than in 2016 reflecting stronger grades and recoveries at Vasilkovsky plus initial gold production from the Dolinnoe mine.
Australia
Zinc production of 436000 tonnes was 52400 tonnes 1 1% down on 2016 and lead production of 156400 tonnes was 29000 tonnes 16% down reflecting general mine planning changes at Mount Isa and the impact of no longer processing Black Star ore.
North America The Canadian mines produced 123700 tonnes of zinc down 6400 tonnes 5% on 2016 reflecting expected variability in mined volumes and head grades as both operations reach end of life.
Other Zinc The South American assets produced 99800 tonnes of zinc in line with 2016.
Lead production of 54800 tonnes was 12400 tonnes 29% up on 2016 mainly relating to stronger production at Aguilar in Argentina.
The African assets produced 92100 tonnes of zinc and 3700 tonnes of lead up to 31 August 2017 at which point they were sold to Trevali Mining.
European custom metallurgical assets Zinc production of 788000 tonnes was in line with 2016.
Lead production of 193800 tonnes was 22800 tonnes 1 1% lower reflecting more complex feeds than previously being processed.
Nickel assets Own sourced nickel production of 109100 tonnes was 6000 tonnes 5% down on 2016 owing to changes in the use of third party versus own sourced feeds in the INO circuit partly offset by a strengthening operational performance at Koniambo.
Integrated Nickel Operations INO Own sourced nickel production of 57500 tonnes was 8700 tonnes 13% down on 2016 mainly due to a higher proportion of third party feeds in the production mix as noted above.
Total production including thirdparty feeds was 87100 tonnes down 7% on 2016.
Murrin Murrin Own sourced nickel production of 34100 tonnes was 1200 tonnes 3% lower than in 2016 mainly reflecting the maintenance shut in H1 2017.
Koniambo
Production of 17500 tonnes was 3900 tonnes 29% higher than in 2016 reflecting efforts to steadily improve the plants operating performance towards capacity expectation levels.
The DC furnace 2 rebuild is complete with first metal tapped in December 2017.
A progressive testing and rampup process will continue in the coming months.
Ferroalloys assets
Attributable ferrochrome production of 1531000 tonnes was in line with 2016.
Quarter on quarter changes were largely driven by timing of furnace refurbishments.
Platinum Group Metals PGM Mototolos concentrate production was temporarily suspended from August to December 2017 while strengthening of the tailings dam was carried out.
Glencores share of production at 72000 ounces was therefore down 30% on 2016.
Normal operations have since resumed.
A further 2000 ounces were reclaimed from a PGM recovery plant at Eastern Chrome Mines mainly in Q4 2017.
Steadystate operations from such activities are expected to yield 10000 ounces per year.
Vanadium
Production of 20.9 million pounds was in line with 2016.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Energy products
Energy Products Adjusted EBITDA of 4.7 billion was 2.2 billion 89% up on 2016.
Both periods were constrained somewhat by the corporate risk management decision in Q2 2016 to economically hedge a portion of future coal sales effectively locking in H1 2016 pricing resulting in an opportunity cost of 380 million 2016 980 million realised in 2017.
All the affected tonnes had rolled off by yearend.
Adjusting for this hedging impact 2017 Adjusted EBITDA was up 60% over the prior year.
Much of this increase was due to higher realised coal prices with benchmark thermal coal averages up around 30  35% year over year.
Marketing also contributed to the increase aided by higher oil volumes and supportive coal market conditions.
In August 2017 Glencore reached an agreement with Yancoal to acquire a 49% JV interest in the Hunter Valley Operations coal business in New South Wales which is expected to complete in H1 2018 subject to regulatory approvals.
Adjusted EBITDA US million tel Adjusted EBIT US million tel Coal Adjusted EBITDA margin 41% Pre economic hedge Crude oil marketed 33%higher Strategic partnerships and offtakes include Rosneft Glencore Annual Report 2017 Energy products US million
Industrial
Marketing activities
Revenue
118199 10067 128266 81872 7149 89021 Adjusted EBITDA 1054 3599 4653 959 1503 2462 Adjusted EBIT 990 1424 2414 909 842 67 Adjusted EBITDA margin 0.9% 35.8% 3.6% 1.2% 21.0% 2.8% Market conditions Selected average commodity prices 2017 2016 Change % SandP GSCI Energy Index 178 151 18 Coal API4 t 84 64 31 Coal Newcastle 6000 t 88 65 35 Oil price  Brent bbl 55 45 22 Financial information US million 2017 2016 Change %
118199 81872 44 Adjusted EBITDA 1054 959 10 Adjusted EBIT Selected marketing volumes sold 2017 2016 Change % Thermal coal Metallurgical coal
Crude oil mbbl 1209 911 33 Oil products mbbl Includes agency volumes.
Marketing highlights Seaborne coal prices continued their momentum from 2016 as Chinese policy restrictions were maintained to limitcap supply to support targeted domestic coal price bands.
After a relatively prolonged period of range bound prices from midyear oil prices began to meaningfully increase with OPEC and nonOPEC cuts gradually reducing inventories and improving sentiment all contributing.
As a result of these positive market developments and a meaningful increase in oil volumes marketed 2017 Marketing Adjusted EBIT of 990 million was up 9% year over year.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Energy products continued Thermal coal 3.7% Seaborne thermal coal demand growth in 2017 35% YoY increase in Newcastle index price Global seaborne thermal coal demand grew 30Mt or 3.7% during 2017 largely in the Pacific and Indian Ocean markets.
Korean and Chinese demand growth dominated among broadbased demand increases across Asia where increased coal use for power generation and industrial applications was supported by its relatively low cost as a fuel supply.
Growth of the Chinese economy supported total electricity and thermal power generation demand growth of 5.7% and 4.6% respectively year over year.
Combined with production limitations associated with ongoing improvements Chinese domestic supply restrictions led to increased demand for imported coal to domestic mines safety and production controls the increased power demand contributed to Chinese domestic coal supply shortages supporting prices and increased import coal demand.
Hydro electricity generation shortfalls in parts of Europe and strong demand for electricity in Turkey contributed to increased thermal coal demand in the Atlantic.
On the supply side Cyclone Debbie and strikes curtailed Australian supply while weather also impacted Colombia with thermal coal export volumes declining from both origins during 2017.
While higher prices attracted additional supply from the USA Russia and Indonesia overall the short term supply response struggled to keep up with strong demand during the second half of 2017.
To date such supply response has typically been in low energy andor high sulphur products but this could change in the future.
In the longer term price volatility and environmental concerns continue to limit investment in new supply capacity.
At the end of December 2017 market index prices for Newcastle API4 and API2 closed respectively 7% 9% and 10% higher than end December 2016 returning to levels last seen briefly in November 2016 and prior to that in April 2012.
22% YoY increase in Brent crude price During the first half of 2017 oil prices were largely range bound with Brent capped around 55 per barrel.
By midyear the benchmark slipped to 45 per barrel as market sentiment weakened amidst events that increased concerns about oversupply and global inventories remaining stubbornly high.
However by the third quarter high OPEC compliance with its production cuts was evident and forecasters encouraged by synchronous GDP growth in most global markets predicted strong oil demand growth.
Inventories started to draw down meaningfully which led to renewed optimism that expectations on the oil market rebalancing within the coming year would be fulfilled providing the impetus for higher oil prices in the second half of 2017.
OPEC cuts and renewed optimism about global growth supported higher prices
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Further support came from geopolitical events and supply disruptions with outages in Libya Iraq the North Sea Canada and mounting concerns about Venezuela production declines.
The steady increase in shortcycle US and other nonOPEC production coming on line was less influential in capping oil price gains as speculator net length increased rapidly to historically high levels driving the price of Brent up to 67 per barrel at the end of the year.
The Brent curve shifted decisively into backwardation midway through the year and by year end the WTI curve followed suit.
Refinery margins were generally healthy for most of 2017 in part supported by the impact of some unexpected capacity losses in Europe and the US.
In shipping the tanker freight market remained lacklustre and struggled to perform as fleet expansion continued to outpace scrapping of tanker tonnage.
Industrial activities
Energy Products Adjusted EBITDA of 3.6 billion was up 2.1 billion year over year.
As noted above a portion of this relates to the roll off of the economic hedges during 2017 but the far greater part reflects the improved price environment partially offset by lower tonnes resulting primarily from industrial action and some inflationary cost pressures.
The Adjusted EBITDA mining margin pre economic hedges increased from 32% to 41%.
Financial information US million 2017 2016 Change % Net revenue Coal operating revenue Coking Australia 1088 651 67 Thermal Australia 4892 3763 30 Thermal South Africa 1500 1349 11 Prodeco 1199 1130 6
Impact of corporate coal economic hedging 380 980 n.
Coal operating revenue 9088 6519 39 Coal other revenue Coking Australia 3 2 50 Thermal Australia 672 325 107 Thermal South Africa 17 9 89 Prodeco 6 12 50
Coal other revenue buyin coal 699 349 100 Coal total revenue Coking Australia 1091 653 67 Thermal Australia 5564 4088 36 Thermal South Africa 1517 1358 12 Prodeco 1205 1142 6
Impact of corporate coal economic hedging 380 980 n.
Coal total revenue 9787 6868 43 Energy products revenue 10067 7149 41 Represents the Groups share of this JV.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBIT US million 2017 2016 Change % 2017 2016 Change % Coking Australia 54tel12 n.
Thermal Australia 1999 1334 50 876 26 n.
Thermal South Africa Prodeco 35tel16 n.
Cerrejn
Coal result prior to hedging 3863 2362 64 1816 277 556 Impact of corporate coal economic hedging 380 980 n.
Total coal 3483 1382 152 1436 703 n.
Adjusted EBITDA margin 41% 31% Adjusted EBITDA margin 41% 43% Energy products Adjusted EBITDAEBIT 3599 1503 139 1424 842 n.
Adjusted EBITDA margin  pre economic hedge 41% 32% Adjusted EBITDA margin  post economic hedge 38% 22% 1 Represents the Groups share of this JV.
2 Coal EBITDA margin is calculated on the basis of Coal operating revenue before corporate hedging as set out in the preceding table.
2017 2016 US million Sustaining Expansion Total Sustaining Expansion Total Capital expenditure Australia thermal and coking 153 7tel291 Thermal South Africa Prodeco Cerrejn 54  Total Coal 54tel145 498 Oil 98  Capital expenditure 1 Represents the Groups share of this JV.
Energy products continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Production data Coal assets 2017 2016 Change % Australian coking coal mt 6.1 5.3 15 Australian semisoft coal mt 4.0 4.2 5 Australian thermal coal export mt 49.1 52.5 6 Australian thermal coal domestic mt 7.5 5.6 34 South African thermal coal export mt 18.7 17.2 9 South African thermal coal domestic mt 10.0 12.1 17 Prodeco mt 14.6 17.3 16
Total Coal department mt 120.6 124.9 3 Controlled industrial assets and joint ventures only.
Production is on a 100% basis except for joint ventures where the Groups attributable share of production is included.
The Groups prorata share of Cerrejn production 33.3%.
Oil assets 2017 2016 Change % Glencore entitlement interest basis Equatorial Guinea kbbl 2529 3629 30 Chad kbbl 2524 3882 35 Total Oil department kbbl 5053 7511 33 Gross basis Equatorial Guinea kbbl 11914 16909 30 Chad kbbl 3450 5308 35 Total Oil department kbbl 15364 22217 31 Operating highlights Coal assets Coal production of 121 million tonnes was 3% down on 2016 as reductions associated with industrial action and adverse weather events were mostly offset by productivity improvements and Glencores higher equity share in certain mines.
Australian coking Production of 6.1 million tonnes was 0.8 million tonnes 15% higher than in 2016 mainly related to the restart of the Integra mine.
Australian thermal and semisoft Production of 60.6 million tonnes was 1.7 million tonnes 3% down on 2016 as higher equity ownership of the Newlands and Collinsville mines expected rampups notably Rolleston and production efficiencies across the board were offset by planned mine closures and the impact of industrial action.
South African thermal Production of 28.7 million tonnes was in line with 2016 as improved operating performances at the main mine complexes were offset by planned closures of smaller mines.
Prodeco
Production of 14.6 million tonnes was 2.7 million tonnes 16% lower than in 2016 initially due to the impact of severe wet weather and later as a result of a geotechnical event with productivity adversely affected by the necessary workarounds.
Cerrejn
Glencores share of production at 10.6 million tonnes was in line with 2016 as the easement of some restrictions related to dust emissions in 2016 was offset by the disruption caused by unusually heavy rainfall.
Oil assets Glencores oil entitlement interest of 5.1 million barrels was 1.4 million barrels 33% lower than in 2016 reflecting expected reductions in a period of inactive field development in a low oil price environment.
Drilling in Chad recommenced in H2 2017 with a singlerig campaign which is expected to offset natural field declines in Equatorial Guinea.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Agricultural products
At the end of 2016 we completed the sale of 50% of the Agricultural products business.
The resulting joint venture has been presented on a proportionate consolidation basis in this analysis hence the apparent year over year reductions reflecting the changed ownership interest.
Underlying performance was within expectations in a difficult trading environment characterised by relatively low prices and volatility which limited arbitrage opportunities.
Portfolio changes reflected the addition of a sugarcane mill in Brazil adding 50% to crushed volumes and the sale of our farming assets in Ukraine.
Adjusted EBITDA US million tel 50% selldown Adjusted EBIT US million tel 50% selldown Adjusted EBITDA 100% basis Adjusted EBIT 100% basis Glencore Annual Report 2017 Agricultural products US million 2017 100% basis 2016 Change % 100% basis Revenue  12611 25278 21970 15 Adjusted EBITDA  Adjusted EBIT  192 384 522 26 Adjusted EBITDA margin 2.5% 2.5% 2.7% Sustaining capital expenditure  Expansionary capital expenditure  Total capital expenditure   financial information reflected 1 1 months results on a 100% consolidated basis and 1 month on a 50% proportionate consolidated basis.
2017 reflected 50% proportionate consolidation throughout.
Market conditions Selected average commodity prices 2017 2016 Change % SandP GSCI Agriculture Index 290 295 2 CBOT wheat price USbu 436 436 CBOT corn no.2 price USbu 359 358 CBOT soya beans USbu 976 989 1 ICE cotton price USlb 73 66 11 ICE sugar  1 1 price USlb 16 18 11 Selected marketing volumes sold Million tonnes 2017 2016 Change % Grain 45.3 43.8 3 OilOilseeds 29.6 26.7 11 Cotton 0.5 0.4 25 Sugar 0.7 0.5 40 Marketing highlights The grain and oilseed markets were again well supplied low priced and lacked volatility which in turn limited arbitrage opportunities.
Despite a brief U.
June impacting primarily spring wheat which proved to be less significant than initially thought global crops were problem free with Russia Australia basis late 2016 harvest carried over and Brazil all recording historically high production.
Global grain marketing performed well in the environment and whilst oilseed marketing results were satisfactory they fell short of 2016.
Record exports in Russia and Australia were beneficial for the grain handling and marketing businesses in both countries.
In Canada the Viterra handling business faced challenges particularly in the second half.
Reluctant selling by farmers in the face of excess handling capacity pressured margins.
The disruption of the pulses trade into India due to government intervention in support of local producers was also a negative for Canadian exports.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Agricultural products continued Operating highlights Soft seed processing margins in both the EU and Canada were below expectations.
In the EU the rape seed deficit was filled by imports which was of some benefit to the coastal facilities but not to facilities such as ours located inland.
The lifting of tariffs on imported biodiesel into the EU depressed biodiesel margins towards the end of the year.
In
Argentina our performance was satisfactory but we endured periods of crush margin weakness.
Our sugar milling performance including the Unialco mill acquired in February 2017 was also satisfactory despite weaker sugar prices in H2 2017.
The economic environment in Brazil continues to provide challenges for our wheat milling business with processing volumes down 7% year over year reflective of reduced domestic demand.
We continued our progressive exit from farming with the sale of our remaining Ukrainian farming assets in H2 2017.
Processingproduction data 2017 2016 Change % Farming kt 360 792 55 Crushing kt 8065 7680 5 Longterm toll agreement kt 812 804 1 Biodiesel kt 735 687 7 Rice milling kt 177 274 35 Wheat milling kt 920 989 7 Sugarcane processing kt 4884 3259 50 Total agricultural products kt 15953 14485 10 1 Reported on a 100% basis.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Corporate
82 Directors and officers 84 Chairmans introduction 86 Corporate Governance report 101 Directors remuneration report 106 Directors report Glencore Annual Report 2017 Directors and officers Anthony Hayward Chairman H John Mack NonExecutive Director R Ivan Glasenberg
Chief Executive Officer H
Peter Coates AO NonExecutive Director H Chairman since May 2013 he joined the Board in 201 1 as the Senior Independent Director.
Experience Currently a managing partner of St.
James Asset Management and AEA
Chairman of Compact GTL Limited and Colombia Oil and Gas.
He was CEO of BP plc from 200710 having joined BP in 1982.
He became group treasurer in 2000 chief executive for BP upstream activities and a member of the main board of BP in 2003.
From 201 115 he was CEO of Genel Energy plc and chairman from 201517.
Dr Hayward studied geology at Aston University in Birmingham and completed a Ph.
Edinburgh University.
He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Joined Glencore in April 1984 Chief Executive Officer since January 2002.
Experience Initially worked in Glencores coal department in South Africa as a marketer.
Following time in Australian and Asian offices in 1990 he was made head of Glencores coal marketing and industrial businesses and remained in this role until he became Group CEO in January 2002.
Mr Glasenberg is a Chartered Accountant of South Africa holds a Bachelor of Accountancy from the University of Witwatersrand and an MBA from the University of Southern California.
He is currently a nonexecutive director of Rusal HKG 0486 and Rosneft MCXROSN.
NonExecutive Director since January 2014 previously Executive Director from June to December 2013 and NonExecutive Director from April 201 1 to May 2013.
Experience Prior to joining Glencore in 1994 as a senior executive in the coal department Mr Coates had occupied senior positions in a range of resource companies.
He joined Xstrata in 2002 as CEO of Xstratas coal business when Glencore sold its Australian and South African coal assets to Xstrata stepping down in December 2007.
He was nonexecutive chairman of 1 Xstrata Australia from 200809 2 Minara Resources Ltd from 20081 1 and 3 Santos Limited from 200913 and 201518.
He is currently a nonexecutive director of Event Hospitality and Entertainment Limited ASXEVT.
Mr Coates holds a degree in Mining Engineering from the University of New South Wales.
Patrice Merrin NonExecutive Director H Gill Marcus NonExecutive Director A N Appointed in June 2014.
Experience Ms Merrin is currently a non executive director of Kew Media Group Inc.
TSXKEW.
She has been a director and then chairman of CML Healthcare from 200813 and a director of various other companies including Stillwater Mining NB Power and Arconic.
Following initial roles with Molson and Canadian Pacific Ms Merrin worked at Sherritt the Canadian diversified miner for 10 years until 2004 latterly as COO.
She then became CEO of Luscar Canadas largest thermal coal producer.
Ms Merrin was a director of the Alberta Climate Change and Emissions Management Corporation from 200914.
Ms Merrin is a graduate of Queens University Ontario and completed the Advanced Management Programme at INSEAD.
Appointed with effect from 1 January 2018.
Experience Ms Marcus was Governor of the South African Reserve Bank from 200914.
She worked in exile for the African National Congress from 1970 before returning to South Africa in 1990.
In 1994 she was elected to the South African Parliament.
In 1996 she was elected as the deputy minister of finance and 1999 the deputy governor of the Reserve Bank.
Ms Marcus was the nonexecutive chair of the Absa Group from 200709.
She has also been a nonexecutive director of Gold Fields Ltd and
She acted as chair of a number of South African regulatory bodies including the Financial Services Board and the Standing Committee for the Revision of the Banks Act.
Ms Marcus is a graduate of the University of South Africa.
Appointed in June 2013.
Experience Mr Mack is the chairman of Lantern Credit a nonexecutive director of Lending Club NYSELC and also serves on the board of Tri
He also serves on the board of Trustees of New YorkPresbyterian Hospital and the University Hospitals of both Columbia and Cornell.
Mr Mack previously served as CEO of Morgan Stanley from 200509.
He retired as chairman Mr Mack first joined Morgan Stanley in May 1972 becoming a board director in 1987 and president in 1993.
Before rejoining Morgan Stanley as chairman and CEO in 2005 Mr Mack served as coCEO of Credit Suisse.
Mr Mack is a graduate of Duke University.
Directors
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Officers Martin Gilbert NonExecutive Director A R Leonhard Fischer NonExecutive Director A N R Appointed in April 201 1.
Experience Mr Fischer is founder and chairman of the investment committee of DFG Deutsche Fondsgesellschaft SE Invest.
Member of the board of Gesellschaft zuer Foerderung der Frankfurter Wertpapierboerst e.
He was CEO of BHF Kleinwort Benson group from 200916.
He was CEO of Winterthur group from 200306 and a member of the executive board of Credit Suisse group from 200407.
He joined Credit Suisse from Allianz where he had been a member of the management board.
Mr Fischer holds an M. the University of Georgia.
Peter Grauer Senior Independent Director A N Appointed in June 2013 and became the Senior Independent Director in May 2014.
Experience Mr Grauer is chairman of Bloomberg Inc.
He was chairman and chief executive officer from 20021 1 and has been a member of Bloombergs board of directors since 1996.
He is also currently a director of Davita Inc NYSEDVA a member of the International Business Council of the WEF and a trustee of Rockefeller University.
Mr Grauer was managing director of Donaldson Lufkin and Jenrette from 19922000 and CSFB Private Equity until 2002.
Mr Grauer graduated from the University of North Carolina and the Harvard University Graduate School of Business Program for Management Development in 1975.
Appointed in May 2017.
Experience Mr Gilbert is cochief executive of Standard Life Aberdeen plc LONSLA.
Mr Gilbert was a cofounder of Aberdeen Asset Management which was established in 1983.
Mr Gilbert sits on the board of directors of the Institute of International Finance.
He is also a member of the international advisory panel of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the international advisory board of BritishAmerican
He is also the deputy chairman of Sky plc LONSKY.
He was appointed chairman of the Prudential Regulation Authoritys practitioner panel in December 2013.
Mr Gilbert was educated in Aberdeen has an MA in Accountancy and an LLB and is a Chartered Accountant.
Steven Kalmin Chief Financial Officer John Burton Company Secretary Appointed as Chief Financial Officer in June 2005.
Experience Joined Glencore in September 1999 as general manager of finance and treasury functions at Glencores coal industrial unit.
He moved to Glencores head office in 2003 to oversee Glencores accounting functions becoming CFO in June 2005.
In November 2017 he was appointed as a director of Katanga Mining Limited TSX KAT.
Mr Kalmin holds a Bachelor of Business with distinction from the University of Technology Sydney and is a member of the Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand and the Financial Services Institute of Australasia.
Before joining Glencore Mr Kalmin worked for nine years at Horwath Chartered Accountants.
Appointed Company Secretary in September 2011.
Experience He was formerly company secretary and general counsel of Informa plc and before that a partner of CMS in London specialising in corporate law.
Mr Burton holds a B. degree in Law from Durham University.
He was admitted as a Solicitor in England and Wales in 1990.
Notes
All the Directors are nonexecutive apart from Mr Glasenberg.
The nonexecutive Directors are designated as independent apart from Mr Coates.
Committee membership is as follows A Audit Health Safety Environment and Communities HSEC N Nomination R Remuneration denotes Committee chair
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Chairmans introduction
Dear shareholders I am pleased to present our corporate governance report for 2017.
Following the downcycle challenges of 201516 the past year has been one of consolidation and renewal.
Our wideranging portfolio of assets together with our leading marketing business are unique in the industry.
Even at the low point in the most recent downturn the Groups annualised Adjusted EBITDA was circa 8 billion H2 2015 and H1 2016 supported by the generally more stable Marketing earnings.
Shareholders will of course note the comparative figure of 14.8 billion for 2017 reflecting both stronger pricing across the industrial portfolio and our strongest performance from Marketing since 2008.
During the last year we have grown the business through delivery of major brownfield capital projects and corporate transactions on both the buyside and sellside including considerable progress in the Katanga coppercobalt Mopani copper and Koniambo nickel projects BaseCore Metals streams and royalties joint venture with Ontario Teachers agreed the formation of a joint venture with Yancoal for the Hunter Valley Coal Operations acquisition of the majority of voting shares in Peruvian zinc miner Volcan contribution of a portfolio of petroleum storage and logistics assets to an arrangement with HNA Safety remains a top priority for the Board.
We are committed to achieving our goal of zero fatalities.
We offer our condolences to the families of the nine people who lost their lives while working at our operations last year.
The HSEC Committee has met with the management of all the operations where the fatalities occurred to review the incidents and ensure that appropriate actions are taken to prevent recurrence.
Our numerous and wideranging asset base provides unique challenges.
However during every year in which I have served on your Board I have seen considerable efforts to tackle legacy issues from some previous underinvestment and a continuous and significant record of improvement.
We continue to invest in our considerable and committed workforce and will seek over time to widen our reporting on people matters.
While the business has performed well we are constantly reminded of the importance of governance compliance and sustainability issues.
We have refreshed and strengthened the Board with the appointments of Martin Gilbert and Gill Marcus Glencore Annual Report 2017 While the business has performed well we are constantly reminded of the importance of governance compliance and sustainability issues not least by some adverse media and NGO reports.
The Board has overseen the Companys response to Katangas accounting restatement.
This has been an important area of focus for us in the past few months as detailed further on pages 92 and 97.
We continue to refresh the Board.
Over the past twelve months we have been pleased to welcome two new
Gill Marcus has led an exemplary career of public service to South Africa which culminated in her five year tenure as head of the Reserve Bank of South Africa.
Martin
Gilbert is one of Europes leading asset management entrepreneurs and is now coCEO of Standard Life Aberdeen plc.
Further details of their experience is on page 82.
Also during the year Bill Macaulay stepped down from the Board.
He had been a Director since the Companys IPO in May 201 1 and has been a strong and consistent contributor to board debate and I would like to thank him again for his valuable contribution to Glencore.
In tax we have seen previously through the EITI standards and latterly through the EU Directive on mandatory reporting for listed companies on payments to governments a welcome move to transparency with regard to the tax position of corporates in the resources sector.
Our relevant disclosures are referred to on page 106.
As the OECDs base erosion and profit shifting project moves into the implementation stage we are now complying with the reporting requests of member countries.
Following the endorsement of the Aiming for A shareholder resolution at our 2016 AGM last year we welcomed the launch of the recommendations of the Taskforce on Climaterelated Financial Disclosure TCFD.
We have stated publicly our support for the TCFD and details of our progress in identifying and addressing the risks and opportunities resulting from climate change for our business are included in this report and the upcoming 2017 Sustainability Report.
We face many challenging situations at our operations as we work to extract resources safely profitably and responsibly to mitigate our environmental impact and support our host communities.
We recognise the value of multistakeholder dialogue in addressing these complex situations through shared learnings and expertise.
This year we have participated in a number of such initiatives including those focused on management of security development of guidance on human rights for the commodities trading sector and addressing the challenges associated with the cobalt value chain.
Looking ahead we seek to continue to strengthen our engagement in these platforms and to identify opportunities for partnerships that can help us solve the complex challenges we encounter at and around our operations.
We remain committed to transparency and in 2017 on a voluntary basis we published our first report on the steps we are taking to review modern slavery in our supply chain and will be providing a further update this year.
There are many opportunities and challenges ahead for resource businesses.
I believe that Glencore will continue to play a leading role in sustainable value creation for all our stakeholders.
Anthony Hayward
1 March 2018 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Corporate Governance report Board governance and structure
This governance report sets out how Glencore has applied the main principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code in a manner which enables shareholders to evaluate how these principles have been applied.
As a London premium listed entity we seek to ensure full compliance with the
The Board believes that the Company has throughout the year complied with all relevant provisions contained in the Code.
The Glencore Board currently comprises eight NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman and one Executive Director.
On
1 January 2018 Gill Marcus joined the Board.
A list of the Directors with their brief biographical details and other significant commitments is provided in the previous pages.
The Chief Financial Officer attends all meetings of the Board and Audit
The Company Secretary attends all meetings of the Board and its committees.
This report should be read in conjunction with the Directors Report and the remainder of the Governance section Division of responsibilities As a Jersey incorporated company Glencore has a unitary Board meaning all Directors share equal responsibility for decisions taken.
Glencore has established a clear division between the respective responsibilities of the NonExecutive Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer which are set out in a schedule of responsibilities which has been approved by the Board.
While the NonExecutive Chairman is responsible for leading the Boards discussions and decisionmaking the CEO is responsible for implementing and executing strategy and for leading Glencores operating performance and daytoday management.
The CEO and CFO have line of sight across the Group.
The CEO is further supported by the Groups senior management team principally comprising the heads of the businesses and the heads of legal and strategy.
The Company Secretary is responsible for ensuring that there is clear and effective information flow to the NonExecutive Directors.
The Senior Independent Director is available to meet with shareholders and acts as an intermediary between the Chairman and other independent Directors when required.
This division of responsibilities coupled with the schedule of reserved matters for the Board ensures that no individual has unfettered powers of decision.
Further details of these responsibilities are set out below.
Roles and responsibilities
Leader of the Board Responsible for effective communication flow between Directors Facilitates effective contribution of all
Responsible for effective Board governance Ensures effective communication with shareholders Senior Independent
Is a confidant of the Chairman and when appropriate also acts as an intermediary for other independent Directors Will stand in for the Chairman if he is unable to attend Responsible for appraising the Chairmans performance along with other independent Directors Available to shareholders to answer questions
Chief Executive Officer
Leads and motivates management team Implements strategy and objectives as directed by the Board Develops Group policies and proposals for approval by the Board and ensures effective implementation Other NonExecutive
Supply challenge and support to management Bring independent mindset and differing backgrounds and experience to Board debates Provide leadership and challenge as chair of or a member of the Board Committees which except HSEC comprise only NonExecutive
Scrutinise leadership of Chairman Company Secretary Secretary to Board and its Committees Informs the Board on all matters reserved to it and ensures papers are provided in sufficient detail and on time Available to Directors in respect of Board procedures and provides support and advice Ensures the Board is kept informed on governance matters Coordinates and assists with the Board evaluation process along with the Chairman Glencore Annual Report 2017 NonExecutive Directors The Companys NonExecutive Directors provide a broad range of skills and experience to the Board which assists in their roles in formulating the Companys strategy and in providing constructive challenge to executive management.
Glencore regularly assesses its Non Executive Directors independence.
Except for Peter Coates due to his employment by the Group during 201314 they all are regarded by the Company as Independent NonExecutive Directors within the meaning of independent as defined in the Code and free from any business or other relationship which could materially interfere with the exercise of their independent judgement.
Management of conflicts of interest All Directors endeavour to avoid any situation of conflict of interest with the Company.
Potential conflicts can arise and therefore processes and procedures are in place requiring Directors to identify and declare any actual or potential conflict of interest.
Any such notifications are required to be made by the Directors prior to or at a Board meeting and all Directors have a duty to update the whole Board of any changes in circumstances.
Glencores Articles of Association and Jersey law allow for the Board to authorise potential conflicts and the potentially conflicted Director must abstain from any vote accordingly.
During
2017 no abstention procedures for conflicts had to be activated.
Board Committees The following four Committees are in place to assist the Board in exercising its functions Audit Nomination Remuneration and Health Safety Environmental and Communities HSEC as set out in the diagram on the next page.
Committee meetings are held prior to Board meetings and at each scheduled Board meeting the chairman of each Committee leads a discussion concerning the Committees activities since the previous Board meeting.
The Committees carry out a considerable amount of work.
In particular the Audit Committee provides challenge and enquiry on the significant areas of financial and accounting oversight and
risk management
Chairman and CEO continues to have the heaviest workload of all the committees due to its strong focus on sustainability issues especially safety performance A report for 2017 from each Committee Chairman is set out later in this Corporate governance report.
Each Committee reports to and has its terms of reference approved by the Board and the minutes of the Committee meetings are circulated to the Board.
Each Committee reviewed its terms of reference during the year and as a result revisions were made to the HSEC Committees terms of reference to ensure they reflect the Boards expectations as to the Committees role.
All Committees terms of reference are available at site whowearegovernance Board attendance throughout the year Attendance during the year for all scheduled full agenda Board and all Board Committee meetings is set out in the table below
Audit of 4
Nomination of 4
Peter Coates 6    5 Leonhard Fischer Martin Gilbert Ivan Glasenberg 6    5 Peter Grauer 6 4  4 Anthony Hayward 6    5 William Macaulay John Mack 5  2 4 Patrice Merrin 6    5 1 Attended all meetings since appointment on 5 May 2017.
Attended all meetings until he retired from the Board on 14 April 2017.
In addition there were another five limited agenda meetings of the Board.
Details of all these Board meetings are set out on page 89.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Board meetings The Board has approved a formal schedule which sets out those matters which are reserved for its decisionmaking alone such as strategy the annual budget and material acquisitions and disposals.
Meetings are usually held at the Companys headquarters in Baar
Details of the Board and Committee meetings held during the year are detailed above.
The Board and its Committees have standing agenda items to cover their proposed business at their scheduled meetings.
The Chairman seeks to ensure that the very significant work of the Committees feeds into and benefits as to feedback from the full
The Board and Committee meetings also benefit from presentations by senior executives and some technical and investor relations updates.
Presentations from the business and senior management allow Directors to enhance their understanding of the business and the implementation of strategy in turn contributing to a more effective
A summary of the Boards main activities during 2017 is set out on the next page.
Several times a year the Chairman holds meetings with the Non Executive Directors without the Executive Director present and at least once a year the NonExecutive Directors meet without the Chairman present.
Appointment and reelection of Directors All Directors will be offering themselves for reelection at the 2018 AGM.
All of the Directors have service agreements or letters of appointment and the details of their terms are set out in the Directors remuneration report.
No other contract with the Company or any subsidiary undertaking of the Company in which any Director was materially interested existed during or at the end of the financial year.
Information management meetings site visits and professional development It is considered of great importance that the NonExecutive Directors attain a good knowledge of the Company and its business and allocate sufficient time to Glencore to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
The Board calendar is planned to ensure that Directors are briefed on a wide range of topics.
As well as internal briefings Directors attend appropriate external seminars and briefings.
While attending Company meetings the Directors also usually engage with heads of commodities and other senior Group functions.
In addition in order to better familiarise themselves with the industrial activities site visits are also arranged.
During 2017 three operations were visited.
All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible to the Board for ensuring the Board procedures are complied with and have access to independent and professional advice at the Companys expense where they judge this to be necessary to discharge their responsibilities as Directors.
Shareholders
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer
Directors
Board of
HSEC committee
Remuneration committee
Ongoing
Corporate Governance report continued Board structure Glencore Annual Report 2017 First scheduled meeting Annual results including review and approval where appropriate of from the Audit Committee Chairman detailed consideration of principal risks uncertainties and mitigation to be disclosed report on going concern final distribution recommendation fullyear results announcement for the prior year Annual Report draft and management representation letter Consideration of AGM resolutions Report from the Nomination Committee Chairman and discussion on whether all current Directors should stand at AGM Report from the Remuneration Committee
Report from the HSEC Committee Chairman in particular discussions on safety and draft sustainability report Reviewed updated Board governance documents and key policies Board evaluation report and discussion First scheduled short agenda meeting Resultsbusiness update Initial discussion as to proposed impairment charges Consideration and approval of Mutanda and Katanga share purchase transactions Review and approval of prior year Production Report and Reserves and Resources Report Second scheduled short agenda meeting B u s i n e s s up d at e Considered and approved the Q1 Production Report Consideration and conditional approval of the appointment of Martin Gilbert as independent NonExecutive Director Second scheduled meeting Briefing on the business to be conducted at the AGM and after of the other issues raised Business update and review Report from the HSEC Committee
Report from the Audit Committee Chairman including as to the current year audit plan Report from the Nomination Committee
First short notice meeting Business update Consideration and approval of proposal for an acquisition of Rio Tintos Australian Hunter Valley coal assets Third scheduled meeting Review of various business issues Consideration and approval of updated proposal concerning Hunter Valley Review of other MandA matters Consideration of certain regulatory matters Fifth scheduled meeting Review of Q3 financial report Review and approval of Q3 production report Consideration and approval of Rusal share exchange transaction Consideration and approval of the Companys delisting in Hong Kong Established committee to oversee Katanga review Review of the Groups Zinc business Review of Groups IT function including cyber security Review of legal and compliance function including actual or potential litigation and the Raising Concerns programme Report from the HSEC Committee Chairman Second short notice meeting Consideration and approval of proposed investment in Chevrons downstream oil business in South Africa and Botswana Third scheduled short agenda meeting Business update Review and approval of halfyear Production Report Review of potential MandA and other material matters including an update on and approval of proposals concerning Hunter Valley Fourth scheduled meeting Halfyear results including review and approval where appropriate of report from the Audit Committee
Report from the HSEC Committee
Considered outcomes from multiple shareholder meetings on governance and sustainability issues Initial discussion concerning Katanga control issues Sixth scheduled meeting Review of Katanga control issues Review of principal risks and uncertainties and preparation for longerterm viability statement Consideration and approval of the 2018 budget and 201921 business plan Presentations from senior management of copper and nickel Report from the HSEC Committee
Report from the Audit Committee
Work at Board meetings and principal Board activities during 2017 The main considerations and actions carried out at the meetings of the Board during 2017 are summarised here.
The work of the committees is described later in this report.
At each main scheduled meeting the following standing matters are considered consideration of any new conflicts of interest review of minutes of previous meetings including actions from previous meetings reportsupdates from the CEO CFO Head of Strategy and Investor Relations and Head of
These reports include consideration of strategic matters including possible asset expansionscontractions acquisitionsdisposals material debt refinancing and analysis of risks In addition regular updates are provided by the Company Secretary on governance Board processes and other Company secretarial matters usually the NonExecutive Directors have a separate meeting with sometimes a second session without the Chairman present Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Director induction New Directors receive a full formal and tailored induction on joining the Board including meetings with senior management.
The induction process for Martin Gilbert in 2017 provided a comprehensive introduction to the main aspects of the Group its business and functions and the roles and responsibilities of a UK listed company director and the Companys Code of Conduct.
A similar induction is being undertaken for Gill Marcus in 2018.
Board effectiveness Since an external evaluation was carried out during 2015 and no material governance issues arose during 2016 the Board resolved to carry out an internal evaluation for the year.
As part of this process the findings from the external evaluation which were summarised in the 2015 Annual Report were reviewed.
The evaluation process has been augmented by the private sessions which take place between the NonExecutive Directors without management and ongoing discussions as to the efficiency and effectiveness of the Board and its committees.
There are currently no material issues which have been identified regarding the composition or operation of the
The next Board evaluation will be facilitated externally.
Remuneration
Remuneration is covered in the Directors remuneration report which follows this section.
It includes a description of the work of the Remuneration Committee.
Diversity
The diversity policy which is applied to appointments to our administrative management and supervisory bodies with regard to aspects such as for instance age gender or education and professional backgrounds is the same as for all Group employees as described on page 36.
During 2017 Martin Gilbert and Gill Marcus were appointed to the Board.
The Board is very cognisant of the ongoing desire from stakeholders for greater diversity in senior management and boards.
In particular leading institutional shareholders have set a target for women to comprise 30% of the senior management and boards of FTSE100 companies by 2020.
While we support the aims of diversity we do not believe that a one size fits all policy is correct.
Historically certain sectors have attracted a considerable number of career women while others  such as mining and commodities  have not.
Even today we find it challenging to fill positions in remote mining locations and for the marketing of commodities by women.
Risk  Board leadership The Board provides leadership and oversight on risk management.
Specifically it 1 provides a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group The Board determines the nature and extent of the principal risks the Group should take in achieving its strategic objectives.
The Board has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The Directors description of those risks and their explanation as to how they are being managed or mitigated are set out on page 42.
2 determines a longerterm viability statement Taking account of the Groups position and principal risks the Directors assess the prospects of the Group and conclude whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment.
Their conclusions are set out on page 109.
3 monitors the Groups risk management and internal control systems The Board oversees sound risk management and internal control systems.
It carries out a regular review of their effectiveness including reviewing the Groups internal financial controls and the Groups internal control and risk management.
This monitoring and review covers all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
Their work and conclusions are described on pages 42 and 91  94.
Corporate Governance report continued Glencore Annual Report 2017
Risk Management Framework
External
Prices Operating Catastrophes Supply and demand Credit HSEC Business Sustainability
Tone from the top
Risk process
Identify Measure Mitigate Control Report Technology Process
Industrial
HSEC risk process Risk culture Risk strategy and appetite Risk governance Risk organisation External disclosure Risk monitoring and reporting Risk identification Risk assessment
Risk management
Principal risks and uncertainties see pages 42 Bu s i ne s s s e g m e n t s and functions Management team executive Group functions incl.
Compliance
Internal Audit HSEC Assurance Board of Directors Audit Committee HSEC Committee Accountability and audit Financial reporting The Group has in place a comprehensive financial review cycle which includes a detailed annual planningbudgeting process where business units prepare budgets for overall consolidation and approval by the Board.
The Group uses a large number of performance indicators to measure both operational and financial activity in the business.
Depending on the measure these are reported and reviewed on a daily weekly or monthly basis.
In addition management in the business receives weekly and monthly reports of indicators which are the basis of regular operational meetings where corrective action is taken if necessary.
At a Group level a welldeveloped management accounts pack including income statement balance sheet cash flow statement as well as key ratios is prepared and reviewed monthly by management.
As part of the monthly reporting process a reforecast of the current year projections is performed.
To ensure consistency of reporting the Group has a global consolidation system as well as a common accounting policies and procedures manual.
Management monitors the publication of new reporting standards and works closely with our external auditor in evaluating their impact if any.
Risk management
The Board has applied Principle C.2 of the Code by establishing a continuous process for identifying evaluating and managing the risks that are considered significant by the Group in accordance with the revised Turnbull Guidance on Internal Control published by the Financial Reporting
This process has been in place for the period under review and up to the date of approval of the Annual Report and financial statements.
The process is designed to manage and mitigate rather than eliminate risk and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Directors confirm that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and have reviewed the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems.
This review excludes associates of the Group as Glencore does not have the ability to dictate or modify the internal controls of these entities.
This report describes how the effectiveness of the Groups structure of internal controls including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems is reviewed.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Katanga Restatement Notwithstanding the strong Group internal control environment a restatement of past financial statements was required at Katanga.
This followed an internal review of certain of Katangas historic accounting practices under the direction of the independent directors of Katanga who engaged Canadian legal counsel and an international accounting firm to assist them in conducting the review.
Despite the matter not having a material adverse effect on the consolidated income financial position or cash flows of Glencore the Board regarded it as serious and accordingly established a Board committee headed by the Chairman to carefully consider the findings of this review and noted the material weaknesses identified in Katangas internal controls over financial reporting.
As a result of these matters three of the Katanga executive directors resigned from the Katanga board and Glencore nominated three new directors to replace them.
Additionally as a result of a review by Glencore various structural and internal control changes have been implemented across the copper department in order to enhance and strengthen its financial processes and procedures.
Your Board has been committed to ensure that the weaknesses identified are addressed and do not recur.
Katanga has been advised by the Ontario Securities Commission OSC that its enforcement staff are investigating among other things whether Katangas previously filed periodic public disclosures contain statements that are misleading in a material respect and the adequacy of Katangas corporate governance practices and the related conduct of certain directors and officers of Katanga.
Katanga has also been advised that OSC enforcement staff are reviewing Katangas risk disclosure in connection with applicable requirements under certain international bribery government payment and anti corruption laws.
Katanga is cooperating fully with the OSC investigations and the Board committee continues to closely monitor developments with respect to the OSC investigation.
Approach to risk management Effective risk management is crucial in helping the Group achieve its objectives of preserving its overall financial strength for the benefit of all shareholders and other stakeholders and safeguarding its ability to continue as a going concern while generating sustainable longterm profitability.
Spanning the organisational structure Glencores disciplined approach to risk management and control originates with strategic responsibility in the hands of the Board which also retains operational authority on matters exceeding agreed thresholds of materiality.
The Board retains final authority for assessing and approving the Groups overall risk appetite and sets overall limits which are subject to review annually.
It is assisted by the work of the Audit Committee for oversight and by senior management for daytoday operational matters in order to maintain an effective risk management governance apparatus for the Group.
Risk Management Framework
Management engagement The Companys senior management reviews the major risks facing the Group and decides if the level of risk is acceptable or whether further steps need to be taken to mitigate these risks.
Together central and business management set the level of risk appetite by ensuring that there is an appropriate balance between the level of risk assumed and the expected return.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing the risk management system and internal controls.
Mandated by the Board the Audit and HSEC Committees are responsible for ensuring that the significant risks identified are properly managed.
Group functions
Group functions Risk Management
Compliance Legal and Sustainable Development support the Business Risk Owners and senior management in mitigating risk across the Group.
Internal Audit Internal Audit as an independent assurance provider reviews the risk management process and internal controls established by the management team.
A riskbased audit approach is applied in order to focus on high risk areas during the audit process.
It involves discussions with management on the risks identified in the business risk registers emerging risks operational changes new investments and capital projects.
The key results from this process are reported to the Audit Committee for their review.
As well as being subject to a review of the Audit Committee for its effectiveness the Internal Audit function was also subject to a conformance review in 2017 Corporate Governance report continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 by KPMG pursuant to the International Internal Audit Standards and International Professional Practices Framework Guidance.
A Generally Conforms assessment the best scale of assessment available was made by KPMG.
Industrial risk management We believe that every employee should be accountable for the risks related to their role.
As a result we encourage our employees to escalate all risks to their immediate supervisors.
This enables risks to be tackled and mitigated at an early stage by the team with the relevant level of expertise.
The management teams at each industrial operation are responsible for implementing a risk management process that identifies assesses and manages risk.
The risks that may impact on business objectives and plans are maintained in a business risk register.
They include strategic compliance operational and reporting risks.
Any significant risks are reported to Management and the Audit
A Corporate Risk Management Framework is implemented on a Groupwide basis to ensure consistency in the assessment and reporting of risks.
HSEC risk management These risk management processes are operated at asset level subject to coordination and guidance from the central sustainability team and subject to the leadership and oversight of the HSEC Committee.
The Groups internal assurance programme continues to be developed for the assessment of compliance with leading practices in health and safety environment and communities.
Further information is provided in the report from the HSEC Committee below and will be published in the Groups sustainability report for 2017.
Marketing risk management Glencores marketing activities are exposed to commodity price basis volatility foreign exchange interest rate credit and performance liquidity and regulatory risks.
Glencore devotes significant resources to developing and implementing policies and procedures to identify monitor and manage these risks.
Glencore has a disciplined and conservative approach to Marketing Risk MR management supported by its flat organisational structure.
Glencore continues to update and implement policies which are intended to mitigate and manage commodity price credit and other related risks.
Glencores MR is managed at an individual business and central level.
Initial responsibility for risk management is provided by the businesses in accordance with and complementing their commercial decisionmaking.
A support challenge and verification role is provided by the central MR function headed by the Chief Risk Officer CRO via its daily risk reporting and analysis which is split by market and credit risk.
The CEO as the central figure of commercial leadership and control drives functional risk management policy supported by the CFO and CRO with data and reporting from the central risk team and the other key functional units.
In turn the CEO reports to and seeks authority limits from the Board with the main oversight role being performed by the Audit Committee which receives a report from the CRO at each of its scheduled meetings.
It also approves subject to Board confirmation the Groupwide risk profile and any exceptions to agreed positional thresholds.
At the heart of the risk management regime is the process of challenge that takes place between the CEO the CRO and the business heads which sets risk appetite in accordance with Group requirements and market conditions for each commodity.
The objective is to ensure that an appropriate balance is maintained between the levels of risk assumed and expected return which relies on the commodity specific expert knowledge provided by business heads.
This is then subject to challenge from the CEO based on his overall Group knowledge and experience.
This process is designed to manage risk effectively while facilitating the fast commercial decisionmaking which is required in a dynamic commodity marketing company.
Another important consideration of the MR team is the challenge of dealing with the impact of large transactional flows across many locations.
The function seeks to ensure effective supervision by its timely and comprehensive transaction recording ongoing monitoring of the transactions and resultant exposures providing all encompassing positional reporting and continually assessing universal counterparty credit exposure.
Key focus points Market Risk limits and reporting The MR team provides a wide array of dailyweekly reporting.
A daily risk report showing Group Value at Risk VaR as shown on the next page and various other stress tests and analyses are distributed to the CEO CFO and CRO.
Business risk summaries showing positional exposure and other relevant metrics together with potential margin call requirements are also circulated daily.
The MR function works to enhance its stress and scenario testing as well as enhancing measures to capture risk exposure within the specific areas of the business e. refining charges are analysed.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Credit Risk Management
The Group continues to make extensive use of credit enhancement tools seeking letters of credit insurance cover discounting and other means of reducing credit risk from counterparts.
In addition marktomarket exposures in relation to hedging contracts are regularly and substantially collateralised primarily with cash pursuant to margining agreements in place with such hedge counterparts.
The Groupwide Credit Risk Policy governs higher levels of credit risk exposure with an established threshold for referral of credit decisions by business heads to CFO CEO relating to unsecured amounts in excess of 75 million with BBB or lower rated counterparts.
At lower levels of materiality decisions may be taken by the business heads where key strategic transactions or established relationships suggest that an open account exposure may be warranted.
Systems and reporting Whilst no single trading system that the Group can identify appears able to manage the broad range of requirements that the different business profiles of the Group would place on it interfacing with multiple source systems and transferring data from one to another create enhanced risk to data integrity granularity consistency and timeliness.
Corporate Governance report continued The Group monitors its commodity price risk exposure by using a VaR computation assessing open commodity positions which are subject to price risks.
VaR is one of the risk measurement techniques the Group uses to monitor and limit its primary market exposure related to its physical marketing exposures and related derivative positions.
VaR estimates the potential loss in value of open positions that could occur as a result of adverse market movements over a defined time horizon given a specific level of confidence.
The methodology is a statistically defined probability based approach that takes into account market volatilities as well as risk diversification benefits by recognising offsetting positions and correlations between commodities and markets.
In this way risks can be compared across all markets and commodities and risk exposures can be aggregated to derive a single risk value.
Last year the Board approved the Audit Committees recommendation of a one day 95% VaR limit of 100 million for 2017 consistent with the previous year.
This limit is subject to review and approval on an annual basis.
The purpose of this Group limit is to assist senior management in controlling the Groups overall risk profile within this tolerance threshold.
During 2017 Glencores reported average daily VaR was approximately 25 million with an observed high of 41 million and a low of 13 million.
There were no breaches in the limit during the year.
The Group remains aware of the extent of coverage of risk exposures and their limitations.
In addition VaR does not purport to represent actual gains or losses in fair value on earnings to be incurred by the Group nor are these VaR results considered indicative of future market movements or representative of any actual impact on its future results.
VaR remains viewed in the context of its limitations notably the use of historical data as a proxy for estimating future events market illiquidity risks and risks associated with longer time horizons as well as tail risks.
Recognising these limitations the Group complements and refines this risk analysis through the use of stress and scenario analysis.
The Group regularly backtests its VaR to establish adequacy of accuracy and to facilitate analysis of significant differences if any.
The Board has again approved the Audit Committees recommendation of a one day 95% VaR limit of 100 million for 2018.
Value at risk
Mar
Jun
Sept
Dec
Metals and minerals Energy products Agricultural products VaR development m Glencore Annual Report 2017 Dealing with requirements arising from regulatory reform In 2017 Glencore continued to implement the requirements of financial regulatory reform including the European Market Abuse Regulation MAR which affects the protection and disclosure of inside information and the prevention of market manipulation the DoddFrank Act the European Market Infrastructure Regulation EMIR and the Swiss Financial Market Infrastructure Act FMIA which affect in particular the areas of risk mitigation trade confirmation timeframes portfolio reconciliation portfolio compression and dispute resolution and trade reporting Upcoming financial regulatory reform proposals or requirements include further requirements under EMIR including mandatory clearing and margining requirements further requirements under FMIA including trade reporting risk mitigation margin requirements and mandatory clearing MIFID II including EU authorisations and position limits The impact of certain aspects of these and other new regulations to commodity market participants is potentially considerable.
The impact on our marketing business will largely be in the form of compliance requirements with associated costs rather than meaningful commercial limitations.
Glencores compliance finance IT and risk teams continue to work together in monitoring and advising management on these developments.
Internal Audit Glencore has a dedicated Internal Audit function reporting directly to the Audit Committee.
The role of Internal Audit is to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management control and business governance processes.
Internal Audit reviews areas of potential risk within the business and suggests control solutions to mitigate exposures identified.
The Audit Committee considers and approves the riskbased audit plan areas of audit focus and resources and is regularly updated on audits performed and relevant findings as well as the progress on implementing the actions arising.
In particular the Committee considered Internal Audits high priority issues with a particular focus on procurement and systems its KPIs and the effectiveness and timeliness of managements responses to its findings.
The Audit Committee reviewed the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function.
As part of this work it considered the functions management framework and its improvement programme.
Relationships with shareholders The Board aims to present a balanced and clear view of the Group in communications with shareholders and believes that being transparent in describing how we see the market and the prospects for the business is extremely important.
We communicate with shareholders in a number of different ways.
The formal reporting of our full and halfyear results and quarterly production reports is achieved through a combination of releases presentations group calls and one to one meetings.
The full and halfyear reporting is followed by investor meetings in a variety of locations where we have institutional shareholders.
We also regularly meet with existing and prospective shareholders to update or to introduce them to the Company and periodically arrange visits to parts of the business to give analysts and major shareholders a better understanding of how we manage our operations.
These visits and meetings are principally undertaken by the CEO CFO and senior members of the Investor Relations team and an array of business heads.
In addition many major shareholders have meetings with the Chairman and appropriate senior personnel of the Group including other NonExecutive Directors the Company Secretary and senior Sustainability managers.
In particular in 2017 the following were undertaken a presentation and investor roadshow was held in May to provide a detailed account of the Companys sustainability policies and plans.
Led by the Chairman of the HSEC Committee presentations were also given by the Chairman and the CEO the Chairman and Company Secretary met with a large number of institutional shareholders in the summer principally to discuss governance and reporting The Board receives regular updates from the Companys Head of Strategy on the views of shareholders through a briefing which is a standing agenda item for all Board meetings which is supplemented by input from the Chairman CEO CFO and if applicable the Senior Independent Director.
AGM
The Companys next AGM is due to be held in Zug on 2 May 2018.
Full details of the meeting will be set out in the Notice of Meeting which will be sent to shareholders one month before the meeting.
Shareholders unable to attend are encouraged to vote by proxy as detailed in the Notice of Meeting.
All documents relating to the AGM will be available on the Companys website at siteagm Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Mr Fischer and Mr Grauer served throughout the year.
Mr Gilbert joined the Committee at its second meeting of the year in May.
Mr Macaulay retired from the Board in April 2017 and participated in one meeting prior to this date.
All are considered to be Independent NonExecutive Directors and deemed to be financially literate by virtue of their business experience.
Additionally all Committee members are considered by the Board to have recent and relevant financial experience and have competence in accounting.
The Committee held four scheduled and one additional meeting during the year which all the Committee members attended.
John Burton is Secretary to the Committee.
Governance processes The Audit Committee usually invites the CEO CFO Group Financial Controller CRO and Head of Internal Audit and the lead partner from the external auditor to attend each meeting.
Other members of management and the external auditor may attend as and when required.
Other Directors and sometimes all other Directors also attend its meetings.
The Committee also holds private sessions with the external auditor and the Head of Internal Audit without members of management being present.
The
Committee has adopted guidelines allowing nonaudit services to be contracted with the external auditor on the basis set out below.
Role responsibilities and main activities The primary function of the Audit Committee is to assist the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities with regard to financial reporting external and internal audit risk management and controls.
During the year the Committees principal work included the following reviewing Glencores internal financial and compliance controls and internal controls and risk management systems reviewing and agreeing the preparation and scope of the yearend reporting process determining the global audit plan scope and fees of the audit work to be undertaken by the external auditor evaluating the Groups procedures for ensuring that the Annual Report and accounts taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable reviewing the fullyear audited and halfyear unaudited financial statements with management and the external auditor reviewing the Groups financial and accounting policies and practices including discussing material issues with management and the external auditor especially matters that influence or could affect the presentation of accounts and key figures considering applicable regulatory changes to reporting obligations evaluating the effectiveness of the external auditor recommending to the Board a resolution to be put to the shareholders for their approval on the appointment of the external auditor and to authorise the Board to fix the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditor monitoring the independence of the external auditor and reviewing the operation of the Companys policy for the provision of nonaudit services by it considering and approving two assignments above the approval threshold with the external auditor in respect of nonaudit services considering the output from the Groupwide processes used to identify evaluate and mitigate risks including credit and performance risks across the industrial and marketing activities
Leonhard Fischer Other members Martin Gilbert Peter Grauer A u d i t C o mmi t te e report Corporate Governance report continued Glencore Annual Report 2017  considering the scope and methodologies to determine the Companys going concern and longerterm viability statements reviewing the Internal Audit departments annual audit plan and reviewing the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of Glencores internal controls for which there were no significant failings or weaknesses noted other than the Katanga restatement noted below reviewing reports on the operation of the Groups legal compliance programme including material notifications under the Groups Raising Concerns whistleblowing programme Risk analysis The Committee receives reports and presentations at its meetings on our management of marketing and other risks excluding sustainability risks which are reviewed by the HSEC Committee.
Significant issues related to the financial statements The Committee assesses whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and whether management has made appropriate estimates and judgements.
They also review external auditor reports outlining audit work performed and conclusions reached in respect of key judgements as well as identifying any issues in respect of these.
During the year the Committee has focused in particular on these key matters Katanga restatement The Katanga restatement issue is described on page 92.
Areas of focus for the Audit Committee were understanding the material defects in the internal control environment which led to the misstatements to satisfy itself in discussions with the CEO and CFO and the internal and external auditor that the remedial steps proposed to the internal controls are sufficient to ensure that the weaknesses identified do not recur overseeing the implementation and monitoring of recommendations by external experts and the Board committee to strengthen internal controls to consider the appropriate treatment in our accounts for matters arising as a result of these issues Acquisitions and disposals Accounting for acquisitions involves significant management judgements and estimates.
In 2017 the Committee analysed the accounting treatment of the QIA and Rosneft strategic partnership the purchase of interests in Katanga Mutanda and Volcan the finalisation of the sale of a 50% stake in Glencore Agriculture the sale of a controlling stake in oil storage assets and the Trevali zinc assets transaction.
Impairment
The Committee considered whether the carrying value of goodwill industrial assets physical trade positions and material loans and advances may be impaired as a result of commodity price volatility and some asset specific factors.
The
Committee reviewed managements reports outlining the basis for the key assumptions used in calculating the recoverable value for the Groups assets.
Future performance assumptions used are derived from the Board approved business plan.
As part of the process for approval of this plan the Committee considered the feasibility of strategic plans underpinning future performance expectations and whether they remain achievable.
Considerable focus was applied to managements commodity price and exchange rate assumptions.
The Committee discussed with the external auditor their work in respect of impairment review which was a key area of focus for them.
Taxation
Due to its global reach including operating in high risk jurisdictions the Group is subject to enhanced complexity and uncertainty in accounting for income taxes particularly the evaluation of tax exposures and recoverability of deferred tax.
The Committee has engaged with management to understand the potential tax exposures globally and the key estimates taken in determining the positions recorded including the status of communications with local tax authorities and the carrying values of deferred tax assets.
Counterparty exposures The Groups global operations expose it to credit and performance risk which result in the requirement to make estimates around recoverability of receivables loans trade advances and contractual nonperformance.
As part of an ongoing review the Committee considered material continuing exposures the robustness of processes followed to evaluate recoverability and whether the amounts recorded in the financial statements are reasonable.
Following its analysis of these matters the Committee satisfied itself that the estimates made by management are reasonable and that financial statements disclosures included in the accounts are appropriate.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Internal Audit The Committee monitored the internal audit function as described under Internal Audit on page 95.
External Audit The Committee has evaluated the effectiveness of the external auditor and as part of this assessment has considered the steps taken by the auditor to ensure their objectivity and independence the deep knowledge of the Company which enhances Deloittes ability to perform as external auditor competence when handling key accounting and audit judgements and ability to communicate these to the Committee and management the extent of the auditors resources and technical capability to deliver a robust and timely audit including consideration of the qualifications and expertise of the team auditors performance and progress against the agreed audit plan including communication of changes to the plan and identified risks the proven stability that is gained from the continued engagement of Deloitte as external auditor the benefit of lead audit partner rotation.
The Committee assesses the quality and effectiveness of the external audit process on an annual basis in conjunction with the senior management team.
Key areas of focus include consideration of the quality and robustness of the audit identification of and response to areas of risk and the experience and expertise of the audit team including the lead audit partner.
Provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor The Groups policy on nonaudit services provided by the external auditor is designed to ensure the external auditor independence and objectivity is safeguarded.
A specified wide range of services may not be provided as they have the potential to impair the external auditors independence Excluded Services.
The Audit Committees approval is required for 1 any Excluded Service 2 any other engagement where either i the fee is contingent ii the fee may exceed 500000 or iii where the fees for all nonaudit work may exceed 15 million.
Subject to these restrictions and other safeguards in the policy the external auditor may be permitted to provide certain nonaudit services when it is concluded that they are the most appropriate supplier due to efficiency and status as a leading firm for those specific services.
For 2017 fees paid to the external auditor were 32 million the total nonaudit fees of which were 9 million further details are contained in note 28 to the financial statements.
Reappointment of the external auditor Deloitte has been the auditor of the listed entity since its IPO in 201 1.
A lead audit engagement partner rotation occurred prior to the financial year ended 31 December 2013 and is due to take place again during 2018 for which preparations have already commenced.
The Board and the Audit Committee acknowledge the greater investor scrutiny as to a tendering for and rotation of the external auditor and note the recent regulatory and guidance changes.
Taking into account all relevant factors the Audit Committee has concluded that it is not appropriate to tender at the current time.
The Committee has determined that it is satisfied that the work of Deloitte LLP is effective the scope is appropriate and significant judgements have been challenged robustly by the lead partner and team.
Additionally there are no contractual restrictions on the Companys choice of external auditor.
The Committee has therefore recommended to the Board that a proposal be put to shareholders at the 2018 AGM for the reappointment of Deloitte LLP as external auditor.
Leonhard Fischer Chairman of the Audit Committee 1 March 2018 Corporate Governance report continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Chairman Peter Grauer Other members John Mack Leonhard Fischer N om i n a t i on Committee report Secondly the Committee considered the composition of the Board and refreshment.
Search processes for suitable additional NonExecutive Directors were conducted.
Martin Gilbert was appointed in May 2017.
In recommending his appointment to the Board Mr Gilberts indepth financial knowledge and long track record both as a listed company CEO and as a FTSE NonExecutive Director were considered.
At the end of the year Gill Marcus was also appointed with effect from 1 January 2018.
Ms Marcus will bring to the Board extensive experience of finance and public service.
The Committee has noted the recommendations of the Hampton Alexander Review on gender and the Parker Review on ethnic diversity.
It is part of the Committees policy when making new Board appointments to consider the importance of diversity on the Board including gender and ethnicity.
This is considered in conjunction with experience and qualifications.
Further details are set out on page 90.
External consultancy Spencer Stuart was retained for search mandates during the year.
Other than this engagement Spencer Stuart do not provide other services to the Group.
Peter Grauer Chairman of the Nomination
1 March 2018 All members served on the Committee throughout the year.
The Committee only comprises Independent NonExecutive
The Committee met four times during the year and all members attended these meetings.
In addition some of the discussions and deliberations in respect of the matters summarised below were carried out at Board meetings.
Roles and responsibilities The main responsibilities of the Nomination Committee are to assist the Board with succession planning and with the selection process for the appointment of new Directors both Executive and NonExecutive including the Chairman.
This involves evaluating the balance and skills knowledge and experience of the Board and identifying the capabilities and qualities including diversity required for a particular appointment overseeing the search process evaluating the need for Board refreshment and succession planning generally Main activities The Committee focused on two main tasks during this year.
Firstly prior to the notice of 2017 AGM being compiled the Committee considered the performance of each Director.
It concluded that each Director is effective in their role and continues to demonstrate the commitment required to remain on the Board.
Accordingly it recommended to the Board that reelection resolutions be put for each continuing Director at the 2017 AGM.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information  continued to analyse implementation of the SafeWork programme focusing on identification of fatal hazards and an appropriate safety culture considered reports from the Groups assurance programme for sustainability matters with an emphasis on catastrophic hazards and approved the assurance plan for 2018 provided ongoing support for managements engagement on climate change and emissions matters.
This included considering the work of the Groups climate change working group chaired by Dr Hayward considered reports on key performance indicators in relation to material issues including water and energy use and complaints from host communities considered process safety management water and effluents waste and spills human rights and grievance mechanism product stewardship and community engagement and compliance to social commitments considered engagement with communities and NGOs on sustainability matters reviewed and oversaw the Groups sustainability report held an investor roadshow to inform and receive feedback on the Companys sustainable development strategy and approach to HSEC management considered a variety of other material HSEC issues such as resettlement programmes incident reporting and health strategy Peter Coates Chairman of the HSEC Committee 1 March 2018 Corporate Governance report continued
Peter Coates Other members Ivan Glasenberg Anthony Hayward Patrice Merrin H e a l t h  S a f e t y Environment and
HSEC report The Committee met five times during the year.
Each Committee member served throughout the year and attended all of the meetings.
Every scheduled meeting had a substantial agenda reflecting the Committees objective of overseeing the Groups ongoing improvements in HSEC performance.
Responsibilities
The main responsibilities of the Committee are to ensure that appropriate Group policies are developed in line with our Values and Code of Conduct for the identification and management of current and emerging health safety environmental and community risks evaluate the effectiveness of policy implementation and HSEC risk management through assessment of operational performance review of recent internal and external reports independent audits and reviews of performance in regard to HSEC matters and action plans developed by management in response to issues raised report to the Board Main activities During the year the Committee reviewed and approved the Groups HSEC strategy continued its monitoring of achieving ongoing reductions in fatalities especially at the higher risk focus assets.
For this purpose it received a report on reviewed and made recommendations in respect of each fatality ongoing review of the Groups progress on its catastrophic hazard management as the most important nonfinancial risk management issue for the Group Glencore Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration report For the year ended 31 December 201 7
On behalf of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present our Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
As usual we have sought to make this report as short simple and straightforward as possible.
As a Jersey registered company headquartered in Switzerland Glencore is not subject to the UKs reporting regime but this report is prepared in full compliance with the UK rules unless stated otherwise.
Accordingly over the following pages we have set out details of the implementation of our reward policy in 2017 including the governance surrounding pay decisions members of the Committee and its advisers and details of what was paid to Directors during the year.
At the 2017 AGM shareholders approved our remuneration arrangements through two votes one on the Directors Remuneration Report excluding the Directors Remuneration Policy and the other on our Directors Remuneration Policy with votes in excess of 98% in favour of each resolution.
There are no changes in Board remuneration to report.
The Committee continues to ensure that the Directors Remuneration Policy and its implementation are attractive to shareholders in reflecting good governance reasonable terms and complete transparency.
John Mack Remuneration Committee Chairman 1 March 2018 Basis of reporting We have presented this Remuneration Report to reflect the reporting requirements on remuneration matters for companies with a UK governance profile particularly the UKs Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the UK Remuneration Regulations.
The Company aims to comply in all material respects with the reporting obligations within these regulations as a matter of good practice.
The report also describes how the Board has complied with the provisions set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code relating to remuneration matters.
Our auditors have reported on certain parts of the Directors Remuneration Report and stated whether in their opinion those parts of the report have been properly prepared.
Those sections of the report which have been subject to audit are clearly indicated.
Part A  Directors Remuneration Policy The Directors Remuneration Policy was approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM and the Company continues its obligation to only make payments within the limits it allows.
The Policy will be put to a shareholder vote the earlier of once every three years or when an amendment to the Policy is proposed.
As the Policy is not being put forward for shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM it has not been included in this Annual Report.
A summary is set out below and it is reproduced in full on our website at sitewhowearegovernance.
Summary of Directors Remuneration Policy General Policy for Executive Directors To facilitate the attraction retention and motivation of Executive Directors and other senior executives of appropriately high calibre to implement the Groups strategy.
In practice the CEO has continued to waive participation in bonus or LTI arrangements.
Base salary Provides market competitive fixed remuneration.
The Committee has not increased the salary level for any Executive Director since May 201 1.
Benefits
To provide appropriate supporting nonmonetary benefits.
Benefits received by Mr Glasenberg comprise salary loss longterm sickness and accident insurance travel insurance with a limit of 20000 p.
Pension
Provides basic retirement benefits which reflects local market practice.
Mr Glasenberg participates in the standard pension scheme for all Baar Switzerland based employees with an annual cap on the cost of provision of retirement benefits of 150000 p.
Annual Bonus Plan Supports delivery of shortterm operational financial and strategic goals.
The Committee has set a maximum annual bonus level of 200% of base salary.
LongTerm Incentives Glencore Performance Share Plan incentivises the creation of shareholder value over the longerterm.
The Committee has set a maximum annual grant level of 200% of base salary.
Significant Personal Shareholdings Aligns the interests of executives and shareholders.
The Committee has set a formal shareholding requirement for Executive Directors of 300% of salary.
The CEO has a beneficial ownership of over 8% of the Companys issued share capital.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Directors remuneration report For the year ended 31 December 201 7 continued Chairman and NonExecutive Director fees Reflects time commitment experience global nature and size of the Company.
NonExecutive Directors and the Senior Independent Director receive a base fee additional fees are paid for chairing or membership of a Board committee.
Chairman receives a single inclusive fee.
NonExecutive Directors are not eligible for any other remuneration or benefits of any nature.
Potential rewards under various scenarios Under the formal policy consistent with other large FTSE companies the total available variable pay i. base salary.
As Mr Glasenberg has continued to waive entitlement to all variable elements including both bonus and longterm incentives his base salary and all benefits are set at less than 25% of the aggregate remuneration which would potentially have been available to him had he not waived participation in these aspects.
These waivers are considered appropriate as the level of his personal shareholding is sufficient to provide a keen alignment of interest between him and of shareholders more generally without the need to add additional aspects to his package and cost to other shareholders.
His fixed remuneration set out below was set at a modestly below market level so the waivers do not reflect any element of an excessive bias to fixed pay in the traditional sense.
Consistent with UK legislation it has been prepared using the following assumptions.
In 2017 Mr Glasenbergs base salary was paid in US dollars and his benefits and pension contributions were paid in Swiss francs as described in this report.
Fixed  Consists of base salary benefits and pension Base salary is applicable to both 2017 and 2018 Benefits measured as benefits figure in the single figure table Pension measured as pension figure in the single figure table Ivan Glasenberg Base Salary
Pension
Total Fixed 1447 4 62 1513 Ontarget and
Based on what the Director would receive if performance was ontarget whether inclusive or exclusive of share price appreciation and dividends STI Mr Glasenberg currently waives any right to participate in the annual bonus plan LTI He does not currently participate in the Performance Share Plan Executive Directors contracts The table below summarises the key features of the service contract for Ivan Glasenberg the only person who served as an Executive Director during the year.
All Directors contracts and letters of appointment will be available for inspection on the terms to be specified in the Notice of 2018 AGM.
Provision Service contract terms Notice period  Twelve months notice by either party Contract date  28 April 201 1 as amended on 30 October 2013 Expiry date  Rolling service contract
No special arrangements or entitlements on termination.
Any compensation would be limited to base salary only for any unexpired notice period plus any accrued leave
On a change of control of the Company no provision for any enhanced payments nor for any liquidated damages External appointments The Executive Directors external appointments are noted on page 82.
He assigns to the Group the compensation received in relation to each appointment.
The appropriateness of these appointments is considered as part of the annual review of Directors interests potential conflicts.
NonExecutive Directors Letters of appointment and reelection All NonExecutive Directors have letters of appointment with the Company for an initial period of three years from their date of appointment subject to reappointment at each AGM.
The Company may terminate each appointment by immediate notice and there are no special arrangements or entitlements on termination except that the Chairman is entitled to three months notice.
As set out in last years Annual Report the fees payable to the NonExecutive Directors were increased with effect from 1 January 2017.
The annual fees are paid in accordance with a NonExecutive Directors role and responsibilities.
The fees payable for 2018 are unchanged and are as follows US 000
Chairman 1150 Senior Independent Director 200 NonExecutive Director 135 Remuneration Committee Chairman 45 Member 25 Audit Committee Chairman 60 Member 35 Nomination Committee Chairman 40 Member 20 HSEC Committee Chairman 125 Member 40 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Part B  Implementation Report Implementation Report  Unaudited Information Remuneration Committee Membership and experience of the Remuneration
We believe that the members of the Committee provide a useful balance of abilities experience and perspectives to provide the critical analysis required in carrying out the Committees function.
Each of John Mack Leonhard Fischer and Martin Gilbert has had a long career in the management of large financial services organisations and therefore provides considerable experience of remuneration analysis and implementation.
All members of the Remuneration Committee are considered to be independent.
Further details concerning independence of the NonExecutive Directors are contained on page 87.
Role of the Remuneration Committee The terms of reference of the Committee set out its role.
They are available on the Companys website at sitewhowearegovernance Its principal responsibilities are on behalf of the Board to set the Companys executive remuneration policy and review its ongoing relevance and appropriateness establish the remuneration packages for the Executive Director including the scope of pension benefits determine the remuneration package for the Chairman in consultation with the Chief Executive have responsibility for overseeing schemes of performance related remuneration including share incentive plans for and determine awards for the Executive Director as appropriate ensure that the contractual terms on termination for the Executive Director are fair and not excessive monitor senior management remuneration The Committee considers corporate performance on HSEC and governance issues when setting remuneration for the Executive Director.
The Committee seeks to ensure that the incentive structure for the Groups senior management does not raise HSEC or governance risks by inadvertently motivating irresponsible behaviour.
Remuneration Committee meetings The Committee met two times during the year and considered amongst other matters the remuneration policy applicable to the Executive Director senior management remuneration policy including its level and structure the form and structure of grants to employees under the Companys Deferred Bonus Plan and Performance Share Plan and the content and approval of the Remuneration Report.
The Chairman CEO and CFO are usually invited to attend some or all of the proceedings of Remuneration Committee meetings.
They do not participate in any decisions concerning their own remuneration.
Advisers to the Remuneration Committee The Committee appointed and received independent remuneration advice during the year from its external adviser FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FIT.
FIT is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group the UK professional body for these consultants and adheres to its code of conduct.
The Committee was satisfied that the advice provided by FIT was objective and independent.
FITs fees for this advice in respect of 2017 were 4872 2016 10410.
FITs fees were charged on the basis of the firms standard terms of business for advice provided.
FIT provided no other services to the Group in the year.
The Committee also receives advice from John Burton the Company Secretary.
Relative importance of remuneration spend The table below illustrates the change in total remuneration distributions paid and net profit from 2016 to 2017.
USm
USm
Distributions and buybacks 998 Net income attributable to equity holders 5777 1379 Total remuneration 4656 4245 The figures presented have been calculated on the following bases Distributions and buybacks  distributions paid during the financial year.
No shares were bought back during the year.
Net income attributable to equity holders our reported net income in respect of the financial year.
The Committee believes it is a good indicator of ongoing relative statutory performance.
Total remuneration  represents total personnel costs as disclosed in note 22 to the financial statements which includes salaries wages social security other personnel costs and sharebased payments.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Performance graph and table This graph shows the value to 31 December 2017 on a total shareholder return TSR basis of 100 invested in Glencore plc on 24 May 201 1 our IPO date compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE 350 Mining
The FTSE 350 Mining Index is considered to be an appropriate comparator for this purpose as it is an equity index consisting of companies listed in London in the same sector as Glencore.
The UK reporting regulations also require that a TSR performance graph is supported by a table summarising aspects of CEO remuneration as shown below for the same period as the TSR performance graph Percentage change in pay of Chief Executive Officer and comparative ratios The UK Remuneration Regulations provide for disclosure of percentage changes of the CEOs remuneration against the average percentage change for employees generally or an appropriate group of employees.
In addition the UK Investment Associations 2016 Remuneration Principles recommend disclosure as to how the remuneration outturn for a Companys CEO compares with that of a its median employee and b its Executive Committee.
Given that the CEO has since May 201 1 waived any entitlement to any increase in salary and given that his only other unwaived benefits are those provided to all employees at the Companys head office in Baar no such comparisons or ratios have been made.
Most recent shareholder voting outcomes The votes cast 1 to approve the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2016 and 2 to approve the Directors Remuneration Policy at the 2017 AGM were Votes For
Against
Votes
Abstentions as a total of votes cast
Directors Remuneration Report
98.24% 1.76% 0.11% 10748442346 192592622 12442987 Directors Remuneration Policy 98.20% 1.80% 0.52% 10700495856 196055182 56926916 The Committee continues to seek a productive and ongoing dialogue with investors on the Directors Remuneration Policy remuneration aspects of corporate governance any changes to the Companys executive pay arrangements and developments as to executive remuneration issues in general.
Single figure of total remuneration
Annual variable element award rates against maximum opportunity Longterm incentive vesting rates against maximum opportunity 2017 Ivan Glasenberg Ivan 1513 2016 Ivan Glasenberg 1509 2015 Ivan Glasenberg 1510 2014 Ivan Glasenberg 1513 2013 Ivan Glasenberg 1509 2012 Ivan Glasenberg 1533 2011 Ivan Glasenberg 1483 1 The value of benefits and pension provision in the single figure vary as a result of the application of exchange rates although in the relevant local currency these parts of Mr Glasenbergs remuneration have not altered since May 2011.
In this table the figures are reported in US dollars the currency in which Mr Glasenberg received his salary in 2017.
The salary was payable in pounds sterling prior to 2014.
Therefore those figures have been translated into US dollars at the exchange rates used for the preparation of the financial statements in those years.
Mr Glasenbergs pension and other benefits are charged to the Group in Swiss francs and these amounts are translated into US dollars on the same basis.
2 The CEO has requested not to be considered for these potential awards.
Directors remuneration report For the year ended 31 December 201 7 continued
May
Glencore
31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec FTSE 350 Mining Index Glencore Annual Report 2017 Implementation of policy in 2018 No change to any aspect of Directors remuneration is envisaged for 2018.
Implementation Report  Audited Information Single figure table Salary Benefits Annual Bonus
USteltelteltel 2016 Ivan Glasenberg 1447 1447 4 2 62 60 1513 1509 The notes to the performance table above also apply in relation to the compilation of this table.
As no bonuses or longterm incentives have been granted to Mr Glasenberg there are no relevant performance measures to be disclosed although the first page of this report notes the alignment of his position with that of other shareholders.
NonExecutive fees The emoluments of the NonExecutive Directors for 2017 were as follows
Total 2017
Total 2016
NonExecutive Chairman Anthony Hayward 1150 1056 NonExecutive Directors Peter Coates 260 249 Leonhard Fischer 240 221 Martin Gilbert Peter Grauer 275 237 William Macaulay John Mack 200 187 Patrice Merrin 175 143 1 Appointed on 5 May 2017.
2 Retired on 14 April 2017.
The aggregate emoluments of all Directors for 2017 including pension contributions were 3997000 2016 3780000.
The only Director participant in a pension plan was Mr Glasenberg.
Directors interests The Directors interests in shares are set out in the Directors report which is set out after this report.
Mr Glasenbergs holding is considerably in excess of the formal share ownership guideline for Executive Directors of 300% of salary.
Approval
This report in its entirety has been approved by the Committee and the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by John Mack Remuneration Committee Chairman 1 March 2018 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Directors report For the year ended 31 December 201 7
This Annual Report is presented by the Directors on the affairs of Glencore plc the Company and its subsidiaries the Group or Glencore together with the financial statements and auditors report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Directors report includes details of the business the development of the Group and likely future developments as set out in the Strategic Report which together form the management report for the purposes of the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rule DTR 4.1.8R.
The notice concerning forwardlooking statements is set out at the end of the Annual Report.
Corporate structure Glencore plc is a public company limited by shares incorporated in Jersey and domiciled in Baar Switzerland.
Its shares are listed on the London and Johannesburg Stock Exchanges.
On 31 January 2018 the Company delisted its shares from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
Financial results and distributions The Groups financial results are set out in the financial statements section of this Annual Report.
A distribution of US0.07 per share was paid in 2017.
The Board is recommending two distributions totalling US0.20 per share in respect of the 2017 financial year as further detailed on page 58.
Review of business future developments and post balance sheet events A review of the business and the future developments of the Group is presented in the Strategic Report.
A description of acquisitions disposals and material changes to Group companies undertaken during the year is included in the Financial review and in note 24 to the financial statements.
Financial instruments Descriptions of the use of financial instruments and financial risk management objectives and policies including hedging activities and exposure to price risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow risk are included in notes 25 and 26 to the financial statements.
Corporate governance A report on corporate governance and compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code is set out in the Corporate Governance report and forms part of this report by reference.
Health safety environment and communities HSEC An overview of health safety and environmental performance and community participation is provided in the Sustainable Development section of the Strategic report.
The work of the HSEC Board committee is contained in the Corporate Governance report.
Taxation policy Our Tax Policy sitegrouptaxpolicy and our second payments to Governments report sitepaymentstogovermentsreport set out the Companys approach to tax and transparency and disclose the payments made by the Group on a countrybycountry and projectbyproject basis.
Exploration and research and development The Groups business units carry out exploration and research and development activities that are necessary to support and expand their operations.
Employee policies and involvement Glencore operates an equal opportunities policy that aims to treat individuals fairly and not to discriminate on the basis of sex race ethnic origin disability or on any other basis.
Applications for employment and promotion are fully considered on their merits and employees are given appropriate training and equal opportunities for career development and promotion.
Where disability occurs during employment the Group seeks to accommodate that disability where reasonably possible including with appropriate training.
The Group places considerable value on the involvement of its employees which is reflected in the principles of its Code of Conduct and its related guidance which requires regular open fair and respectful communication zero tolerance for human rights violations fair remuneration and above all a safe working environment.
Employee communication is mainly provided by the Groups intranet and corporate website.
A range of information is made available to employees including all policies applicable to them as well as information on the Groups financial performance and the main drivers of its business.
Employee consultation depends upon the type and location of operation or office.
Further information on our people is set out on pages 36 and 39.
Directors conflicts of interest Under Jersey law and the Companys Articles of Association which mirror section 175 of the UK Companies Act 2006 a Director must avoid a situation in which the Director has or can have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or possibly may conflict with the interests of the Company.
The duty is not infringed if the matter has been authorised by the Directors.
Under the Articles the Board has the power to authorise potential or actual conflict situations.
The Board maintains effective procedures to enable the Directors to notify the Company Glencore Annual Report 2017 of any actual or potential conflict situations and for those situations to be reviewed and if appropriate to be authorised by the Board.
Directors conflict situations are reviewed annually.
A register of authorisations is maintained.
Directors liabilities and indemnities The Company has granted third party indemnities to each of its Directors against any liability that attaches to them in defending proceedings brought against them to the extent permitted by Jersey Law.
In addition Directors and Officers of the Company and its subsidiaries are covered by directors and officers liability insurance.
Directors and Officers The names of the Companys Directors and Officers who were in office at the end of 2017 together with their biographical details and other information are shown on page 82.
Directors interests Details of interests in the ordinary shares of the Company of those Directors who held office during 2017 are given below
Number of
Shares
Percentage of Total Voting
Executive Directors Ivan Glasenberg 1211957850 8.40 NonExecutive Directors Peter Coates 1585150 0.01 Leonhard Fischer Martin Gilbert 50000 0.00 Peter Grauer 129792 0.00 Anthony Hayward 244907 0.00 William Macaulay 200000 0.00 John Mack 750000 0.00 Patrice Merrin 43997 0.00 1 Appointed to the Board on 5 May 2017.
2 Retired from the Board on 14 April 2017.
Figures provided at date of retirement.
No Director has any other interest in the share capital of the Company whether pursuant to any share plan or otherwise.
No changes in Directors interests of those in office at the date of this report have occurred between 31 December 2017 and 1 March 2018.
Share capital and shareholder rights As at 1 March 2018 the issued ordinary share capital of the Company was 145862001 represented by 14586200066 ordinary shares of 0.01 each of which 161459158 shares are held in treasury and 12771 1907 shares are held by Group employee benefit trusts.
Major interests in shares As at 31 January 2018 Glencore had been notified of the following interests representing 3% or more of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company Name of holder
Percentage of Total Voting
Qatar Holding 1221497099 8.47 Ivan Glasenberg 1211957850 8.40 BlackRock Inc 820422580 5.69 Harris Associates 545706610 3.78 Daniel Mat 454136143 3.15 Aristotelis Mistakidis 450175134 3.12 Share capital The rights attaching to the Companys ordinary shares being the only share class of the Company are set out in the Companys Articles of Association the Articles which can be found at sitewhoweare boardofdirectorsgovernancedownloads.
Subject to Jersey law any share may be issued with or have attached to it such preferred deferred or other special rights and restrictions as the Company may by special resolution decide or if no such resolution is in effect or so far as the resolution does not make specific provision as the Board may decide.
No such resolution is currently in effect.
Subject to the recommendation of the Board holders of ordinary shares may receive a distribution.
On liquidation holders of ordinary shares may share in the assets of the Company.
Holders of ordinary shares are also entitled to receive the Companys Annual Report and Accounts or a summarised version and subject to certain thresholds being met may requisition the Board to convene a general meeting GM or the proposal of resolutions at AGMs.
None of the ordinary shares carry any special rights with regard to control of the Company.
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled to attend and speak at GMs of the Company and to appoint one or more proxies or if the holder of shares is a corporation a corporate representative.
On a show of hands each holder of ordinary shares who being an individual is present in person or being a corporation is present by a duly appointed corporate representative not being himself a member shall have one vote and on a poll every holder of ordinary shares present in person or by proxy shall have one vote for every share of which he is the holder.
Electronic and paper proxy appointments and voting instructions must be received not later than 48 hours before a GM.
A holder of ordinary shares can lose Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information the entitlement to vote at GMs where that holder has been served with a disclosure notice and has failed to provide the Company with information concerning interests held in those shares.
Except as 1 set out above and 2 permitted under applicable statutes there are no limitations on voting rights of holders of a given percentage number of votes or deadlines for exercising voting rights.
The Directors may refuse to register a transfer of a certificated share which is not fully paid provided that the refusal does not prevent dealings in shares in the Company from taking place on an open and proper basis or where the Company has a lien over that share.
The Directors may also refuse to register a transfer of a certificated share unless the instrument of transfer is i lodged duly stamped if necessary at the registered office of the Company or any other place as the Board may decide accompanied by the certificate for the shares to be transferred andor such other evidence as the Directors may reasonably require as proof of title or ii in respect of only one class of shares.
Transfers of uncertificated shares must be carried out using CREST and the Directors can refuse to register a transfer of an uncertificated share in accordance with the regulations governing the operation of CREST.
The Directors may decide to suspend the registration of transfers for up to 30 days a year by closing the register of shareholders.
The Directors cannot suspend the registration of transfers of any uncertificated shares without obtaining consent from CREST.
There are no other restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company except 1 certain restrictions may from time to time be imposed by laws and regulations for example insider trading laws 2 pursuant to the Companys share dealing code whereby the Directors and certain employees of the Company require approval to deal in the Companys shares and 3 where a shareholder with at least a 0.25% interest in the Companys issued share capital has been served with a disclosure notice and has failed to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares.
There are no agreements between holders of ordinary shares that are known to the Company which may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
The rules for appointment and replacement of the Directors are set out in the Articles.
Directors can be appointed by the Company by ordinary resolution at a GM or by the Board upon the recommendation of the Nomination Committee.
The Company can remove a Director from office including by passing an ordinary resolution or by notice being given by all the other
The Company may amend its Articles by special resolution approved at a GM.
The powers of the Directors are set out in the Articles and provide that the Board may exercise all the powers of the Company including to borrow money.
The Company may by ordinary resolution authorise the Board to issue shares and increase consolidate subdivide and cancel shares in accordance with its Articles and Jersey law.
Purchase of own shares At the end of the year the Directors had authority under a shareholders resolution passed on 24 May 2017 to purchase through the market up to 10% of the Companys issued ordinary shares.
No purchase was made by the Company during 2017.
The Directors will seek a similar authority at the Companys AGM to be held in 2018.
Going concern The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are set out in the Strategic Report.
Furthermore notes 25 and 26 to the financial statements include the Groups objectives and policies for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposure to credit and liquidity risk.
Significant financing activities that took place during the year are detailed in the Financial review section.
The results of the Group principally pertaining to its industrial asset base are exposed to fluctuations in both commodity prices and currency exchange rates whereas the performance of marketing activities is primarily physical volume driven with commodity price risk substantially hedged.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation having made appropriate enquiries that the Group has adequate resources to continue its operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
The Directors have made this assessment after consideration of the Groups budgeted cash flows and related assumptions including appropriate stress testing of the identified uncertainties being primarily commodity prices and currency exchange rates and undrawn credit facilities monitoring of debt maturities and after review of the Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting 2014 as published by the UK Financial Reporting Council.
Directors report For the year ended 31 December 201 7 continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Longerterm viability In accordance with paragraph C2.2 of the Code the Directors have assessed the prospects of the Groups viability over a longer period than the 12 months required by the going concern assessment above.
A summary of the assessment made is set out on page 44 in the Principal risks and uncertainties section.
Based on the results of the related analysis the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the fouryear period of this assessment.
They also believe that the review period of four years is appropriate having regard to the Groups business model strategy principal risks and uncertainties and viability.
Auditor
Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
Deloitte LLP have expressed their willingness to continue in office as auditor and a resolution to reappoint them will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for the Company for each financial year.
The financial statements are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted for use in the European Union together IFRS.
The financial statements are required by law to be properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
International Accounting Standard 1 requires that financial statements present fairly for each financial year the Companys financial position financial performance and cash flows.
This requires the faithful representation of the effects of transactions other events and conditions in accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets liabilities income and expenses set out in the International Accounting Standards Boards Framework for the preparation and presentation of financial statements.
In virtually all circumstances a fair presentation will be achieved by compliance with all applicable IFRSs.
However the Directors are also required to properly select and apply accounting policies present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern The Directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Signed on behalf of the Board John Burton Company Secretary 1 March 2018 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Information required by Listing Rule LR 9.8.4C In compliance with UK Listing Rule 9.8.4C the Company discloses the following information Listing Rule Information required Relevant disclosure 9.8.41 Interest capitalised by the Group See note 7 to the financial statements 9.8.42 Unaudited financial information as required LR 9.2.18 See Chief Executive Officers review 9.8.45 Director waivers of emoluments See Directors remuneration report 9.8.46 Director waivers of future emoluments See Directors remuneration report 9.8.412 Waivers of dividends See note 17 to the financial statements 9.8.413 Waivers of future dividends See note 17 to the financial statements 9.8.414 Agreement with a controlling shareholder LR 9.2.2A Not applicable There are no disclosures to be made in respect of the other numbered parts of LR 9.8.4.
Confirmation of Directors responsibilities We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards and interpretations as adopted by the European Union International Financial Reporting Standards and interpretations as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and the Companies Jersey Law 1991 give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and income of the Group and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the management report which is incorporated in the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties they face and the Annual Report and consolidated financial statements taken as a whole are fair and balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the performance position strategy and business model of the Company.
The consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 were approved on the date below by the Board of Directors.
Signed on behalf of the Board Anthony Hayward Ivan Glasenberg
Chairman Chief Executive Officer
1 March 2018 Directors report For the year ended 31 December 201 7 continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 1 12 Independent Auditors Report Consolidated statement of income 123 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 124 Consolidated statement of financial position 125 Consolidated statement of cash flows 127 Consolidated statement of changes of equity 128 Notes to the financial statements
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the affairs of Glencore plc and its subsidiaries together the Group affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups income for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
We have audited the financial statements of the Group which comprise the consolidated statement of income the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated statement of financial position the consolidated statement of cash flows the consolidated statement of changes of equity and the related notes 1 to 33 The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as issued by the IASB.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We confirm that the nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Summary of our audit approach Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the current year were
Revenue recognition Fair value measurements within the marketing operations Classification of financial instruments Credit and performance risk Taxation and Katanga Mining Limited Katanga Restatements Our assessment of the Groups key audit matters is broadly consistent with 2016.
Capital preservation Debt reduction plans is no longer considered a key audit matter as a result of the Group completing the capital preservation and debt reduction plan announced in 2015.
We identified Katanga Restatements as a current year key audit matter following the announcement of the completion of an internal review of certain of Katangas historic accounting practices.
Materiality We determined materiality for the Group to be 200 million based on a normalised 3year average pretax profit.
Scoping We focused our Group audit scope primarily on the audit work at 47 components representing the Groups most material marketing operations and industrial assets.
These 47 components account for 93% of the Groups net assets 97% of the Groups revenue and 89% of the Groups adjusted EBITDA as set out in Note 2.
Significant changes in our approach Aside from the changes in key audit matters noted above there were no significant changes to our audit approach when compared to 2016.
Independent Auditors Report
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Conclusions relating to going concern principal risks and viability statement Going concern We have reviewed the directors statement in note 1 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to that statement required by Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 and report if the statement is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
Principal risks and viability statement Based solely on reading the directors statements and considering whether they were consistent with the knowledge we obtained in the course of the audit including the knowledge obtained in the evaluation of the directors assessment of the Groups ability to continue as a going concern we are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the disclosures on pages 42  51 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors confirmation on page 90 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity or the directors explanation on page 44 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We are also required to report whether the directors statement relating to the prospects of the Group required by Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We confirm that we have nothing material to report add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We confirm that we have nothing material to report add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Independent Auditors Report
Impairments
Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter The carrying value of the Groups noncurrent assets which includes intangible assets property plant and equipment loans and advances and investments in associates and joint ventures amounted to 85867 million at 31 December 2017.
The volatility in expected future prices of certain commodities key to the Group particularly oil copper cobalt zinc and coal foreign exchange rates production levels operating costs discount rates and macroeconomic developments require management to closely monitor noncurrent asset carrying values.
Given the nature of the Groups industrial assets developments concerning geology production or distribution of the Groups products may also trigger a need to consider impairment.
For loans advances and other investments assessing counterparty risk solvency and liquidity can be highly subjective.
Management completes an impairment review on all of the Groups significant investments annually as part of the Groups budgeting process.
The outcome of impairment assessments could vary significantly were different assumptions applied.
Refer to Key sources of estimation uncertainty within note 1 notes 4 5 and 9 as well as the Audit Committee Report on pages 96  98.
In total impairments amounting to 871 million were recognised in the year ended 31 December 2017 primarily relating to oil assets as a result of commodity prices and operational developments.
This was offset by 243 million of impairment reversals within oil assets following production plan optimisation and cost efficiency identification.
We reviewed managements assessment of impairment risk and their assessment of the indicators of impairment and challenged the significant assumptions used.
We sought to identify additional potential indicators of impairment through our review of operational performance and financial results as well as the impact of any significant regulatory changes.
Where significant indicators of impairment or impairment reversals were identified we utilised Deloitte extractive industry valuation specialists to assess the appropriateness of managements underlying model inputs and significant assumptions.
In performing our challenge we considered the risk of management bias in the assumptions and estimates.
We challenged the significant inputs and assumptions used in impairment and impairment reversal testing for intangible assets property plant and equipment associates and joint ventures.
Our challenge included comparing inputs and significant assumptions as noted above to third party forecasts and Deloitte developed discount rates.
Production assumptions were compared to life of mine or hydrocarbon extraction plans where applicable as well as reserves and resources estimates.
Operating costs and production levels were also compared to the current period actual results management approved budgets and life of mine models.
Further we assessed whether macro assumptions had been applied on a consistent basis across the Group.
We challenged managements sensitivity analysis by performing independent sensitivity analyses on selected assets including those which were not identified as having indicators of impairment but have a higher risk of impairment due to lower available headroom in fair value models volatility in key pricing assumptions or the existence of operational circumstances which may indicate potential for impairment.
For impairment reversals we reviewed the audit evidence relating to the reversal of conditions previously leading to the impairment and the models supporting the reversal.
With respect to loans and advances of 2976 million our procedures included challenging their recoverability by reviewing supporting agreements and obtaining evidence of current performance to identify potential indicators of impairment.
We assessed the adequacy of impairment related disclosures in the financial statements including the key assumptions used and the sensitivity of the financial statements to these assumptions.
Key observations Based on the results of our testing we concluded that managements assessment of impairment indicators was appropriate.
Where there were impairment indicators our procedures found that the impairment models were in line with the underlying mine and hydrocarbon extraction plans and supported by appropriate inputs and assumptions.
We concluded that the key pricing and discount rate assumptions were in line with third party evidence and our experts acceptable ranges.
We found managements disclosures on key assumptions and impairment sensitivities to be appropriate.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Revenue recognition Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter Revenue for the year was 205476 million 2016 152948 million and the identification as a key audit matter primarily relates to the following Marketing operations We identified a risk that the capture of trades within the trade book is incomplete or inaccurate impacting the timing and quantum of revenue recognition for commodity sales with deliveries occurring on or around yearend.
Judgement is required to determine when risks and rewards have transferred under certain contractual arrangements with third parties especially on or around yearend.
As a majority of the Groups trades are measured at fair value through profit and loss a complete and accurate trade capture process that includes all specific and bespoke terms within the commodity contracts is critical for accurate financial reporting and monitoring of trade book exposures and performance.
Marketing related activities depend on the reliability of the trade capture systems and their IT infrastructure environment.
Industrial assets Substantially all output from industrial assets is sold by the Groups marketing divisions.
Where third party sales occur the key risks relate to provisional pricing terms metal concentrate estimates and the consideration of embedded derivatives in sales contracts.
Judgement must be exercised to determine when risks and rewards have transferred under bill and hold and other non standard contract arrangements.
We presume a risk of material misstatement due to fraud related to revenue recognition.
Refer to note 1 for the revenue accounting policies.
We have reviewed Glencores revenue recognition policies for compliance with the requirements of IAS 18 Revenue IAS 18.
For marketing operations we evaluated the design implementation and tested the operating effectiveness of key controls surrounding the completeness and accuracy of trade capture and the revenue and trade cycle tested the operating effectiveness of general IT controls surrounding major technology applications and critical interfaces involving revenue recognition and the completeness and accuracy of trade capture agreed on a sample basis deliveries occurring on or around 31 December 2017 to supporting documentation to assess whether the IFRS revenue recognition criteria were met for recorded sales obtained third party confirmations where relevant to check completeness and accuracy of trade books and performed cutoff testing of trades entered into the trade book system around the reporting date For industrial assets we assessed the design and implementation of controls around the methodology adopted by management to identify the provisional pricing terms and the determination of estimates of metal in concentrate sold to third parties obtained third party confirmations to verify the completeness and accuracy of third party sales and reviewed key contracts for the existence of embedded derivatives and performed valuation testing as appropriate.
We also performed testing on journal entries using computer assisted profiling techniques to address the risk of management override of internal controls related to revenue recognition.
Key observations Based on the results of our testing we are satisfied that the revenue recognition policies are in line with IFRS and were appropriately applied throughout the period.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Fair value measurements within the marketing operations Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter Determination of fair values of marketing inventories financial assets and liabilities is a complex and subjective area often requiring significant estimates particularly where valuations utilise unobservable inputs e. volatility and forecast operational estimates.
At 31 December 2017 total Level 3 Other financial assets and liabilities amounted to 356 million and 705 million respectively.
As the Groups marketing inventories and other financial assets and liabilities are measured at fair value at each reporting date these fair value measurements significantly impact the Groups results.
Refer to Key sources of estimation uncertainty within note 1 and additionally notes 26 and 27.
We evaluated the design and implementation and tested operating effectiveness of key internal controls over managements processes for determining inputs to fair value measurements and performed detailed substantive testing on a sample basis of the related fair value measurements.
Using financial instrument specialists embedded within the audit team with experience in commodity trading we specifically tested the evidence supporting significant unobservable inputs utilised in Level 3 measurements in the fair value hierarchy as outlined in note 27 to the financial statements which included reviews of independent price quotes recent transactions and other supporting documentation.
Key observations Based on the results of our testing we are satisfied that the level 3 fair value measurements are supported by reasonable assumptions in line with recent transactions andor externally verifiable information.
We found the financial statement disclosures on fair value measurements in note 27 to be adequate.
Classification of financial instruments Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter Glencore trades a diverse portfolio of commodities and utilises a wide variety of trading strategies in order to profit from volatility in market prices differentials and spreads whilst maximising flexibility and optionality.
The classification of contracts relating to the Groups marketing operations is a judgemental area particularly distinguishing sales contracts where the Group physically delivers its own production to a third party own use from those which form part of the Groups marketing operations.
The majority of the Groups trades are measured at fair value through profit and loss.
Differences in classification affect recognition of associated gains and losses as contracts which are own use are exempt from marktomarket accounting.
Transactions for the sale or purchase of commodities may contain a financing element andor embedded derivatives which may require judgement in determining the most appropriate classification presentation and accounting treatment.
Refer to notes 26 and 27.
We obtained an understanding of the trading strategies and associated product flows within the Groups marketing departments using financial instrument specialists embedded within the audit team with experience in commodity trading.
We evaluated the design and implementation and tested operating effectiveness of key controls around monitoring exposures by the risk management department.
We analysed the trade books to understand unusual or complex derivatives open at yearend.
We also analysed the trading results for portfolios designated as own use for evidence of any net settlements which may indicate potential tainting of the IAS 39 own use criteria.
We challenged managements judgement and conclusions associated with classification and accounting for new significant arrangements and significant changes to existing arrangements.
We assessed the adequacy of related disclosures in the financial statements in accordance with the requirements of IFRS.
Key observations Based on the results of our testing we are satisfied that all significant assumptions applied in respect of the classification of financial instruments are appropriate and that disclosures given around financial instruments are in accordance with the requirements of IFRS.
Independent Auditors Report
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Credit and performance risk Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter The Group is exposed to credit and performance risk arising from the Groups global production and marketing operations particularly in markets demonstrating significant price volatility with limited liquidity and terminal markets.
This risk is heightened in times of increased price volatility where suppliers may be incentivised to default on delivery and customers are unable to make payments.
At 31 December 2017 total advances and loans and accounts receivable amounted to 2976 million and 20359 million respectively.
Refer to notes 10 12 and 25 and the Audit Committee Report on pages 96 to 98.
We undertook internal control testing of the Groups centralised and local credit and performance risk monitoring procedures.
We challenged managements assessment of the recoverability of aged and overdue receivables loans and advance payments with delayed or overdue deliveries considering historical patterns of trading and settlement as well as recent communications with the counterparties and other post balance sheet date evidence.
In addition we challenged the valuation of significant fixed price positions in commodities across the Group at yearend given the high price volatility during the year particularly with respect to base metals and coal where the risk of nonperformance is higher.
Key observations We concluded that the Groups provisioning in relation to counterparty and performance risk was appropriately assessed.
Taxation
Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter There is significant judgement around accounting for income taxes particularly in light of the number of jurisdictions in which the Group operates including judgements concerning presence of key corporate operations and holding companies provisioning for tax exposures application of transfer pricing rules the recognition of deferred income tax assets and the taxation impacts of any corporate restructurings.
This gives rise to complexity and uncertainty in respect of the calculation of income taxes and deferred tax assets and consideration of contingent liabilities associated with tax years open to audit.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group has recorded net deferred tax liabilities of 7024 million and net deferred tax assets of 1733 million.
Additionally the Group has 6574 million of gross tax losses carried forward and deductible temporary differences for which no deferred tax assets have been recognised.
The assessment of taxrelated contingent liabilities has been disclosed in note 21.
Refer to Key sources of estimation uncertainty within note 1 and additionally notes 6 and 21 and the Audit Committee Report on pages 96 to 98.
We undertook a specific assessment of the material components impacting the Groups tax expense balances and exposures and performed detailed audit procedures in relation to these.
We considered the appropriateness of managements assumptions and estimates to support the recognition of deferred tax assets with reference to forecast taxable profits and the consistency of these forecasts with the Groups budgets.
We reviewed and challenged managements assessment of uncertain tax positions and conclusions on complex tax arrangements such as transfer pricing through discussions with the Group taxation department reviewing correspondence with local tax authorities reviewing third party expert tax opinions and utilising Deloitte tax specialists where appropriate to assess the adequacy of associated provisions and disclosures.
We challenged management on the disclosures in the financial statements in relation to taxation specifically on the requirement for adequate assessment of uncertainties and contingent liabilities.
Key observations The results of our testing were satisfactory and we concur that the level of tax provisions and disclosures are appropriate.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Katanga Restatements Description of key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter Katanga is a Canadian listed copper and cobalt producer in the Democratic Republic of Congo which is controlled by Glencore and therefore a consolidated subsidiary.
During the year the nonexecutive directors of Katanga initiated an independent review into the accounting practices of Katanga covering the financial years ended December 2014 2015 and 2016 Independent Review.
This review concluded that as a result of inappropriate accounting practices and significant weaknesses in Katangas internal control environment around financial reporting and inventory valuation and recording including management override of internal controls various financial line items were misstated in 2014 2015 and 2016.
The cumulative restatements resulted in a net reduction in total assetsliabilities and equity of 60 million net of income tax credits of 18 million which was accounted for as a current year adjustment in Glencores 2017 financial statements.
These adjustments do not have a material adverse effect on the consolidated income financial position or cash flows of Glencore.
The Glencore plc Board of Directors convened a board committee to assess the implications of the findings from the Katanga Independent Review on Glencore Groups internal controls the Glencore Review.
This was to assess the matter including the possibility of similar issues existing at other Glencore operations and determine the appropriate measures to improve the control environment and the disciplinary action to be taken against Glencore personnel involved in misstating past financial statements.
Our audit work at Group and the relevant component level included additional procedures considering the impact of the findings from the Katanga Independent Review and the Glencore plc board committee.
Please refer to page 92 and 97 for the boards discussion on the matter and note 4 for the cumulative impacts of the above adjustments in Glencores financial statements.
The additional audit procedures performed by the Group and relevant component audit teams in response to the Katanga Independent Review included the following The use of Deloitte forensic experts at Group and component level to understand and challenge both the scope and competency of the independent accounting expert engaged by the nonexecutive directors assisting with the Katanga Independent Review as well as the audit procedures performed by the Group audit team A review of the report prepared by the independent accounting expert from the Katanga Independent Review to understand the nature of the misstatements including findings with respect to internal controls including management override of internal control Additional audit work with respect to the correcting entries required to restate the Katanga financial statements Meeting with the Glencore Board of Directors and senior management to understand the scope and findings of the Glencore Review including consideration of the risk of management override at other Glencore assets and specifically within the African copper assets Communicating the increased risk of management override of controls to component auditors with similar risk profiles to Katanga requesting additional audit procedures be conducted such as the involvement of Deloitte technical mining experts in the component audit procedures and Consideration of the implementation of recommendations made by experts engaged to assist in this matter and other actions by the Katanga and Glencore boards to determine whether misstatements involving management override could exist at other components Key observations We concur that the cumulative impact of the adjustments recorded in Glencores consolidated financial statements are fairly stated in all material respects in accordance with IFRS.
Based on the results of our testing no additional reportable misstatements involving management override were identified from our audit.
Independent Auditors Report
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group materiality 200 million 2016 150 million The applied materiality is approximately 7% of normalised 3year average pretax profit 2016 7% and equates to less than 1% 2016 1% of equity.
Group materiality Maximum allowed component materiality
Marketing
Audit Committee reporting threshold Basis for determining materiality Consistent with the methodology in the prior year we have determined materiality by using a percentage of a normalised 3year average 201517 of pretax profits.
The selected materiality is 3% of current year normalised results without the effect of averaging.
These normalising items are outlined in notes 3 and 4 to the financial statements.
Rationale for the benchmark applied The pretax profits for the 201517 years have been normalised in determining materiality to exclude items which due to their variable financial impact andor expected infrequency of the underlying events are not considered indicative of continuing operations of the Group.
These items do not form part of the Groups internally or externally monitored primary key performance indicators and which if included would distort materiality yearonyear.
We consider this approach of using a 3year average to be more appropriate than an assessment based on current year results alone given the nature of the mining industry which is exposed to cyclical commodity price fluctuations and to therefore provide a more stable base reflective of the scale of the Groups size and operations.
We note that the maximum allowed component materiality for industrial assets has increased to 100 million in the current year on the basis that the contribution to pretax profit by industrial assets has significantly increased throughout the normalised 3year average period used in the determination of our materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 10 million 2016 10 million as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Based on our continuing assessment we focused our Group audit scope primarily on the audit work at 47 components 2016 45 components representing the Groups most material marketing operations and industrial assets and utilised 23 component audit teams 2016 21 component audit teams in 20 countries 2016 18 countries.
27 of these were subject to a full scope audit 2016 29 components and 20 were subject to specified audit procedures where the extent of our testing was based on our assessment of the risk of material misstatement and of the materiality of the Groups operations at those locations 2016 16 components These 47 components account for 93% of the Groups net assets 2016 92% 97% of the Groups revenue 2016 95% and 89% of the Groups adjusted EBITDA 2016 89%.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Net assets
Adjusted EBITDA Coverage % Full scope audit Specied audit procedures Analytical procedures Components are scoped based on their contribution to financial metrics revenue EBIT and Adjusted EBITDA production and qualitative criteria such as being a significant development project or exhibiting particular risk factors.
Detailed audit instructions were sent to the auditors of these inscope components.
These detailed audit instructions specified areas of audit focus identified the risks of material misstatement assessed by the Group audit team and set out the information to be reported back to the Group audit team.
The Group audit team continued to follow a programme of regular onsite meetings with components that has been designed so that the Group Audit Partner or another senior member of the Group audit team periodically meets with local management and the component audit team on a rotational basis.
In 2017 the Group audit team held inperson meetings with 21 components 2016 13 components.
Additionally for all inscope components the Group audit team was involved in the audit work performed by the component auditors through a combination of our global planning conference call meetings provision of referral instructions review and challenge of related component interoffice reporting and of findings from their work which included the audit procedures performed to respond to risks of material misstatement attendance at component audit closing conference calls and regular interaction on any related audit and accounting matters which arose.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
In this context matters that we are specifically required to report to you as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information include where we conclude that Fair balanced and understandable  the statement given by the directors that they consider the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit committee reporting  the section describing the work of the audit committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the audit committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code  the parts of the directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Independent Auditors Report
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the statement of directors responsibilities the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Article 1 13A of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinion on other matter prescribed by our engagement letter In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the provisions of the UK Companies Act 2006 as if that Act had applied to the company.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Jersey Law 1991 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or proper accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or proper returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Other matters Auditor tenure Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the Board of Directors on 22 August 201 1 to audit the financial statements of Glencore plc for the year ending 31 December 201 1 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments of the firm as auditors of Glencore plc is 7 years covering the years ending December 201 1 to December 2017.
Consistency of the audit report with the additional report to the audit committee Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the audit committee we are required to provide in accordance with ISAs UK.
Matthew Sheerin ACA CA AUS for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Recognised Auditor London UK 1 March 2018 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Consolidated statement of income For the year ended 31 December 201 7 US million Notes 2017 2016 Revenue 205476 152948 Cost of goods sold 197695 149763 Selling and administrative expenses 1310 1102 Share of income from associates and joint ventures 9 1158 11 Gains on disposals and investments 3 1309 489 Other expense  net 4 594 1626 Dividend income 28 27 Interest income 168 155 Interest expense 1619 1688 Incomeloss before income taxes 6921 549 Income tax expense 6 1759 638 Incomeloss for the year from continuing operations 5162 1187 Income from discontinued operations net of tax 24  2123 Income for the year 5162 936 Attributable to Noncontrolling interests 615 443 Equity holders of the Parent 5777 1379 Earningsloss per share  continuing operations Basic US 16 0.41 0.05 Diluted US 16 0.40 0.05 Earnings per share  continuing and discontinued operations Basic US 16 0.41 0.10 Diluted US 16 0.40 0.10 The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income For the year ended 31 December 201 7 US million Notes 2017 2016 Income for the year 5162 936 Other comprehensive incomeloss Items not to be reclassified to the statement of income in subsequent periods Defined benefit plan actuarial gainslosses net of tax of 32 million 2016 14 million 22 81 41 Discontinued operations  Actuarial losses net of tax of Nil 2016 1 million 22  4 Net items not to be reclassified to the statement of income in subsequent periods 81 45 Items that have or may be reclassified to the statement of income in subsequent periods Exchange gain on translation of foreign operations 446 472 Lossesgains on cash flow hedges net of tax of 5 million 2016 5 million 165 99 Share of comprehensive gain from associates and joint ventures 9 93 Unrealised gain on available for sale financial instruments 9 500 365 Discontinued operations Items recycled to the statement of income upon disposal of subsidiaries 24 143 602 Net items that are or may be reclassified to the statement of income in subsequent periods 731 1581 Other comprehensive income 812 1536 Total comprehensive income 5974 2472 Attributable to Noncontrolling interests 672 411 Equity holders of the Parent 6646 2883 1 2016 included exchange gain on translation of foreign operations of 22 million and gain on cash flow hedges net of tax of 21 million.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Consolidated statement of financial position As at 31 December 201 7 US million Notes 2017 2016
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 7 57046 53826 Intangible assets 8 6787 6716 Investments in associates and joint ventures 9 13998 13086 Other investments 9 2958 1753 Advances and loans 10 2976 3483 Inventories 11 369 564 Deferred tax assets 6 1733 1760 85867 81188 Current assets Inventories 11 24084 18347 Accounts receivable 12 20359 20066 Other financial assets 27 2311 2212 Prepaid expenses 416 269 Cash and cash equivalents 13 2124 2518 49294 43412 Assets held for sale 14 432 49726 43412 Total assets 135593 124600 Equity and liabilities Capital and reserves  attributable to equity holders Share capital 15 146 146 Reserves and retained earnings 49609 44097 49755 44243 Noncontrolling interests 32 300 462 Total equity 49455 43781 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 19 24532 23188 Deferred income 20 2561 2266 Deferred tax liabilities 6 7024 5664 Other financial liabilities 27 513 403 Provisions including postretirement benefits 21 7094 5931 41724 37452 Current liabilities Borrowings 19 9402 10030 Accounts payable 23 28826 26176 Deferred income 20 410 138 Provisions 21 477 458 Other financial liabilities 27 4522 6386 Income tax payable 618 179 44255 43367 Liabilities held for sale 14 159 44414 43367 Total equity and liabilities 135593 124600 The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Consolidated statement of cash flows For the year ended 31 December 201 7 US million Notes Operating activities Incomeloss before income taxes from continuing operations 6921 549 Income before income taxes from discontinued operations 24  2254 Adjustments for Depreciation and amortisation 5398 5632 Share of income from associates and joint ventures 9 1158 26 Increasedecrease in employee benefit liabilities 52 17 Gains on disposals and investments 324 1321 2421 Unrealised marktomarket movements on other investments 4 290 121 Impairments 5 628 1268 Other noncash items  net Interest expense  net 1451 1603 Cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 11866 7868 Working capital changes Increase in accounts receivable 1165 5005 Increase in inventories 5614 2707 Increase in accounts payable 1814 5555 Proceeds from gold and silver streaming 20  971 Total working capital changes 4965 1186 Income taxes paid 921 584 Interest received 106 111 Interest paid 1269 1376 Net cash generated by operating activities 4817 4833 Investing activities Net cash usedreceived in acquisition of subsidiaries 24 674 176 Net cash received from disposal of subsidiaries 24 706 5535 Purchase of investments 378 15 Proceeds from sale of investments 36 3 Purchase of property plant and equipment 78 3586 3048 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 282 128 Dividends received from associates and joint ventures 9 1081 833 Net cash usedgenerated by investing activities 2533 3612 1 Includes results from assets held for sale see note 14.
2 Includes results from discontinued operations see note 24.
3 Includes certain noncash items as disclosed in note 4.
4 Includes movements in other financial assets prepaid expenses and longterm advances and loans.
5 Includes movements in other financial liabilities provisions and deferred income.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Consolidated statement of cash flows For the year ended 31 December 201 7 US million Notes Financing activities Proceeds from issuance of capital market notes 19 2026 1366 Repayment of capital market notes 19 4539 4748 Repurchase of capital market notes 19  2629 Proceeds fromrepayment of revolving credit facility 19 501 2644 Proceeds fromrepayment of other noncurrent borrowings 19 19 79 Repayment of finance lease obligations 19 105 125 Margin receiptspayments in respect of financing related hedging activities 1255 695 Proceeds from U.
Repayment ofproceeds from current borrowings 19 1266 1035 Acquisition of additional interests in subsidiaries 561 7 Return of capitaldistributions to noncontrolling interests 194 91 Disposal of own shares 17 3 Distributions paid to equity holders of the Parent 17 998 Net cash used by financing activities 2665 8629 Decrease in cash and cash equivalents 381 184 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes 20 15 Cash and cash equivalents beginning of year 2508 2707 Cash and cash equivalents end of year 2147 2508 Cash and cash equivalents reported in the statement of financial position 2124 2508 Cash and cash equivalents attributable to assets held for sale 23 1 Includes results from assets held for sale see note 14.
2 Includes results from discontinued operations see note 24.
3 Refer to note 19 for reconciliation of movement in borrowings.
4 Net of issuance costs relating to capital market notes of 20 million 2016 9 million.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Consolidated statement of changes of equity For the year ended 31 December 201 7 US million
Share premium
Note 15
Total reserves and deficit retained earnings
Total equity attributable to equity holders
Note 32
1 January 2016 5099 52338 4419 1712 41108 146 41254 89 41343 Income for the year 1379    1379  1379 443 936 Other comprehensive loss income 45  1549  1504  1504 32 1536 Total comprehensive income 1334  1549  2883  2883 411 2472 Own share disposal Equitysettled sharebased expenses Change in ownership interest in subsidiaries   68  68  68 17 85 Disposal of business Distributions paid At 31 December 2016 3739 52338 2802 1700 44097 146 44243 462 43781 1 January 2017 3739 52338 2802 1700 44097 146 44243 462 43781 Income for the year 5777    5777  5777 615 5162 Other comprehensive income 174  695  869  869 57 812 Total comprehensive income 5951  695  6646  6646 672 5974 Own share disposal Equitysettled sharebased expenses Change in ownership interest in subsidiaries   318  318  318 1057 739 Disposal of business Distributions paid At 31 December 2017 2269 51340 2425 1575 49609 146 49755 300 49455 1 See note 15.
2 See note 18.
3 See note 24.
4 See note 17.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 1.
Accounting policies Corporate information Glencore plc the Company Parent the Group or Glencore is a leading integrated producer and marketer of natural resources with worldwide activities in the production refinement processing storage transport and marketing of metals and minerals energy products and agricultural products.
Glencore operates on a global scale marketing and distributing physical commodities sourced from third party producers and own production to industrial consumers such as those in the automotive steel power generation oil and food processing industries.
Glencore also provides financing logistics and other services to producers and consumers of commodities.
In this regard Glencore seeks to capture value throughout the commodity supply chain.
Glencores long experience as a commodity producer and merchant has allowed it to develop and build upon its expertise in the commodities which it markets and cultivate longterm relationships with a broad supplier and customer base across diverse industries and in multiple geographic regions.
Glencore plc is a publicly traded limited company incorporated in Jersey and domiciled in Switzerland.
Its ordinary shares are traded on the London and Johannesburg stock exchanges.
On 31 January 2018 the Company delisted its shares from the Hong Kong stock exchange.
These consolidated financial statements were authorised for issue in accordance with a Directors resolution on 1 March 2018.
Statement of compliance The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and interpretations as adopted by the European Union EU effective as of 31 December 2017 and IFRS and interpretations as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB effective as of 31 December 2017 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Estimates and assumptions are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable and relevant under the circumstances independent estimates quoted market prices and common industry standard modelling techniques.
Actual outcomes could result in a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets or liabilities affected in future periods.
Glencore has identified the following areas as being critical to understanding Glencores financial position as they require management to make complex andor subjective judgements estimates and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain Critical accounting judgements In the process of applying Glencores accounting policies management has made the following judgements based on the relevant facts and circumstances including macroeconomic circumstances and where applicable interpretation of underlying agreements which have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements.
Judgement is required to determine when Glencore has control of subsidiaries or joint control of joint arrangements.
This requires an assessment of the relevant activities those relating to the operating and capital decisions of the arrangement such as the approval of the capital expenditure programme for each year and appointing remunerating and terminating the key management personnel or service providers of the operations and when the decisions in relation to those activities are under the control of Glencore or require unanimous consent.
See note 24 for a summary of the acquisitions of subsidiaries completed during the year and the key judgements made in determining control thereof.
Judgement is also required in determining the classification of a joint arrangement between a joint venture or a joint operation through an evaluation of the rights and obligations arising from the arrangement and in particular if the joint arrangement has been structured through a separate vehicle further consideration is required of whether 1 the legal form of the separate vehicle gives the parties rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities 2 the contractual terms and conditions give the parties rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities and 3 other facts and circumstances give the parties rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities.
Joint arrangements in which the primary activity is the provision of output to the shareholders typically convey substantially all the economic benefits of the assets to the parties and judgement is required in assessing whether the terms of the offtake agreements and any other obligations for liabilities of the arrangement result in the parties being substantially the only source of cash flows contributing to the continuity of the operations of the arrangement.
Notes to the financial statements Glencore Annual Report 2017 Certain joint arrangements that are structured through separate vehicles including Collahuasi Glencore Agri and QHG are accounted for as joint ventures.
The Collahuasi arrangement is primarily designed for the provision of output to the shareholders sharing joint control the offtake terms of which are at prevailing market prices and the parties are not obligated to cover any potential funding shortfalls.
In managements judgement Glencore is not the only possible source of funding and does not have a direct or indirect obligation to the liabilities of the arrangement but rather shares in its net assets and therefore such arrangements have been accounted for as joint ventures.
Differing conclusions around these judgements may materially impact how these businesses are presented in the consolidated financial statements  under the full consolidation method equity method or recognition of Glencores share of assets liabilities revenue and expenses including any assets or liabilities held jointly.
See note 9 for a summary of these joint arrangements and the key judgements made in determining the applicable accounting treatment for the material joint arrangements entered during the year.
The Groups global marketing operations expose it to credit and performance the risk that counterparties fail to sell or purchase physical commodities on agreed terms risks these arise particularly in markets demonstrating significant price volatility with limited liquidity and terminal markets and when global andor regional macroeconomic conditions are weak.
Continuously but particularly during such times judgement is required to determine whether receivables loans and advances are recoverable and if contracted product deliveries will be received.
Judgements about recoverability and contractual performance may materially impact both noncurrent and current assets as recognised in the statement of financial position.
Any estimation uncertainty related to these judgements is not anticipated to result in a material change to the carrying value of these assets within the next financial year.
Transactions for the sale or purchase of commodities may contain a financing element such as extended payment terms.
Judgement is required to determine the most appropriate classification and presentation of these transactions within the statements of cash flows and financial position.
In determining the appropriate classification management considers the underlying economic substance of the transaction and the significance of the financing element to the transaction.
Typically the economic substance of the transaction is determined to be operating in nature i. with a corresponding trade receivable or payable in the statement of financial position.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty In the process of applying Glencores accounting policies management has made key estimates and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty.
The key assumptions and estimates at the reporting date that have a significant risk of resulting in a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are described below.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions and may materially affect financial results or the financial position reported in future periods.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent it is considered probable that those assets will be recoverable.
This involves an assessment of when those deferred tax assets are likely to reverse and a judgement as to whether there will be sufficient taxable income available to offset the tax assets when they do reverse.
These judgements and estimates are subject to risk and uncertainty and therefore to the extent assumptions regarding future profitability change there can be a material increase or decrease in the amounts recognised in the consolidated statement of income in the period in which the change occurs.
The recoverability of deferred tax assets including the estimates and assumptions contained therein are reviewed regularly by management.
Investments in associates and joint ventures other investments advances and loans property plant and equipment and intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be fully recoverable or at least annually for goodwill and other indefinite life intangible assets.
If an assets recoverable amount is less than the assets carrying amount an impairment loss is recognised in the consolidated statement of income.
For those assets which were impaired in prior periods if their recoverable amount exceeds their carrying amount an impairment reversal is recorded in the consolidated statement of income.
Future cash flow estimates which are used to calculate the assets fair value are discounted using asset specific discount rates and are based on expectations about future operations primarily comprising estimates about production and sales volumes commodity prices considering current and historical prices price trends and related factors reserves and resources operating costs rehabilitation and restoration costs and capital expenditures.
Estimates are reviewed regularly by management.
Changes in such estimates and in particular deterioration in the pricing outlook could impact the recoverable values of these assets whereby some or all of the carrying amount may be impaired or the impairment charge reversed if pricing outlook improves significantly with the impact recorded in the statement of income.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information Notes to the financial statements continued Accounting policies continued iii Restoration rehabilitation and decommissioning costs note 21 A provision for future restoration rehabilitation and decommissioning costs requires estimates and assumptions to be made around the relevant regulatory framework the magnitude of the possible disturbance and the timing extent and costs of the required closure and rehabilitation activities.
Most of these rehabilitation and decommissioning events are expected to take place many years in the future and the currently estimated requirements and costs that will have to be met when the restoration event occurs are inherently uncertain and could materially change over time.
In calculating the appropriate provision for the expected restoration rehabilitation or decommissioning obligations cost estimates of the future potential cash outflows based on current studies of the expected rehabilitation activities and timing thereof are prepared.
These forecasts are then discounted to their present value using a risk free rate specific to the liability and the currency in which they are denominated.
Any changes in the expected future costs are initially reflected in both the provision and the asset and subsequently in the consolidated statement of income over the remaining economic life of the asset.
As the actual future costs can differ from the estimates due to changes in laws regulations technology costs and timing the provisions including the estimates and assumptions contained therein are reviewed regularly by management.
Change in estimate In the prior year estimates for potential likely prolongation of the underlying timing assumptions and an anticipated benefit of eventually realising costs lower than those estimated were combined with the countrycurrency specific risk free rates in deriving applicable liability specific discount rates.
In the current year these cost and timing considerations have been incorporated directly into the underlying cash flow forecasts with the revised estimates discounted using a risk free rate specific to the liability and currency in which the forecasts are denominated.
As a result of this change in estimate there was no initial impact on equity as the rehabilitation provision increased by 312 million with a resulting equivalent increase in property plant and equipment.
In addition to recognising derivative instruments at fair value as discussed below an assessment of the fair value of assets and liabilities is also required in accounting for other transactions most notably business combinations and marketing inventories and disclosures related to fair values of financial assets and liabilities.
In such instances fair value measurements are estimated based on the amounts for which the assets and liabilities could be exchanged at the relevant transaction date or reporting period end and are therefore not necessarily reflective of the likely cash flow upon actual settlements.
Where fair value measurements cannot be derived from publicly available information they are estimated using models and other valuation methods.
To the extent possible the assumptions and inputs used take into account externally verifiable inputs.
However such information is by nature subject to uncertainty particularly where comparable marketbased transactions often do not exist.
Derivative instruments are carried at fair value for which Glencore evaluates the quality and reliability of the assumptions and data used to measure fair value in the three hierarchy levels Level 1 2 and 3 as prescribed by IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement.
Fair values are determined in the following ways externally verified via comparison to quoted market prices in active markets Level 1 by using models with externally verifiable inputs Level 2 or by using alternative procedures such as comparison to comparable instruments andor using models with unobservable market inputs requiring Glencore to make marketbased assumptions Level 3.
Level 3 inputs therefore include the highest level of estimation uncertainty.
Adoption of revised standards In the current year Glencore has applied revised IFRS standards which were adopted as of 1 January 2017 i Amendments to IAS 12  Recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses The amendment to IAS 12 clarifies the accounting treatment for deferred tax assets related to debt instruments measured at fair value.
The adoption of this amendment has had no material impact on the Group.
The amendment to IAS 7 requires entities to provide disclosures about changes in their liabilities arising from financing activities including changes arising from financing cash flows and noncash changes such as foreign exchange movements.
The Group has included a reconciliation of cash flow movements in borrowings in note 19 to comply with this amendment.
New and revised standards not yet effective At the date of authorisation of these consolidated financial statements the following new and revised IFRS standards which are applicable to Glencore were issued but are not yet effective i Amendments to IFRS 2  Classification and measurement of sharebased payment transactions  effective for year ends beginning on or after 1 January 2018 The amendments to IFRS 2 Sharebased payments clarify the classification and measurement of sharebased payments transactions with respect to accounting for cashsettled sharebased payment transactions that include a performance obligation the classification of sharebased payment transactions with net settlement features and the accounting for modifications of sharebased payment transactions from cashsettled to equitysettled.
The Group has assessed the impact of the change on its consolidated financial statements and it does not expect any material impact.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 ii IFRS 9  Financial Instruments  effective for year ends beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 will supersede IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and covers classification and measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities impairment of financial assets and hedge accounting.
The Group has undertaken a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the new standard based on the financial instruments it holds and the way in which they are used.
As a result of the analysis it is anticipated that there will be no material impact on the face of the statement of financial position or in the statement of income however there will be presentational changes in some of our note disclosures as well as additional disclosures around classification and measurement of financial instruments which are summarised as follows Expected credit loss model The new standard introduces an expected loss impairment model for financial assets held at amortised cost which means that anticipated as opposed to impending credit losses will be recognised resulting in the likely earlier recognition of impairment.
This change is not expected to have a material impact on the Groups results given the low exposure to counterparty default risk as a result of the credit risk management processes that are in place.
Hedge accounting The new standard introduces a less prescriptive basis to adopt hedge accounting.
This change is not expected to materially impact the amounts recognised in relation to existing hedging arrangements.
Classification and measurement IFRS 9 modifies the classification and measurement of certain classes of financial assets and liabilities and will require the Group to reassess classification of financial assets from four to three primary categories amortised cost fair value through profit and loss fair value through other comprehensive income reflecting the business model in which assets are managed and their cash flow characteristics.
These modifications will result in presentational changes to the additional detail provided primarily in the advances and loans note 10 accounts receivable note 12 and accounts payable note 23 note disclosures to reflect the business model and cash flow characteristics of these assets and liabilities and group them into their respective IFRS 9 category or other IFRS classification.
A summary of the expected presentational changes on our 31 December 2017 balances is as follows IFRS 9 Presentational changes US million Notes
Held at amortised cost Held at fair value through profit and loss
Financial assets Other noncurrent receivables and loans 10 2475 804  1671 2475 Trade receivables 12 11915 4623 7292  11915 Trade advances 12 2110 19  2091 2110 Other receivables 12 2259 621  1638 2259 Financial liabilities Trade payables 23 24664 8642 16022  24664 Trade advances from buyers 23 451   451 451 Other payables and accrued liabilities 23 2216 2015  201 2216 Classification of other investments Upon implementation IFRS 9 provides companies with the option to irrevocably designate investments in equity instruments as at fair value through other comprehensive income provided certain criteria are met.
Such investments are presented as other investments in note 9.
The Group has evaluated the applicable criteria and intends to designate all its equity investments as fair value through other comprehensive income upon adoption of IFRS 9.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 the fair value movements recognised on the investments currently classified as fair value through profit or loss in the consolidated statement of income were 23 million and as a result of the designation of these investments as fair value through other comprehensive income the respective fair value movements will be recognised in other comprehensive income subsequent to 1 January 2018.
IFRS 15 applies to revenue from contracts with customers and replaces all of the revenue standards and interpretations in IFRS.
The standard outlines the principles an entity must apply to measure and recognise revenue and the related cash flows.
The Group has undertaken a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the new standard based on a review of the contractual terms of its principal revenue streams with the primary focus being to understand whether the timing and amount of revenue recognised could differ under IFRS 15.
As the majority of the Groups revenue is derived from arrangements in which the transfer of risks and rewards coincides with the fulfilment of performance obligations and transfer of control as defined by IFRS 15 no material changes in respect of timing and amount of revenue currently recognised by the Group are expected.
In addition IFRS 15 requires that distinct promised goods or services such as insurance and freight services to deliver the contracted goods to the customers if material be deferred and recognised over time as the obligation is fulfilled.
The impact of this change is also not material however the revenue earned from these activities is required to be separately disclosed and thus there will be presentational changes in our revenue related note disclosures.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 1.
Accounting policies continued iv IFRS 16  Leases  effective for year ends beginning on or after 1 January 2019 IFRS 16 provides a comprehensive model for identification of lease arrangements and their treatment onbalance sheet in the financial statements of both lessees and lessors.
It supersedes IAS 17 Leases and its associated interpretative guidance.
Under the new standard a lessee is required to recognise the present value of the unavoidable lease payments as a lease liability on the statement of financial position including those currently classified as operating leases with a corresponding right of use asset.
The unwind of the financial charge on the lease liability and amortisation of the leased asset are recognised in the statement of income based on the implied interest rate and contract term respectively.
Although the Group is still evaluating the potential impact of IFRS 16 on the financial statements and performance measures including an assessment of whether any arrangements the Group enters into will be considered a lease under IFRS 16 the Groups recognised assets and liabilities will increase and affect the presentation and timing of related depreciation and interest charges in the consolidated statement of income.
Upon adoption of IFRS 16 the most significant impact will be the present value of the operating lease commitments see note 29 being shown as a liability on the statement of financial position together with an asset representing the right of use which are unwound and amortised to the statement of income over time.
Basis of preparation The financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention except for certain financial assets liabilities marketing inventories and pension obligations that are measured at revalued amounts or fair values at the end of each reporting period as explained in the accounting policies below.
Historical cost is defined as the amount of cash or cash equivalents paid or the fair value of the consideration given to acquire them at the time of their acquisition.
The principal accounting policies adopted are set out below.
The Directors have assessed that they have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the 12 months from the date of approval of the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
Therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing these financial statements.
Also see page 108.
Further information on Glencores objectives policies and processes for managing its capital and financial risks are detailed in note 25.
All amounts are expressed in millions of United States Dollars unless otherwise stated consistent with the predominant functional currency of Glencores operations.
Principles of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company and its subsidiaries.
Control is achieved when Glencore is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Specifically Glencore controls an investee if and only if Glencore has all of the following power over the investee i.
When Glencore has less than a majority of the voting rights of an investee or similar rights of an investee it considers all relevant facts and circumstances in assessing whether it has power over the investee including the size of Glencores holding of voting rights relative to the size and dispersion of holdings of the other vote holders potential voting rights held by Glencore other vote holders or other parties rights arising from other contractual arrangements and any additional facts and circumstances that indicate that Glencore has or does not have the current ability to direct the relevant activities at the time that decisions need to be made including voting patterns at previous shareholders meetings The Company reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control listed above.
Consolidation of a subsidiary begins when Glencore obtains control over the subsidiary and ceases when Glencore loses control of the subsidiary.
Specifically income and expenses of a subsidiary acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the consolidated statement of income and other comprehensive income from the date Glencore gains control until the date when Glencore ceases to control the subsidiary.
Profit or loss and each component of other comprehensive income are attributed to the owners of the Company and to the noncontrolling interests.
Total comprehensive income of subsidiaries is attributed to the owners of the Company and to the noncontrolling interests even if this results in the noncontrolling interests having a deficit balance.
When necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies into line with the Groups accounting policies.
All intragroup assets and liabilities equity income expenses and cash flows relating to transactions between members of the Group are eliminated in full on consolidation.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Changes in Glencores interests in subsidiaries that do not result in a loss of control are accounted for as equity transactions with any difference between the amount by which the noncontrolling interests are adjusted and the fair value of the consideration paid or received being recognised directly in equity and attributed to equity holders of Glencore.
When Glencore loses control of a subsidiary a gain or loss is recognised in the consolidated statement of income and is calculated as the difference between i the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration received and the fair value of any retained interest and ii the previous carrying amount of the assets including goodwill and liabilities of the subsidiary and any noncontrolling interests.
All amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income in relation to that subsidiary are accounted for as if Glencore had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities of the subsidiary i. of equity as specifiedpermitted by applicable IFRSs.
The fair value of any investment retained in the former subsidiary at the date when control is lost is regarded as the fair value on initial recognition for subsequent accounting under IAS 39 when applicable or the cost on the initial recognition of an investment in an associate or a joint venture.
Investments in associates and joint ventures Associates and joint ventures together Associates in which Glencore exercises significant influence or joint control are accounted for using the equity method.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control or joint control over those policies.
Significant influence is presumed if Glencore holds between 20% and 50% of the voting rights unless evidence exists to the contrary.
A joint venture is a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the joint arrangement.
Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control over an arrangement which exists only when decisions about relevant strategic andor key operating decisions require unanimous consent of the parties sharing control.
Equity accounting involves Glencore recording its share of the Associates net income and equity.
Glencores interest in an Associate is initially recorded at cost and is subsequently adjusted for Glencores share of changes in net assets of the Associate less any impairment in the value of individual investments.
Where Glencore transacts with an Associate unrealised profits and losses are eliminated to the extent of Glencores interest in that Associate.
Changes in Glencores interests in Associates are accounted for as a gain or loss on disposal with any difference between the amount by which the carrying value of the Associate is adjusted and the fair value of the consideration received being recognised directly in the consolidated statement of income.
Joint operations A joint operation is a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities relating to the arrangement.
When Glencore undertakes its activities under joint operations Glencore recognises in relation to its interest in a joint operation its assets including its share of any assets held jointly its liabilities including its share of any liabilities incurred jointly its revenue from the sale of its share of the output arising from the joint operation its share of the revenue from the sale of the output by the joint operation and its expenses including its share of any expenses incurred jointly The Group accounts for the assets liabilities revenues and expenses relating to its interest in a joint operation in accordance with the IFRSs applicable to the particular assets liabilities revenues and expenses.
Where Glencore transacts with a joint operation unrealised profits and losses are eliminated to the extent of Glencores interest in that joint operation.
Business combinations and goodwill Acquisitions of subsidiaries and businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting.
The cost of the acquisition is measured at fair value which is calculated as the sum of the acquisition date fair values of the assets transferred liabilities incurred to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interests issued in exchange for control of the acquiree.
The identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities identifiable net assets are recognised at their fair value at the date of acquisition.
Acquisition related costs are recognised in the consolidated statement of income as incurred.
Where a business combination is achieved in stages Glencores previously held interests in the acquired entity are remeasured to fair value at the acquisition date i. consolidated statement of income.
Goodwill is measured as the excess of the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest in the acquiree if any over the net of the acquisitiondate amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 1.
Accounting policies continued After initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is from the acquisition date allocated to the cashgenerating units CGU that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the unit may be impaired.
If the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than its carrying amount the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata based on the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
Any impairment loss is recognised directly in profit or loss.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not able to be reversed in subsequent periods.
On disposal of the relevant CGU the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the combination occurs Glencore reports provisional amounts for the items for which the accounting is incomplete.
Those provisional amounts are adjusted for additional information obtained during the measurement period which cannot exceed one year from the acquisition date about facts and circumstances that existed at the acquisition date that if known would have affected the amounts recognised at that date.
Noncontrolling interests that are present ownership interests and entitle their holders to a proportionate share of the entitys net assets in the event of liquidation may be initially measured either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the recognised amounts of the acquirees identifiable net assets.
The choice of measurement basis is made on a transactionby transaction basis.
Other types of noncontrolling interests are measured at fair value or when applicable on the basis specified in another IFRS.
Similar procedures are applied in accounting for the purchases of interests in Associates and joint operations.
Any goodwill arising from such purchases is included within the carrying amount of the investment in Associates but not amortised thereafter.
Any excess of Glencores share of the net fair value of the Associates identifiable net assets over the cost of the investment is included in the consolidated statement of income in the period of the purchase.
Noncurrent assets held for sale and disposal groups Noncurrent assets and assets and liabilities included in disposal groups are classified as held for sale if their carrying amount will be recovered principally through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use they are available for immediate disposal and the sale is highly probable.
Noncurrent assets held for sale are measured at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Revenue recognition Revenue is recognised when Glencore has transferred to the buyer all significant risks and rewards of ownership of the assets sold.
Revenue excludes any applicable sales taxes and is recognised at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable to the extent that it is probable that economic benefits will flow to Glencore and the revenues and costs can be reliably measured.
In most instances sales revenue is recognised when the product is delivered to the destination specified by the customer which is typically the vessel on which it is shipped the destination port or the customers premises.
For certain commodities the sales price is determined on a provisional basis at the date of sale as the final selling price is subject to movements in market prices up to the date of final pricing normally ranging from 30 to 90 days after initial booking.
Revenue on provisionally priced sales is recognised based on the estimated fair value of the total consideration receivable.
The revenue adjustment mechanism embedded within provisionally priced sales arrangements has the character of a commodity derivative.
Accordingly the fair value of the final sales price adjustment is reestimated continuously and changes in fair value are recognised as an adjustment to revenue.
In all cases fair value is estimated by reference to forward market prices.
Royalty interest and dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment has been established it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to Glencore and the amount of income can be measured reliably.
Royalty revenue is recognised on an accrual basis in accordance with the substance of the relevant agreement.
Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and the applicable effective interest rate.
Foreign currency translation Glencores reporting currency and the functional currency of the majority of its operations is the U. to be the principal currency of the economic environment in which it operates.
Transactions in foreign currencies are converted into the functional currency of each entity using the exchange rate prevailing at the transaction date.
Monetary assets and liabilities outstanding at year end are converted at yearend rates.
The resulting exchange differences are recorded in the consolidated statement of income.
For the purposes of consolidation assets and liabilities of group companies whose functional currency is in a currency other than the U. dollar are translated into U. average rates of exchange for the year.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising from the acquisition of a foreign operation are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operation and are translated at the closing rate.
Translation adjustments are included as a separate component of shareholders equity and have no consolidated statement of income impact to the extent that no disposal of the foreign operation has occurred.
Borrowing costs Borrowing costs are expensed as incurred except where they relate to the financing of construction or development of qualifying assets in which case they are capitalised up to the date when the qualifying asset is ready for its intended use.
Retirement benefits Glencore operates various pension schemes in accordance with local requirements and practices of the respective countries.
The annual costs for defined contribution plans that are funded by payments to separate trustee administered funds or insurance companies equal the contributions that are required under the plans and accounted for as an expense.
Glencore uses the Projected Unit Credit Actuarial method to determine the present value of its defined benefit obligations and the related current service cost and where applicable past service cost.
Net interest is calculated by applying the discount rate at the beginning of the period to the net defined benefit liability or asset.
The cost of providing pensions is charged to the consolidated statement of income so as to recognise current and past service costs interest cost on defined benefit obligations and the effect of any curtailments or settlements net of expected returns on plan assets.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised directly in other comprehensive income and will not be reclassified to the consolidated statement of income.
The retirement benefit obligationasset recognised in the consolidated statement of financial position represents the actual deficit or surplus in Glencores defined benefit plans.
Any surplus resulting from this calculation is limited to the present value of any economic benefits available in the form of refunds from the plans or reductions in future contributions to the plans.
Glencore also provides postretirement healthcare benefits to certain employees in Canada South Africa and the United States.
These are accounted for in a similar manner to the defined benefit pension plans however are unfunded.
Sharebased payments i Equitysettled sharebased payments Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at the fair value of the awards based on the market value of the shares at the grant date.
Fair value excludes the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
The fair value is charged to the consolidated statement of income and credited to retained earnings on a straightline basis over the period the estimated awards are expected to vest.
At each balance sheet date the Company revises its estimate of the number of equity instruments expected to vest as a result of the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
The impact of the revision of the original estimates if any is recognised in the consolidated statement of income such that the cumulative expense reflects the revised estimate with a corresponding adjustment to retained earnings.
For cashsettled sharebased payments a liability is initially recognised at fair value based on the estimated number of awards that are expected to vest adjusting for market and nonmarketbased performance conditions.
Subsequently at each reporting period until the liability is settled it is remeasured to fair value with any changes in fair value recognised in the consolidated statement of income.
Income taxes Income taxes consist of current and deferred income taxes.
Current taxes represent income taxes expected to be payable based on enacted or substantively enacted tax rates at the period end on expected current taxable income and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred taxes are recognised for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable income using enacted or substantively enacted income tax rates which are expected to be effective at the time of reversal of the underlying temporary difference.
Deferred tax assets and unused tax losses are only recognised to the extent that their recoverability is probable.
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at reporting period end and amended to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related benefit will be realised.
To the extent that a deferred tax asset not previously recognised subsequently fulfils the criteria for recognition an asset is then recognised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when they relate to income taxes levied by the same authority and Glencore has both the right and the intention to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net or simultaneous basis.
The tax effect of certain temporary differences is not recognised principally with respect to the initial recognition of an asset or liability other than those arising in a business combination or in a manner that initially impacted accounting or taxable profit and temporary differences relating to investments in subsidiaries and Associates to the extent that Glencore can control the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is provided in respect of fair value adjustments on acquisitions.
These adjustments may relate to assets such as extraction rights that in general are not eligible for income tax allowances.
Current and deferred tax are recognised as an expense or income in the consolidated statement of income except when they relate to items that are recognised outside the consolidated statement of income whether in other comprehensive income or directly in equity or where they arise from the initial accounting for a business combination.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 1.
Accounting policies continued Royalties extraction taxes and other leviestaxes are treated as taxation arrangements when they have the characteristics of an income tax including being imposed and determined in accordance with regulations established by the respective governments taxation authority and the amount payable is based on taxable income  rather than physical quantities produced or as a percentage of revenues  after adjustment for temporary differences.
For such arrangements current and deferred tax is provided on the same basis as described above for other forms of taxation.
Obligations arising from royalty arrangements that do not satisfy these criteria are recognised as current provisions and included in cost of goods sold.
Glencore assesses its liabilities and contingencies for all tax years open to audit based upon the latest information available.
Inherent
For those matters where it is probable that an adjustment will be made the Group records its best estimate of these tax liabilities including related interest charges.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost being the fair value of the consideration given to acquire or construct the asset including directly attributable costs required to bring the asset to the location or to a condition necessary for operation and the direct cost of dismantling and removing the asset less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Property plant and equipment are depreciated to their estimated residual value over the estimated useful life of the specific asset concerned or the estimated remaining life of the associated mine LOM field or lease.
Depreciation commences when the asset is available for use.
The major categories of property plant and equipment are depreciatedamortised on a units of production UOP andor straightline basis as follows Buildings 10  45 years Freehold land not depreciated Plant and equipment 3  30 yearsUOP Mineral and petroleum rights UOP Deferred mining costs UOP Assets under finance leases where substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership transfer to the Group as lessee are capitalised and amortised over their expected useful lives on the same basis as owned assets or where shorter the term of the relevant lease.
All other leases are classified as operating leases the expenditures for which are recognised in the statement of income on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Mineral and petroleum reserves resources and rights together Mineral and petroleum rights which can be reasonably valued are recognised in the assessment of fair values on acquisition.
Mineral and petroleum rights for which values cannot be reasonably determined are not recognised.
Exploitable Mineral and petroleum rights are amortised using the UOP basis over the commercially recoverable reserves and in certain circumstances other mineral resources.
Mineral resources are included in amortisation calculations where there is a high degree of confidence that they will be extracted in an economic manner.
Exploration and evaluation expenditure relates to costs incurred in the exploration and evaluation of potential mineral and petroleum resources and includes costs such as exploration and production licences researching and analysing historical exploration data exploratory drilling trenching sampling and the costs of prefeasibility studies.
Exploration and evaluation expenditure for each area of interest other than that acquired from another entity is charged to the consolidated statement of income as incurred except when the expenditure is expected to be recouped from future exploitation or sale of the area of interest and it is planned to continue with active and significant operations in relation to the area or at the reporting period end the activity has not reached a stage which permits a reasonable assessment of the existence of commercially recoverable reserves in which case the expenditure is capitalised.
As the intangible component i. and evaluation expenditure are recorded as a component of property plant and equipment.
Purchased exploration and evaluation assets are recognised at their fair value at acquisition.
As the capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure asset is not available for use it is not depreciated.
All capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure is monitored for indications of impairment.
Where a potential impairment is indicated an assessment is performed for each area of interest or at the CGU level.
To the extent that capitalised expenditure is not expected to be recovered it is charged to the consolidated statement of income.
Administration costs that are not directly attributable to a specific exploration area are charged to the consolidated statement of income.
Licence costs paid in connection with a right to explore in an existing exploration area are capitalised and amortised over the term of the permit.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Development expenditure When commercially recoverable reserves are determined and such proposed development receives the appropriate approvals capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure is transferred to construction in progress a component within the plant and equipment asset subcategory.
All subsequent development expenditure is similarly capitalised provided commercial viability conditions continue to be satisfied.
Proceeds from the sale of product extracted during the development phase are netted against development expenditure.
Upon completion of development and commencement of production capitalised development costs are further transferred as required to the appropriate plant and equipment asset category and depreciated using the unit of production method UOP or straightline basis.
Mainly comprises certain capitalised costs related to underground mining as well as preproduction and inproduction stripping activities as outlined below.
Deferred mining costs are amortised using the UOP basis over the life of the ore body to which those costs relate.
Deferred stripping costs Stripping costs incurred in the development of a mine or pit before production commences are capitalised as part of the cost of constructing the mine or pit and subsequently amortised over the life of the mine or pit on a UOP basis.
Inproduction stripping costs related to accessing an identifiable component of the ore body to realise benefits in the form of improved access to ore to be mined in the future stripping activity asset are capitalised within deferred mining costs provided all the following conditions are met it is probable that the future economic benefit associated with the stripping activity will be realised the component of the ore body for which access has been improved can be identified and c the costs relating to the stripping activity associated with the improved access can be reliably measured.
If all of the criteria are not met the production stripping costs are charged to the consolidated statement of income as they are incurred.
The stripping activity asset is subsequently depreciated on a UOP basis over the life of the identified component of the ore body that became more accessible as a result of the stripping activity and is then stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Biological assets are carried at their fair value less estimated selling costs.
Any changes in fair value less estimated selling costs are included in the consolidated statement of income in the period in which they arise.
Restoration rehabilitation and decommissioning Restoration rehabilitation and decommissioning costs arising from the installation of plant and other site preparation work discounted using a risk free rate specific to the liability and the currency in which they are denominated to their net present value are provided for and capitalised at the time such an obligation arises.
The costs are charged to the consolidated statement of income over the life of the operation through depreciation of the asset and the unwinding of the discount on the provision.
Costs for restoration of subsequent site disturbance which is created on an ongoing basis during production are provided for at their net present values and charged to the consolidated statement of income as extraction progresses.
Changes in the estimated timing of the rehabilitation or changes to the estimated future costs are accounted for prospectively by recognising an adjustment to the rehabilitation liability and a corresponding adjustment to the asset to which it relates provided a reduction if any in the provision is not greater than the depreciated capitalised cost of the related asset in which case the capitalised cost is reduced to Nil and the remaining adjustment recognised in the consolidated statement of income.
In the case of closed sites changes to estimated costs are recognised immediately in the consolidated statement of income.
Intangible assets Intangible assets acquired separately are measured on initial recognition at cost.
The cost of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is their fair value at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition intangible assets are carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation calculated on a straightline basis over their useful lives and accumulated impairment losses if any.
Internally generated intangibles are not capitalised.
Instead the related expenditure is recognised in the consolidated statement of income and other comprehensive income in the period in which the expenditure is incurred.
Identifiable intangible assets with a finite life are amortised on a straightline basis over their expected useful life.
The amortisation method and period are reviewed annually and impairment testing is undertaken when circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Other than goodwill which is not depreciated Glencore has no identifiable intangible assets with an indefinite life.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 1.
Accounting policies continued The major categories of intangibles are amortised on a straightline basis as follows Port allocation rights 30  40 years Licences trademarks and software 3  20 years Royalty arrangements 20  30 years Acquired offtake arrangements 5  10 years Goodwill impairment testing For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill has been allocated to the CGUs or groups of CGUs that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination and which represent the level at which management monitors and manages the goodwill.
In assessing whether an impairment is required the carrying value of the CGU is compared with its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal FVLC and its value in use VIU.
If the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit on a prorata basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
Any impairment loss for goodwill is recognised directly in the consolidated statement of income.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in subsequent periods.
Other investments Equity investments other than investments in Associates are recorded at fair value unless such fair value is not reliably determinable in which case they are carried at cost.
Changes in fair value are recorded in the consolidated statement of income unless they are classified as available for sale in which case fair value movements are recognised in other comprehensive income and are subsequently recognised in the consolidated statement of income when realised by sale or redemption or when a reduction in fair value is judged to be a significant or prolonged decline.
Impairment or impairment reversals Glencore conducts at least annually an internal review of asset values which is used as a source of information to assess for any indications of impairment or impairment reversal.
Formal impairment tests are carried out at least annually for cashgenerating units containing goodwill and for all other noncurrent assets when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
A formal impairment or reversal test involves determining whether the carrying amounts are in excess or below as the case may be of their recoverable amounts.
An assets recoverable amount is determined as the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use.
Such reviews are undertaken on an assetbyasset basis except where assets do not generate cash flows independent of other assets in which case the review is undertaken at the CGU level.
If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount an impairment loss is recorded in the consolidated statement of income to reflect the asset at the lower amount.
For those assets which were impaired in prior periods if their recoverable amount exceeds their carrying amount an impairment reversal is recorded in the consolidated statement of income to reflect the asset at the higher amount to the extent the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying value of the asset that would have been determined had no impairment been recognised.
Goodwill impairments and impairments of available for sale equity investments cannot be subsequently reversed.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when Glencore has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of past events and it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits that can be reliably estimated will be required to settle the liability.
The amount recognised as a provision is the best estimate of the consideration required to settle the present obligation at the balance sheet date taking into account the risks and uncertainties surrounding the obligation including interpretation of specific laws and likelihood of settlement.
Where a provision is measured using the cash flow estimated to settle the present obligation its carrying amount is the present value of those cash flows when the effect of the time value of money is material.
Onerous contracts An onerous contract is considered to exist where Glencore has a contract under which the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations under the contract exceed the economic benefits expected to be received from the contract.
Present obligations arising under onerous contracts are recognised and measured as provisions.
Unfavourable contracts An unfavourable contract is considered to exist when Glencore in a business combination acquires a contract under which the terms of the contract require Glencore to sell products or purchase services on terms which are economically unfavourable compared to current market terms at the time of the business combination.
Unfavourable contracts are recognised at the present value of the economic loss and amortised into the statement of income over the term of the contract.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Inventories The vast majority of inventories attributable to the marketing activities marketing inventories are valued at fair value less costs of disposal with the remainder valued at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Unrealised gains and losses from changes in fair value are reported in cost of goods sold.
Inventories held by the industrial activities production inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Cost is determined using the firstinfirstout FIFO or the weighted average method and comprises material costs labour costs and allocated production related overhead costs.
Financing and storage costs related to inventory are expensed as incurred.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash held at bank cash in hand and shortterm bank deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
The carrying amount of these assets approximates their fair value.
Financial instruments Financial assets are classified as either financial assets at fair value through profit or loss FVTPL loans and receivables heldto maturity investments or available for sale financial assets depending upon the purpose for which the financial assets were acquired.
Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value on the trade date including in the case of instruments not recorded at fair value through profit or loss directly attributable transaction costs.
Subsequently financial assets are carried at fair value other investments derivatives and marketable securities or amortised cost less impairment accounts receivable and advances and loans.
Financial liabilities other than derivatives are initially recognised at fair value of consideration received net of transaction costs as appropriate and subsequently carried at amortised cost.
Financial assets other than those at FVTPL are assessed for indicators of impairment at the end of each reporting period.
Financial assets are considered to be impaired when there is objective evidence that as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the financial asset the estimated future cash flows of the investment have been affected.
For financial assets carried at amortised cost the amount of the impairment loss recognised is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows.
The amount of the loss is recognised in the statement of income.
For financial assets that are carried at cost the amount of the impairment loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of the estimated future cash flows discounted at the current market rate of return for a similar financial asset.
Such impairment loss will not be reversed in subsequent periods.
The Group derecognises a financial asset when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the asset expire or when it transfers the financial asset and substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the asset to another party.
If the Group neither transfers nor retains substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership and continues to control the transferred asset the Group recognises its retained interest in the asset and an associated liability for amounts it may have to pay.
If the Group retains substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of a transferred financial asset the Group continues to recognise the financial asset and also recognises a collateralised borrowing for the proceeds received.
On derecognition of a financial asset in its entirety the difference between the assets carrying amount and the sum of the consideration received and receivable and the cumulative gain or loss that had been recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in equity is recognised in profit or loss.
Own shares The cost of purchases of own shares is deducted from equity.
Where they are purchased issued to employees or sold no gain or loss is recognised in the consolidated statement of income.
Such gains and losses are recognised directly in equity.
Any proceeds received on disposal of the shares or transfers to employees are recognised in equity.
Derivatives and hedging activities Derivative instruments which include physical contracts to sell or purchase commodities that do not meet the own use exemption are initially recognised at fair value when Glencore becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at the end of each reporting period.
Fair values are determined using quoted market prices dealer price quotations or using models and other valuation techniques the key inputs for which include current market and contractual prices for the underlying instrument time to expiry yield curves volatility of the underlying instrument and counterparty risk.
Gains and losses on derivative instruments for which hedge accounting is not applied other than the revenue adjustment mechanism embedded within provisionally priced sales are recognised in cost of goods sold.
Those derivatives qualifying and designated as hedges are either i a Fair Value Hedge of the change in fair value of a recognised asset or liability or an unrecognised firm commitment or ii a Cash Flow Hedge of the change in cash flows to be received or paid relating to a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable transaction.
A change in the fair value of derivatives designated as a Fair Value Hedge is reflected together with the change in the fair value of the hedged item in the consolidated statement of income.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 1.
Accounting policies continued A change in the fair value of derivatives designated as a Cash Flow Hedge is initially recognised as a cash flow hedge reserve in shareholders equity.
The deferred amount is then released to the consolidated statement of income in the same periods during which the hedged transaction affects the consolidated statement of income.
Hedge ineffectiveness is recorded in the consolidated statement of income when it occurs.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss existing in equity at that time remains in shareholders equity and is recognised in the consolidated statement of income when the committed or forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in the consolidated statement of income.
However if a forecast or committed transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was recognised in equity is immediately transferred to the consolidated statement of income.
A derivative may be embedded in a host contract.
Such combinations are known as hybrid instruments and at the date of issuance the embedded derivative is separated from the host contract and accounted for as a standalone derivative if the criteria for separation are met.
The host contract is accounted for in accordance with its relevant accounting policy.
Segment information Glencore is organised and operates on a worldwide basis in three core business segments  Metals and minerals Energy products and Agricultural products with each business segment responsible for the marketing sourcing hedging logistics and industrial investment activities of their respective products and reflecting the structure used by Glencores management to assess the performance of Glencore.
The business segments contributions to the Group are primarily derived from the net margin or premium earned from physical Marketing activities net sale and purchase of physical commodities provision of marketing and related valueadd services and the margin earned from Industrial asset activities net resulting from the sale of physical commodities over the cost of production andor cost of sales and comprise the following underlying key commodities Metals and minerals Zinc copper lead alumina aluminium ferroalloys nickel cobalt and iron ore including smelting refining mining processing and storage related operations of the relevant commodities Energy products Crude oil oil products steam coal and metallurgical coal including investments in coal mining and oil production operations ports vessels and storage facilities and Agriculture products Wheat corn canola barley rice oil seeds meals edible oils biofuels cotton and sugar supported by investments in storage handling processing and port facilities Corporate and other consolidated statement of income amount represents unallocated Group related expenses including variable pool bonus charges.
Statement of financial position amounts represent Group related balances.
The financial performance of the segments is principally evaluated by management with reference to Adjusted EBITEBITDA which is the net result of segmental revenue revenue including Proportionate adjustments as defined in the Alternative performance measure section less cost of goods sold and selling and administrative expenses plus share of income from associates and joint ventures dividend income and the attributable share of Adjusted EBITEBITDA of relevant material associates and joint ventures which are accounted for internally by means of proportionate consolidation excluding significant items.
The 2016 segment information includes the Agricultural products business which was disclosed as a discontinued operation until the close of its 50% sale on 1 December 2016 see note 24.
Following completion of the sale the results from Agricultural products have been combined under Marketing activities and the 2016 comparatives relating to Agricultural 2016 Industrial revenue of 3292 million and EBITDA EBIT of 138 million and 104 million respectively in respect thereof have been reclassified from Industrial to Marketing activities in the below tables consistent with how the business performance is monitored by Glencores management.
The accounting policies of the operating segments are the same as those described in note 1 with the exception of relevant material associates and joint ventures.
Under IFRS 1 1 Glencores investments in the Antamina copperzinc mine 34% owned and the Cerrejn coal mine 33% owned are considered to be associates as they are not subject to joint control and the Collahuasi copper mine 44% owned and Glencore Agri 50% owned are considered to be joint ventures.
Associates and joint ventures are required to be accounted for in Glencores financial statements under the equity method.
For internal reporting and analysis Glencore evaluates the performance of these investments under the proportionate consolidation method reflecting Glencores proportionate share of the revenues expenses assets and liabilities of the investments.
Under IFRS 5 100% of the results of the Agricultural business segment up to the date of completion of the sale were presented as a discontinued operation in the Groups statement of income following the agreed sale of a 50% interest in Glencore Agri see note 24.
Prior to completion of the sale Glencore evaluated the performance of this segment under the full consolidation method consistent with prior periods.
The balances as presented for internal reporting purposes are reconciled to Glencores statutory disclosures in the following tables andor in the Alternative performance measure section.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Glencore accounts for intrasegment sales and transfers where applicable as if the sales or transfers were to third parties i. at arms length commercial terms.
2017 US million Metals and minerals
Agricultural products
Revenue  Marketing activities 51017 118199 12611  181827 Revenue  Industrial activities 29448 10067  37 39552 Revenue 80465 128266 12611 37 221379 Proportionate adjustment  revenue 2502 790 12611  15903 Revenue  reported measure 77963 127476  37 205476 Marketing activities Adjusted EBITDA 2029 1054 316 175 3224 Depreciation and amortisation 24 64   88 Proportionate adjustment  depreciation Adjusted EBIT 2005 990 192 175 3012 Industrial activities Adjusted EBITDA 8281 3599  342 11538 Depreciation and amortisation 3274 1998  38 5310 Proportionate adjustment  depreciation Adjusted EBIT 4496 1424  380 5540 Total Adjusted EBITDA 10310 4653 316 517 14762 Total depreciation and amortisation 3298 2062  38 5398 Total depreciation proportionate adjustment 511 177 124  812 Total Adjusted EBIT 6501 2414 192 555 8552 Share of associates significant items Unrealised intergroup profit elimination adjustments Marktomarket valuation on certain coal hedging contracts Gains on disposals and investments 1309 Other expense  net 594 Interest expense  net 1451 Income tax expense 1759 Proportionate adjustment  net finance and income tax expense Income for the year 5162 1 Balance is net of intrasegment sales arising from transactions between the Industrial and Marketing activities.
Metals and minerals segment 19648 million Energy products segment 2677 million and Agricultural products Nil.
2 Refer to APMs section for definition.
3 Share of associates significant items comprise Glencores share of significant charges booked directly by various associates primarily Century.
4 Represents the required adjustment to eliminate unrealised profit or losses arising on intergroup transactions i. before ultimate sale to a third party.
For Glencore such adjustments arise on the sale of product in the ordinary course of business from its Industrial to Marketing operations.
Management assesses segment performance prior to any such adjustments as if the sales were to third parties.
5 Represents the reversal of the 2016 open coal derivative position designated to hedge price exposure to 11 million tonnes of coal sales in 2017.
The financial effect of settling these contracts in 2017 is included in Energy products Industrial Adjusted EBITDAEBIT above.
Also see prior year footnote on next page.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 2.
Segment information continued 2016 US million Metals and minerals
Agricultural products
Revenue  Marketing activities 42142 81872 21970  145984 Revenue  Industrial activities 24196 7149  22 31367 Revenue 66338 89021 21970 22 177351 Proportionate adjustment  revenue 1826 607 1085  3518 Discontinued operations  revenue   20885  20885 Revenue  reported measure 64512 88414  22 152948 Marketing activities Adjusted EBITDA 1586 959 592 74 3063 Depreciation and amortisation 24 50   74 Proportionate adjustment  depreciation Discontinued operations  depreciation   60  60 Adjusted EBIT 1562 909 522 74 2919 Industrial activities Adjusted EBITDA 6030 1503  328 7205 Depreciation and amortisation 3331 2167  1 5499 Proportionate adjustment  depreciation Adjusted EBIT 2182 842  329 1011 Total Adjusted EBITDA 7616 2462 592 402 10268 Total depreciation and amortisation 3355 2217  1 5573 Total depreciation proportionate adjustment and discontinued operations 517 178 70  765 Total Adjusted EBIT 3744 67 522 403 3930 Share of associates significant items Unrealised intergroup profit elimination adjustments Marktomarket valuation on certain coal hedging contracts Gains on disposals and investments 489 Other expense  net 1626 Interest expense  net 1533 Income tax expense 638 Proportionate adjustment  net finance and income tax expense Discontinued operations  net finance and income tax expense Income for the year from continuing and discontinued operations 936 1 Includes Glencores proportionate share of the Agricultural products business 50% since the disposal of Glencore Agri on 1 December 2016 see note 24.
2 Balance is net of intrasegment sales arising from transactions between the Industrial and Marketing activities.
Metals and minerals segment 16602 million Energy products segment 2263 million and Agricultural products 2253 million.
3 Refer to APMs section for definition.
4 Comprise of gain on disposal of investments of 1881 million other expense of 26 million net finance costs of 70 million and tax expense of 131 million see note 24.
5 Share of associates significant items comprise Glencores share of significant charges booked directly by various associates primarily impairment charges recognised within coal shipping investments.
6 Represents the required adjustment to eliminate unrealised profit or losses arising on intergroup transactions.
For Glencore such adjustments arise on the sale of product in the ordinary course of business from its Industrial to Marketing operations.
Management assesses segment performance prior to any such adjustments as if the sales were to third parties.
7 Represents an accounting measurement mismatch between the fair value of coal derivative positions in respect of portfolio risk managementhedging activities initiated in Q2 2016 and the anticipated future revenue to be generated from the sale of future unsold coal production.
The derivative positions manage forward sales price exposure relating to some 11 million tonnes of future attributable coal production which is expected to be settled before 31 December 2017.
The derivative positions include preexisting trading contracts for which marktomarket movements up until the time of them being ringfenced for hedging activities were included in trading results.
These transactions were not able to be designated as hedging instruments under IFRS which would have allowed for the deferment of any income statement effect until performance of the underlying future sale transactions.
The fair value movements in the derivative portfolio will be offset against future revenue in the segment information as the related sales of production are realised.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 2017 US million Metals and minerals
Agricultural products
Current assets 32642 15464  936 47170 Current liabilities 16603 17676  574 34853 Allocatable current capital employed 16039 2212  1510 12317 Property plant and equipment 37030 19607  409 57046 Intangible assets 3643 3127  17 6787 Investments in associates and other investments 8767 4868 3321  16956 Noncurrent advances and loans 1128 1773  75 2976 Inventory 369    369 Allocatable noncurrent capital employed 50937 29375 3321 501 84134 Other assets 4289 4289 Other liabilities 51285 51285 Total net assets 66976 27163 3321 48005 49455 Capital expenditure  Marketing activities 17 79 118  214 Capital expenditure  Industrial activities 3232 742  46 4020 Capital expenditure 3234 Proportionate adjustment  capital expenditure Capital expenditure  reported measure 2810 767  46 3623 1 Other assets include deferred tax assets cash and cash equivalents and assets held for sale.
Other liabilities include borrowings noncurrent deferred income deferred tax liabilities noncurrent provisions noncurrent financial liabilities and liabilities held for sale.
3 Refer to APMs section for definition.
2016 US million Metals and minerals
Agricultural products
Current assets 23904 17456  466 40894 Current liabilities 13853 18902  582 33337 Allocatable current capital employed 10051 1446  1048 7557 Property plant and equipment 32635 20795  396 53826 Intangible assets 3671 3028  17 6716 Investments in associates and other investments 7963 3721 3155  14839 Noncurrent advances and loans 1737 1737  9 3483 Inventory 564    564 Allocatable noncurrent capital employed 46570 29281 3155 422 79428 Other assets 4278 4278 Other liabilities 47482 47482 Total net assets 56621 27835 3155 43830 43781 Capital expenditure  Marketing activities Capital expenditure  Industrial activities 2695 571  49 3315 Capital expenditure 2497 Proportionate adjustment  capital expenditure Capital expenditure  reported measure 2090 1 Other assets include deferred tax assets and cash and cash equivalents.
Other liabilities include borrowings noncurrent deferred income deferred tax liabilities noncurrent provisions and noncurrent financial liabilities.
3 Refer to APMs section for definition.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 2.
Segment information continued Geographical information US million 2017 2016 Revenue from third parties The Americas 33930 22401 Europe 72459 55021 Asia 82694 61060 Africa 4800 3934 Oceania 11593 10532 205476 152948 Noncurrent assets The Americas 23121 18713 Europe 10917 10434 Asia 4605 4895 Africa 19604 19596 Oceania 19953 20554 78200 74192 1 Revenue by geographical destination is based on the country of incorporation of the sales counterparty however this may not necessarily be the country of the counterparts ultimate parent andor final destination of product.
2 Noncurrent assets are noncurrent assets excluding other investments advances and loans and deferred tax assets.
Noncurrent assets comprise assets in Australia of 18353 million 2016 19215 million in Peru of 10721 million 2016 6093 million and the DRC of 8166 million 2016 8349 million.
Gains on disposals and investments US million 2017 2016 Gain on sale of HG Storage 674 Gain on sale of Zinc Africa 232 Gain on sale of GRail  430 Gain on sale of other operations 173 22 Gain on disposal of property plant and equipment and intangible assets Total 1primarily comprises the gain on sale of a royalty portfolio see below.
HG Storage In December 2017 Glencore disposed of a 51% interest in HG Storage its petroleum products and logistics business resulting in a gain of 674 million including remeasurement of the retained investment to its fair value see note 24.
Zinc Africa In August 2017 Glencore disposed of its African zinc operations Perkoa and Rosh Pinah resulting in a gain of 232 million see note 24.
GRail
In December 2016 Glencore disposed of its New South Wales coal rail haulage business resulting in a gain of 430 million see note 24.
Other
The gain on sale of other operations arose primarily from the disposal of Eland Platinum which resulted in a gain of 147 million mainly on account of recycling foreign currency translation reserves to income see note 24.
Gain on disposal of property plant and equipment  Royalty portfolio In December 2017 Glencore disposed of a portfolio of selected base metals royalty assets for a combination of cash 150 million and a 50% interest in a new base metals streaming and royalties joint venture BaseCore Metals resulting in a gain on disposal of 210 million see note 9.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 4.
Other expense  net US million Notes 2017 2016 Impairments  net 5 628 1268 Net changes in marktomarket valuations on investments held for trading 290 121 Net foreign exchange losses 80 70 Legal settlement 75 92 Katanga restatement 78 Other expenses  net Total 594 1626 1 Other expenses  net for the year ended 31 December 2016 comprised restructuring and closure costs of 47 million and a settlement of a financial guarantee in relation to Optimum of 28 million.
Together with foreign exchange movements and marktomarket movements on investments held for trading other expense includes other items of income and expense which due to their nonoperational nature or expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them are reported separately from operating segment results.
Other expenses  net includes but is not limited to gainloss on disposal of property plant and equipment and restructuring and closure costs.
Net changes in marktomarket valuations on investments held for trading Primarily relates to movements on interests in investments classified as held for trading see note 9 and the ARM Coal non discretionary dividend obligation see note 27 carried at fair value.
Legal settlement Glencore Ltd GLtd the U. branch of Glencore AG is a defendant in a case relating to an alumina refinery located in St.
Croix
U.
Virgin Islands which was acquired by Virgin Islands Alumina Corporation Vialco a former affiliate of GLtd in 1989 and was subsequently disposed of by Vialco in 2005.
GLtd guaranteed the obligations of Vialco under the 1989 agreement which included certain environmental and other indemnities.
The complaint alleges that GLtd is contractually obligated to indemnify the previous owners for two environmental lawsuits arising out of ownership and operation of the refinery.
GLtd intends to vigorously defend the contention but has nevertheless reserved 75 million for the possibility the plaintiff might prevail in the whole of its claims.
In September 2016 a subsidiary of the Group reached a settlement with U. around 65 million of credits in relation to compliance with a U. biofuels programme in the years 201 112.
Katanga restatement During the year Katanga Mining Limited Katanga an 86.3% controlled subsidiary of the Group listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange identified certain accounting matters affecting its results reported in prior years the impact of which was considered material for Katanga but not for the Group.
Consequently for the years ended 31 December 2016 and earlier Katanga has restated its financial statements however the cumulative impact has only been corrected in the Group financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Had the Groups results been restated income before taxes for the 2016 year would have been lower by 10 million.
Impairments
US million Notes 2017 2016 Property plant and equipment and intangible assets net 78 378 1268 Investments 9 101 Advances and loans  noncurrent 149 Total impairments 628 1268 1 Includes impairment reversals of 243 million relating to Energy products as detailed below.
2 Impairments recognised during the year are allocated to Glencores operating segments as follows Metals and minerals 318 million 2016 50 million and Energy products 310 million 2016 1218 million.
As part of a regular portfolio review Glencore carries out an assessment of whether there is an indication of asset impairment or whether a previously recorded impairment may no longer be required.
The recoverable amounts of the property plant and equipment and intangible assets were measured based on fair value less costs of disposal FVLCD determined by discounted cash flow techniques based on the most recent approved financial budgets and threeyear business plans which are underpinned and supported by life of mine plans of the respective operations.
The valuation models use the most recent reserve and resource estimates relevant cost assumptions generally based on past experience and where possible market forecasts of commodity price and foreign exchange rate assumptions discounted using operation specific discount rates ranging from 7%  12% 2016 7%  1 1%.
The valuations remain sensitive to price and a deteriorationimprovement in the pricing outlook may result in additional impairmentsreversals.
The determination of FVLCD uses Level 3 valuation techniques for both years.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 5.
Impairments continued As a result of the regular impairment assessment the following significant impairment charges resulted Property plant and equipment Following a modest downward revision compared to prior year of the longterm oil price assumption used to determine the remaining recoverable value of the EandP assets offset by a combination of improved pricing differentials for the Chad crude oil blend Doba and further cost savings an overall impairment charge of 278 million has been recognised in the Chad oil operations Energy products segment.
The remaining recoverable value of the Chad oil operations is 1221 million.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and further deterioration or improvement in the pricing outlook may result in additional or reversal of impairment.
The short to longterm Brent crude oil price assumptions used in the valuation were 65  70 per barrel and should these decrease or increase by 10% a further 535 million of impairment or reversal would be recognised.
In January 2018 a farmdown agreement to divest a 50% interest in the Bolongo licence in Cameroon was signed.
As a result the remaining recoverable value of the retained 37.5% working interest on the assumption that the Cameroon State National Oil Company will exercise its backin right to the Oak development was impaired by 81 million to its recoverable value of 142 million.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and further deterioration or improvement in the pricing outlook may result in additional or reversal of impairment.
The short to longterm Brent crude oil price assumptions used in the valuation were 65  70 per barrel and should these decrease or increase by 10% a further 13 million of impairment or reversal would be recognised.
The Alen field gas production in Equatorial Guinea is currently reinjected back into the field.
A project to commercialise gas production has now progressed sufficiently resulting in a partial reversal of impairments of 243 million in the Equatorial Guinea oil operations Energy products segment and an increase in the recoverable value to 394 million.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and further deterioration or improvement in the pricing outlook may result in additional or reversal of impairment.
The short to longterm Brent crude oil price assumptions and the Henry Hub price assumption used in the valuation were 65  70 per barrel and 3 per million Btu respectively.
Should these decrease or increase by 10% a further 75 million of impairment or reversal would be recognised.
As a result of certain life of mine optimisation and design updates alongside the finalisation phase of Katangas whole ore leach project and its successful commissioning in late 2017 it was determined that certain processing equipment and noncurrent inventories were no longer required and therefore the full carrying value of these assets were impaired by 76 million.
The balance of property plant and equipment related impairment charges none of which were individually material relates to specific assets where utilisation is no longer required or projects progressed due to changes in production and development plans.
As a result the full carrying value of these assetsprojects was impaired with 186 million recognised in our Metals and minerals segment.
Investments
Following strategic reviews of a copper and gold exploration investment and a coal investment it was determined for the time being to cease further development and as a result the full carrying value of each investment 56 million and 45 million respectively was impaired.
Advances and loans  noncurrent Glencore has reviewed the carrying value of its interest in subordinated debt and preference shares of a coal port following the insolvencies of certain third party shippers which impact the expected return on these investments and as a result such loans were impaired by 149 million to their estimated recoverable amount of 139 million.
Property plant and equipment Due to changes in estimated reserve life and revised mining plans the estimated mine life of Tahmoor in Australia Energy products segment was reduced from 2020 to 2017.
As a result the carrying value of this operation was impaired by 168 million to its estimated recoverable amount of 100 million which is expected to be depleted over the following year as the mine approaches its completion.
As a result of a write down of appraisal expenditure and certain operational challenges at the Equatorial Guinea oil operations Energy products segment an impairment charge of 31 1 million has been recognised resulting in a remaining recoverable value of 194 million.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and further deterioration in the pricing outlook may result in additional impairment.
The short to longterm Brent crude oil price assumptions used in the valuation were between 50  75 per barrel and should these fall by 10% a further 46 million of impairment would be recognised.
During 2016 Glencores longterm oil price assumptions were revised downwards which together with delayed work programmes resulted in a 622 million impairment of the onshore Chad oil operations Energy products segment to their estimated recoverable amount of 1480 million.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and further deterioration in the pricing outlook may result in additional impairment.
The short to longterm Brent crude oil price assumptions used in the valuation were between 50  75 per barrel and should these fall by 10% a further 695 million of impairment would be recognised.
The balance of property plant and equipment related impairment charges none of which were individually material arose due to changes in production and development plans and resulted in impairments of 50 million and 1 17 million being recognised in our Metals and minerals and Energy products segments respectively.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 6.
Income taxes Income taxes consist of the following US million 2017 2016 Current income tax expense 1367 765 Adjustments in respect of prior year income tax 18 3 Deferred income tax expensecredit 370 117 Adjustments in respect of prior year deferred income tax 4 7 Total tax expense reported in the statement of income 1759 638 Current income tax expensecredit recognised directly in other comprehensive income Deferred income tax expensecredit recognised directly in other comprehensive income 37 24 Total tax expensecredit recognised directly in other comprehensive income 37 24 The effective Group tax rate is different from the statutory Swiss income tax rate applicable to the Company for the following reasons US million 2017 2016 Incomeloss before income taxes and attribution from continuing operations 6921 549 Income before income taxes and attribution from discontinued operations  2254 Income before income taxes and attribution from continuing and discontinued operations 6921 1705 Less Share of income from associates and joint ventures from continuing operations 1158 11 Less Share of income from associates and joint ventures from discontinued operations  15 Parent Companys and subsidiaries income before income tax and attribution from continuing and discontinued operations 5763 1679 Income tax expense calculated at the Swiss income tax rate of 15% 2016 15% 864 252 Tax effects of Different tax rates from the standard Swiss income tax rate 333 205 Tax exempt income 125 million 2016 160 million from recurring items and 248 million 2016 283 million from nonrecurring items 373 443 Items not tax deductible 316 million 2016 365 million from recurring items and 279 million 2016 269 million from nonrecurring items 595 634 Foreign exchange fluctuations 30 19 Changes in tax rates 5 million 2016 3 million from recurring items and 188 million 2016 Nil from nonrecurring items 193 3 Utilisation and changes in recognition of tax losses and temporary differences 290 41 Tax losses not recognised 412 483 Adjustments in respect of prior years 22 10 Other 27 1 Income tax expense 1759 769 Income tax expense reported in the statement of income 1759 638 Income tax expense attributable to discontinued operations  131 The nontax deductible items of 826 million 2016 634 million primarily relate to nondeductible exploration charges financing costs impairments and various other expenses.
The impact of tax exempt income of 332 million 2016 443 million primarily relates to nontaxable intragroup dividends income that is not effectively connected to the taxable jurisdiction and various other items.
The tax impact of foreign exchange fluctuations relates to the foreign currency movements on deferred tax balances where the underlying tax balances are denominated in a currency different to the functional currency determined for accounting purposes.
The impact of change in tax rates of 193 million arises primarily from significant corporate tax rate changes in the U. the announced U. tax reform.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 6.
Income taxes continued Deferred taxes as at 31 December 2017 and 2016 are attributable to the items in the table below US million 2017 Recognised in the statement of income
Business combination and disposal of subsidiaries
Deferred tax assets Tax losses carried forward 1523 131   1  1653 Other 210 50 14 Total 1733 81 14 2 19 47 1760 Deferred tax liabilities Depreciation and amortisation 6855 265 5 914 142 17 5546 Marktomarket valuations 65 20 5  4  76 Total 7024 293 23 914 151 21 5664 Total Deferred tax  net 5291 374 37 912 132 68 3904 US million 2016 Recognised in the statement of income
Business combination and disposal of subsidiaries
Deferred tax assets Tax losses carried forward 1653 70  97   1680 Total 1760 15 31 104 2  1846 Deferred tax liabilities Depreciation and amortisation 5546 27  94 130  5483 Marktomarket valuations 76 154  9 1  238 Total 5664 67 7 204 132 19 5777 Total Deferred tax  net 3904 52 24 100 130 19 3931 1 Asset and liability positions in the same category reflect the impact of tax assets and liabilities arising in local tax jurisdictions that cannot be offset against tax assets and liabilities arising in other tax jurisdictions.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for tax losses carried forward only to the extent that realisation of the related tax benefit is probable.
As at 31 December 2017 2404 million 2016 2898 million of deferred tax assets related to available loss carry forwards have been brought to account of which 1523 million 2016 1653 million are disclosed as deferred tax assets with the remaining balance being offset against deferred tax liabilities arising in the same tax entity.
This balance is primarily comprised of 470 million 2016 462 million in entities domiciled in the DRC Katanga Mining Group where these entities have been loss making for tax purposes in both 2017 and 2016 478 million 2016 657 million in entities domiciled in Switzerland and 425 million 2016 430 million in entities domiciled in the U.
In evaluating whether it is probable that taxable profits will be earned in future accounting periods prior to any tax loss expiry as may be the case all available evidence was considered including approved budgets forecasts and business plans and in certain cases analysis of historical operating results.
These forecasts are consistent with those prepared and used internally for business planning and impairment testing purposes.
Following this evaluation it was determined there would be sufficient taxable income generated to realise the benefit of the deferred tax assets and that no reasonably possible change in any of the key assumptions would result in a material reduction in forecast headroom of tax profits so that the recognised deferred tax asset would not be realised other than the potential developments in the DRC discussed below.
The losses carried forward in the DRC have an unlimited carry forward period subject to an annual utilisation limitation.
Katanga Mining has recently resumed operations and is expected to generate sufficient taxable profits in the future.
Should these expectations fully materialise up to 633 million of available unrecognised tax effected losses could be recognised.
However in January 2018 the DRC parliament passed a revised mining code which raises taxes and ceases existing tax stability agreements.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 At 31 December 2017 these revisions were not substantively enacted and therefore do not impact the recognition of deferred taxes at year end.
However if enacted as currently contemplated the changes could significantly impact the currently recognised tax losses along with any unrecognised tax losses.
The recognised losses carried forward in Switzerland primarily relate to nonrecurring events in 201 1 and 2012.
Based on the core business activities conducted in Switzerland and taxable income in 2017 sufficient taxable profits are expected to fully utilise the recognised tax losses prior to expiration.
The recognised losses carried forward in the U. of 20 years.
The U. entities comprise our core U. forward sufficient taxable profits are expected to fully utilise the recognised tax losses prior to expiration.
Available gross tax losses carried forward and deductible temporary differences for which no deferred tax assets have been recognised in the consolidated financial statements are detailed below and will expire as follows US million 2017 2016 1 year 110 34 2 years 955 320 3 years 66 2408 Thereafter 2140 13507 Unlimited 3303 2149 Total 6574 18418 As at 31 December 2017 unremitted earnings of 60014 million 2016 40088 million have been retained by subsidiaries for reinvestment.
No provision is made for income taxes.
Property plant and equipment US million Notes Freehold land and buildings Plant and equipment Mineral and petroleum rights
Deferred mining costs Total Gross carrying amount 1 January 2017 4808 54622 20332 2343 2362 84467 Business combination 24 523 528 3648   4699 Disposal of subsidiaries 24 88 728 118  126 1060 Additions 76 3107 138  279 3600 Disposals 31 407 10  1 449 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements 26 392 257   675 Reclassification to held for sale 14 43 644 126   813 Other movements tel173 139 1131 31 December 2017 5566 57322 24817 2170 2375 92250 Accumulated depreciation and impairment 1 January 2017 1061 22392 5219 1138 831 30641 Disposal of subsidiaries 24 44 369 34  121 568 Depreciation 266 3912 849  264 5291 Disposals 6 245 9  1 261 Impairments 5 23 114 8 477  378 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements 5 103 56   164 Reclassification to held for sale 14 6 513 73   592 Other movements 31 December 2017 1363 25385 5997 1584 875 35204 Net book value 31 December 2017 4203 31937 18820 586 1500 57046 1 Include additions to restoration and rehabilitation of 786 million see note 21.
Plant and equipment includes expenditure for construction in progress of 4454 million 2016 4599 million and a net book value of 527 million 2016 592 million of lease assets under finance lease agreements.
Mineral and petroleum rights include biological assets of 21 million 2016 21 million.
Depreciation expenses included in cost of goods sold are 5272 million 2016 5457 million in selling and administrative expenses 19 million 2016 20 million and in discontinued operations Nil 2016 60 million.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 7.
Property plant and equipment continued During 2017 42 million 2016 49 million of interest was capitalised.
With the exception of project specific borrowings the rate used to determine the amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation was 3% 2016 3%.
As at 31 December 2017 except for the purposes of finance leases no property plant or equipment was pledged as security for borrowings 2016 Nil.
US million Notes Freehold land and buildings Plant and equipment Mineral and petroleum rights
Deferred mining costs Total Gross carrying amount 1 January 2016 5326 56037 20579 2337 2393 86672 Business combination 24 22 37    59 Disposal of subsidiaries 24 694 4012 712  95 5513 Additions 62 2606 110  296 3074 Disposals 85 409 14  14 522 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements 28 401 303  1 733 Other movements 149 38 66 6 219 36 31 December 2016 4808 54622 20332 2343 2362 84467 Accumulated depreciation and impairment 1 January 2016 995 19067 4324 784 728 25898 Disposal of subsidiaries 24 137 1284 224  80 1725 Depreciation 263 4063 978  233 5537 Disposals 44 404 3  2 453 Impairments 5  807 105 351  1263 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements 3 85 50   138 Other movements 19 58 11 3 48 17 31 December 2016 1061 22392 5219 1138 831 30641 Net book value 31 December 2016 3747 32230 15113 1205 1531 53826 Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 8.
Intangible assets US million Notes Goodwill Port allocation rights
Royalty and other Total
1 January 2017 13293 1408 385 258 15344 Business combination 24   76  76 Disposal of subsidiaries 24   2 2 4 Additions   6 17 23 Disposals   39 105 144 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements  Reclassification to held for sale Other movements   December 2017 13293 1555 468 183 15499 Accumulated amortisation and impairment 1 January 2017 824tel8628 Disposal of subsidiaries 24   1  1 Amortisation expense Impairments 5 Disposals   19 51 70 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements  13 1  14 Other movements   40 6 34 31 December 2017 8712 Net carrying amount 31 December 2017 5050 1406 231 100 6787 1 Recognised in cost of goods sold.
2 See note 14.
US million Notes Goodwill Port allocation rights
Royalty and other Total
1 January 2016 14122 1252 394 318 16086 Disposal of subsidiaries 24 829 15 8 98 950 Additions   13 3 16 Disposals  1 15  16 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements  Other movements  6 1 33 38 31 December 2016 13293 1408 385 258 15344 Accumulated amortisation and impairment 1 January 2016 8570 Disposal of subsidiaries 24  9 5 20 34 Amortisation expense Impairments 5 Disposals   15  15 Effect of foreign currency exchange movements  14 1  15 Other movements   10 2 8 31 December 2016 824tel8628 Net carrying amount 31 December 2016 5050 1308 222 136 6716 1 Recognised in cost of goods sold.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 8.
Intangible assets continued
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated to cashgenerating units CGUs or groups of CGUs as follows US million 2017 2016 Metals and minerals marketing businesses 3326 3326 Coal marketing business 1674 1674 Metals warehousing business 50 50 Total 5050 5050 Metals and minerals and coal marketing businesses Goodwill of 3326 million and 1674 million was recognised in connection with previous business combinations and was allocated to the metals and minerals marketing and coal marketing CGUs respectively based on the annual synergies expected to accrue to the respective marketing departments as a result of increased volumes blending opportunities and freight and logistics arbitrage opportunities.
Metals warehousing business Goodwill of 50 million 2016 50 million relates to the Access World former Pacorini logistics business CGU.
Port allocation rights Port allocation rights represent contractual entitlements to export certain amounts of coal on an annual basis from Richard Bay Coal Terminal in South Africa recognised as part of previous business combinations.
The rights are amortised on a straightline basis over the estimated economic life of the port of 40 years.
Licences trademarks and software Intangibles related to internally developed technology and patents were recognised in previous business combinations and are amortised over the estimated economic life of the technology which ranges between 10  15 years.
Royalty
The fair value of a royalty income stream related to output from the Antamina copper mine was recognised as part of a previous business combination.
This amount was being amortised on a unit of production basis.
In December 2017 this royalty was disposed of see note 3.
Goodwill impairment testing Given the nature of each CGUs activities information on its fair value is usually difficult to obtain unless negotiations with potential purchasers or similar transactions are taking place.
Consequently the recoverable amount for each of the marketing CGUs is determined by reference to the FVLCD which utilises a price to earnings multiple approach based on the 2017 approved financial budget which includes factors such as marketing volumes handled and operating interest and income tax charges generally based on past experience.
The price to earnings multiple of 15.0 times 2016 13.5 times is derived from observable market data for broadly comparable businesses and Glencore believes that no reasonably possible change in any of the above key assumptions would cause the recoverable amount to fall below the carrying value of the CGU.
The determination of FVLCD for each of the marketing CGUs used Level 3 valuation techniques in both years.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 9.
Investments in associates joint ventures and other investments Investments in associates and joint ventures US million Notes 2017 2016 1 January 13086 11337 Additions 8 15 Disposals 12 9 Share of income from associates and joint ventures 1158 11 Share of income from associates and joint ventures from discontinued operations 24  15 Share of other comprehensive income from associates and joint ventures 93 Fair value of retained interest in HG Storage and other 2016 Glencore Agri 24 563 3125 Disposal of equity accounted investments 24 170 624 Investment in Trevali 242 Investment in BaseCore Metals 4 150 Impairments 5 101 Dividends received 1081 833 Other movements 62 49 31 December 13998 13086 Of which Investments in associates 7643 6910 Investments in joint ventures 6355 6176 As at 31 December 2017 the fair value of listed associates and joint ventures which have a carrying value of 808 million 2016 555 million using published price quotations a Level 1 fair value measurement was 1340 million 2016 424 million.
As at 31 December 2017 the balance mainly comprises Century Aluminum and Trevali which have a carrying value of 478 million 2016 460 million and 239 million 2016 Nil respectively.
As at 31 December 2017 270 million 2016 Nil of the carrying value of Century Aluminum was secured under a loan facility with proceeds received and recognised in current borrowings of 170 million 2016 Nil.
HG Storage In December 2017 Glencore disposed of a 51% interest in HG Storage its petroleum products and logistics business for 530 million see note 24 subsequently accounting for its remaining share using the equity method.
Trevali
In August 2017 Glencore disposed of its African zinc operations Perkoa and Rosh Pinah for a combination of cash and a 25% 222 million interest in Trevali see note 24.
BaseCore Metals In December 2017 Glencore disposed of a portfolio of selected base metals royalty assets for a combination of cash and a 50% 150 million interest in BaseCore Metals LP see note 3 subsequently accounting for its share using the equity method.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 9.
Investments in associates joint ventures and other investments continued Details of material associates and joint ventures Summarised financial information in respect of Glencores associates and joint ventures reflecting 100% of the underlying associates and joint ventures relevant figures is set out below.
US million Cerrejn Antamina
Glencore
Agri
Total material joint ventures
Noncurrent assets 2646 4383 7029 4629 4732 9361 16390 Current assets 880 1174 2054 1363 5839 7202 9256 Noncurrent liabilities 612 1098 1710 1084 855 1939 3649 Current liabilities 522 747 1269 636 5687 6323 7592 The above assets and liabilities include the following Cash and cash equivalents 148 5tel312 516 Current financial liabilities 2 39 41 2 3273 3275 3316 Noncurrent financial liabilities Net assets 31 December 2017 2392 3712 6104 4272 4029 8301 14405 Glencores ownership interest 33.3% 33.8% 44.0% 50.0% Acquisition fair value and other adjustments 967 1973 2940 1154 1307 2461 5401 Carrying value 1764 3228 4992 3034 3321 6355 11347 1 Financial liabilities exclude trade other payables and provisions.
Summarised profit and loss in respect of Glencores associates and joint ventures reflecting 100% of the underlying associates and joint ventures relevant figures for the year ended 31 December 2017 including group adjustments relating to alignment of accounting policies or fair value adjustments is set out below.
US million Cerrejn Antamina
Glencore
Agri
Total material joint ventures
Revenue 2371 3550 5921 2960 25222 28182 34103 Income for the year 388 1300 1688 841 198 1039 2727 Other comprehensive loss    11 3 14 14 Total comprehensive income 388 1300 1688 830 195 1025 2713 Glencores share of dividends paid 14tel 356 996 The above profit for the year includes the following Depreciation and amortisation 533 766 1299 574 248 822 2121 Interest income Interest expense Income tax expense 240 712 952 389 50 439 1391 1 Includes foreign exchange gains and other income of 62 million.
2 Includes foreign exchange losses of 81 million.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 US million Cerrejn Antamina
Glencore
Agri
Total material joint ventures
Noncurrent assets 2487 4313 6800 4504 4461 8965 15765 Current assets 670 952 1622 1164 6354 7518 9140 Noncurrent liabilities 604 1064 1668 1032 841 1873 3541 Current liabilities 291 470 761 442 6286 6728 7489 The above assets and liabilities include the following Cash and cash equivalents 108 9tel274 472 Current financial liabilities 1 77 78 2 3420 3422 3500 Noncurrent financial liabilities Net assets 31 December 2016 2262 3731 5993 4194 3688 7882 13875 Glencores ownership interest 33.3% 33.8% 44.0% 50.0% Acquisition fair value and other adjustments 1028 2021 3049 1176 1311 2487 5536 Carrying value 1781 3282 5063 3021 3155 6176 11239 1 Financial liabilities exclude trade other payables and provisions.
Summarised profit and loss in respect of Glencores associates and joint ventures reflecting 100% of the underlying associates and joint ventures relevant figures for the year ended 31 December 2016 including group adjustments relating to alignment of accounting policies or fair value adjustments is set out below.
US million Cerrejn Antamina
Glencore
Agri
Total material joint ventures
Revenue 1822 2429 4251 2285 2170 4455 8706 Lossincome for the year 913 584 329 Other comprehensive lossincome    11 10 1 1 Total comprehensive lossincome 913 584 329 Glencores share of dividends paid 10tel 352 795 The above profit for the year includes the following Depreciation and amortisation 534 774 1308 581 20 601 1909 Interest income Interest expense Impairment net of tax 1036  1036    1036 Income tax expense 49 420 469 168 32 200 669 1 Includes foreign exchange gains and other income of 37 million.
2 Includes foreign exchange losses of 49 million.
3 Glencores attributable share of impairments relating to Cerrejn amounts to 345 million net of taxes of 176 million resulting from reduced near term production estimates due to increased risks related to delays in securing approvals as a result of continued social and environmental challenges to current mine plans.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and a 10% decrease of the price assumptions would result in a further impairment of 293 million.
Aggregate information of associates that are not individually material US million 2017 2016 The Groups share of incomeloss 121 122 The Groups share of other comprehensive income 99 The Groups share of total comprehensive incomeloss 220 122 Aggregate carrying value of the Groups interests 2651 1847 The amount of corporate guarantees excluding Glencore Agri in favour of associates and joint ventures as at 31 December 2017 was 476 million 2016 470 million.
Issued guarantees in favour of Glencore Agri amounted to 518 million as at 31 December 2017 2016 7339 million mainly now only relating to a 400 million Viterra bond maturing in 2020.
No amounts have been claimed or provided as at 31 December 2017.
Glencores share of joint ventures capital commitments amounts to 151 million 2016 154 million.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 9.
Investments in associates joint ventures and other investments continued Other investments US million 2017 2016 Available for sale United Company Rusal plc 933 562 OAO NK Russneft 1042 895 Yancoal 293 2268 1457 Fair value through profit and loss OSJC Rosneft Oil cashsettled equity swaps 307 Volcan Compania Minera S.
Century Aluminum Company cashsettled equity swaps 179 78 Other Total 2958 1753 Available for sale investments Glencore accounts for its interests in United Company Rusal plc OAO NK Russneft Russneft and Yancoal Australia Limited Yancoal as available for sale investments at fair value with marktomarket movements recognised in other comprehensive income.
Although
Glencore holds a 25% interest in Russneft it does not exercise significant influence over its financial and operating policy decisions.
Yancoal
On 27 July 2017 Glencore and Yancoal signed agreements relating to the acquisition of a 49% interest in the Hunter Valley Operations HVO coal mine in New South Wales Australia following Yancoals acquisition of Coal and Allied from Rio Tinto.
In addition to this transaction Glencore agreed to subscribe for 31 1 million worth of shares in Yancoals equity raising which completed in September 2017.
The HVO acquisition is subject to regulatory approvals which are expected to be received during the course of H1 2018.
Also see note 29.
Fair value through profit and loss
On 3 January 2017 Glencore and Qatar Investment Authority QIA entered into various agreements establishing a 5050 consortium QHG to acquire 19.5% of OSJC Rosneft Oil Rosneft and enter into a 5 year offtake agreement with Rosneft.
The joint investments established constitute joint arrangements subject to joint control by virtue of the partnership agreements in accordance with IFRS 1 1 and are accounted for under the equity method and included within investments in joint ventures.
The structure requires unanimous consent for all key decisions regarding the relevant activities of the joint investments.
As the joint arrangements are structured through separate vehicles and Glencore is not the only possible source of funding nor does it have a direct or indirect obligation for the liabilities of the arrangements the arrangements have been accounted for as joint ventures.
Glencores initial investment was EUR 2.
In September 2017 QHG concluded an agreement with CEFC China Energy Company Limited to dispose of the majority of the shares it held amounting to a 14.16% stake in Rosneft.
Following completion of the transaction the margin guarantees provided by Glencore see note 30 will terminate.
The transaction subject to customary regulatory approval processes is expected to complete in H1 2018.
In relation to these arrangements Glencore advanced EUR300 million in the form of a total return swap over 0.57% of Rosneft shares accounted for at fair value through profit and loss which constitutes the substantial majority of Glencores investment in QHG.
Volcan
On 9 November 2017 Glencore completed the acquisition of additional shares in Volcan thereby increasing its total economic interest from 7.7% to 23.3% see note 24.
Prior to acquisition Glencores interest in Volcan was accounted for at fair value through profit and loss and a gain of 235 million was recognised in changes in marktomarket valuations on investments held for trading see note 4.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 10.
Advances and loans US million Notes 2017 2016 Loans to associates 220 526 Rehabilitation trust fund 213 193 Pension surpluses 22 68 Other noncurrent receivables and loans 2475 2764 Total 2976 3483 1 Includes advances net of 1654 million 2016 2039 million provided by various banks.
Loans to associates Loans to associates generally bear interest at applicable floating market rates plus a premium.
In December 2017 loans extended to associates were impaired by 149 million see note 5.
Rehabilitation trust fund Glencore makes contributions to controlled funds that were established to meet the costs of its restoration and rehabilitation liabilities primarily in South Africa.
These funds are not available for the general purposes of the Group and there is no present obligation to make any further contributions.
Other noncurrent receivables and loans Other noncurrent receivables and loans comprise the following US million 2017 2016
Secured marketing related financing arrangements 992 1043 Socit Nationale dElectricit SNEL power advances 307 295 Chad State National Oil Company 339 389 Socit Nationale des Ptroles du Congo 123 292 Iron ore prepayment 38 89 Other 676 656 Total 2475 2764 1 Various marketing related financing facilities generally secured against certain assets andor payable from the future sale of production of the counterparty.
The advances and loans are interestbearing and on average are to be repaid over a threeyear period.
SNEL power advances In early 2012 a joint agreement with Socit Nationale dlectricit SNEL the Democratic Republic of the Congos DRC national electricity utility was signed whereby Glencores operations will contribute 389 million to a major electricity infrastructure refurbishment programme including transmission and distribution systems.
This is expected to facilitate a progressive increase in power availability to 450 megawatts by the end of 2018.
Funding commenced in the second quarter of 2012 and will continue until Q1 2020.
The loans are being repaid via discounts on electricity purchases which will accelerate upon completion of the refurbishment programme.
Chad State National Oil Company Glencore has provided a net 398 million 2016 418 million to the Chad State National Oil Company SHT to be repaid through future oil deliveries over seven years.
As at 31 December 2017 the advance is net of 872 million 2016 972 million provided by a syndicate of banks the repayment terms of which are contingent upon and connected to the receipt of oil due from SHT under the prepayment.
Of the net amount advanced 339 million 2016 389 million is receivable after 12 months and is presented within Other noncurrent receivables and loans and 59 million 2016 29 million is due within 12 months and included within Accounts receivable.
Socit Nationale des Ptroles du Congo SNPC Glencore has provided a net 212 million 2016 336 million to SNPC repayable through future oil deliveries over five years.
As at 31 December 2017 the advance is net of 549 million 2016 512 million provided by the bank market the repayment terms of which are contingent upon and connected to the future receipt of oil contractually due from SNPC.
Of the net amount advanced 123 million 2016 292 million is due after 12 months and is presented within Other longterm receivables and loans and 89 million 2016 44 million is due within 12 months and included within Accounts receivable.
Iron ore prepayment Glencore has advanced funds to iron ore suppliers to be repaid through future iron ore deliveries over two years.
As at 31 December 2017 the total advance of 1172 million 2016 1571 million is recorded net of 1092 million 2016 1414 million provided by the bank market the repayment terms of which are contingent upon and connected to the future receipt of iron ore contractually due from the counterparty.
Of the net amount advanced 38 million 2016 89 million is due after 12 months and presented within Other longterm receivables and loans and 42 million 2016 68 million is due within 12 months and included within Accounts receivable.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 11.
Inventories
Current inventory Inventories of 24084 million 2016 18347 million comprise 15344 million 2016 1 1323 million of inventories carried at fair value less costs of disposal and 8740 million 2016 7024 million valued at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
The amount of inventories and related ancillary costs recognised as an expense during the year was 185371 million 2016 137903 million.
Fair value of inventories is a Level 2 fair value measurement see note 27 using observable market prices obtained from exchanges traded reference indices or market survey services adjusted for relevant location and quality differentials.
There are no significant unobservable inputs in the fair value measurement of such inventories.
Glencore has a number of dedicated financing facilities which finance a portion of its inventories.
In each case the inventory has not been derecognised as the Group retains the principal risks and rewards of ownership.
The proceeds received are recognised as current borrowings see note 19.
As at 31 December 2017 the total amount of inventory secured under such facilities was 435 million 2016 1632 million.
The proceeds received and recognised as current borrowings were 221 million 2016 1320 million and 80 million 2016 61 million as noncurrent borrowings.
Noncurrent inventory 369 million 2016 564 million of inventories valued at lower of cost or net realisable value are not expected to be utilised or sold within 12 months and are therefore classified as noncurrent inventory.
Accounts receivable US million 2017 2016 Trade receivables 11915 10482 Trade advances 2110 2116 Margin calls paid 3380 4937 Associated companies Income tax receivable 178 201 Other receivables 2259 1886 Total 20359 20066 1 Collectively referred to as receivables presented net of allowance for doubtful debts.
2 Includes advances net of 876 million 2016 1004 million provided by banks the repayment terms of which are contingent upon and connected to the future delivery of contractual production over the next 12 months.
3 Includes 717 million 2016 2181 million of cash collateral payments under margin arrangements related to cross currency swaps held to hedge nonU. denominated bonds.
The average credit period on sales of goods is 20 days 2016 25 days.
The carrying value of trade receivables approximates fair value.
As at 31 December 2017 7% 2016 7% of receivables were between 1 to 60 days overdue and 4% 2016 4% were greater than 60 days overdue.
Such receivables although contractually past their due dates are not considered impaired as there has not been a significant change in credit quality of the relevant counterparty and the amounts are still considered recoverable taking into account customary payment patterns and in many cases offsetting accounts payable balances.
The movement in allowance for doubtful accounts is detailed below US million 2017 2016 1 January 295 269 Released during the year 143 58 Charged during the year 153 232 Utilised during the year 21 46 Disposal of subsidiaries  102 31 December 284 295 Glencore has a number of dedicated financing facilities which finance a portion of its receivables.
The receivables have not been derecognised as the Group retains the principal risks and rewards of ownership.
The proceeds received are recognised as current borrowings see note 19.
As at 31 December 2017 the total amount of trade receivables secured was 748 million 2016 1917 million and proceeds received and classified as current borrowings amounted to 669 million 2016 1670 million.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 13.
Cash and cash equivalents US million 2017 2016 Bank and cash on hand 1751 2060 Deposits and treasury bills 373 458 Total 2124 2518 As at 31 December 2017 35 million 2016 22 million was restricted.
Assets and liabilities held for sale On 29 December 2017 Glencore completed the sale of a 51% interest in HG Storage International Ltd HG Storage a group comprising the majority of Glencores petroleum products storage and logistics businesses to HNA Innovation Finance Group Co Ltd HNA see note 24.
Glencore and HNA also entered into a second agreement pursuant to which three of the original transaction assets located in the USA HG Storage U. of customary regulatory approvals.
In 2017 Glencore entered into an agreement to sell Tahmoor a coal mining operation in New South Wales as well as its manganese plants located in France and Norway with both transactions grouped under other in the table below.
The transactions subject to customary regulatory approvals and closing conditions are expected to complete during the first half of 2018.
At the date of this report the sale of the manganese plants had closed.
As a result assets of 432 million and liabilities of 159 million have been classified as held for sale within the Metals and minerals and Energy segments as detailed below US million HG Storage U.
Other 2017 Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment Intangible assets 1  1 Investments in associates 8  8 Deferred tax assets  33 3telCurrent assets Inventories 4 49 53 Accounts receivable 39 27 66 Other financial assets  7 7 Prepaid expenses 3  3 Cash and cash equivalents Total assets held for sale 208 224 432 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liabilities 41 5 46 Provisions  38 38 Current liabilities Accounts payable 8 62 70 Income tax payable 1 4 5 Total liabilities held for sale 50 109 159 Total net assets held for sale Includes additions of 16 million since reclassification to held for sale.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 15.
Share capital and reserves
Share capital US million Share premium US million
31 December 2017 and 2016 Ordinary shares with a par value of 0.01 each 50000000 Issued and fully paid up 1 January 2016 and 31 December 2016  Ordinary shares 14586200 146 52338 1 January 2017 14586200 146 52338 Distributions paid see note 17   998 31 December 2017  Ordinary shares 14586200 146 51340 Treasury Shares Trust Shares Total
Share premium US million
Share premium US million
Share premium US million Own shares 1 January 2016 191459 948 174404 764 365863 1712 Own shares disposed during the year   7474 12 7474 12 31 December 2016 191459 948 166930 752 358389 1700 1 January 2017 191459 948 166930 752 358389 1700 Own shares disposed during the year   37080 125 37080 125 31 December 2017 191459 948 129850 627 321309 1575 Own shares Own shares comprise shares acquired under the Companys previous share buyback programme and shares of Glencore plc held by Group employee benefit trusts the Trusts to satisfy the potential future settlement of the Groups employee stock plans primarily assumed as part of previous business combinations.
The Trusts also coordinate the funding and manage the delivery of ordinary shares and free share awards under certain of Glencores share plans.
The shares have been acquired by either stock market purchases or share issues from the Company.
The Trusts are permitted to sell the shares and may hold up to 5% of the issued share capital of the Company at any one time.
The Trusts have waived the right to receive distributions from the shares that they hold.
Costs relating to the administration of the Trust are expensed in the period in which they are incurred.
As at 31 December 2017 321309725 shares 2016 358389443 shares equivalent to 2.2% 2016 2.5% of the issued share capital were held at a cost of 1575 million 2016 1700 million and market value of 1694 million 2016 1227 million.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Other reserves US million
Cash flow hedge reserve
Net ownership changes in subsidiaries Total 1 January 2017 2553 126 377 752 2802 Exchange gain on translation of foreign operations 503    503 Loss on cash flow hedges net of tax  165   165 Gain on available for sale financial instruments   500  500 Change in ownership interest in subsidiaries    318 318 Items recycled to the statement of income upon disposal of subsidiaries see note 24 271   128 143 31 December 2017 2321 39 877 942 2425 1 January 2016 3579 21 12 831 4419 Exchange gain on translation of foreign operations 440    440 Gain on cash flow hedges net of tax  99   99 Gain on available for sale financial instruments   365  365 Reclassifications 31 30  1 Change in ownership interest in subsidiaries    68 68 Discontinued operations 22 21   43 Items recycled to the statement of income upon disposal of subsidiaries see note 24 595 3  10 602 31 December 2016 2553 126 377 752 2802 Earnings per share US million 2017 2016 Profitloss attributable to equity holders of the Parent Continuing operations 5777 744 Discontinued operations  2123 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Parent for basic earnings per share 5777 1379 Weighted average number of shares for the purposes of basic earnings per share thousand 14256020 14224100 Effect of dilution Equitysettled sharebased payments thousand 167024 134179 Weighted average number of shares for the purposes of diluted earnings per share thousand 14423044 14358279 Basic earningsloss per share US Continuing operations 0.41 0.05 Discontinued operations  0.15 Total basic earnings per share 0.41 0.10 Diluted earningsloss per share US Continuing operations 0.40 0.05 Discontinued operations  0.15 Total diluted earnings per share 0.40 0.10 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 16.
Earnings per share continued Headline earnings Headline earnings is a Johannesburg Stock Exchange JSE defined performance measure.
The calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share based on headline earnings as determined by the requirements of the Circular 22015 as issued by the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants SAICA is reconciled using the following data US million 2017 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Parent from continuing and discontinued operations for basic earnings per share 5777 1379 Net gain on disposals 1309 2370 Net gain on disposal  noncontrolling interest 7 Net gain on disposals  tax 107 148
479 1789 Impairments  noncontrolling interest 42 16 Impairments  tax 104 573 Headline and diluted earnings for the year 4915 357 Headline earnings per share US 0.34 0.03 Diluted headline earnings per share US 1 In 2016 equitysettled sharebased payments were only dilutive with respect to Headline earnings per share calculation.
2 2017 comprises gain on disposals of investments of 1079 million and gain on disposals of property plant and equipment of 230 million.
2016 comprises gain on disposals of investments of 452 million gain on disposals of property plant and equipment of 37 million gain on disposal of Glencore Agri of 1848 million and gain on disposals and investments as reported in discontinued operations of 33 million see notes 3 and 24.
3 Comprises impairments of property plant and equipment intangible assets and investments see note 5 and impairments related to Cerrejn of 521 million in 2016.
Distributions
US million 2017 2016 Paid during the year First tranche 2016 distribution  0.035 per ordinary share 499 Second tranche 2016 distribution  0.035 per ordinary share 499 Total 998 The proposed distribution of 0.20 per ordinary share amounting to 2.9 billion is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
Distributions declared in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 are expected to be paid equally 0.10 each in May 2018 and September 2018.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 18.
Sharebased payments US million Number of awards granted thousand Fair value at grant date US million
Number of awards outstanding thousand
US million
US million Deferred Bonus Plan 2015 Series 14315 36 3909 14315 7 2016 Series 14851 35 14023 14177  34 2017 Series 16506 64 16506  64 45672 34438 28492 71 34 Performance Share Plan 2013 Series  6 2014 Series 20908 115 5302 10Series 77816 107 54250 75Series 24017 84 23439 6835 47 2017 Series 6280 30 6280 129021 89271 92636 86 75 Total 174693 123710 121128 157 109 Deferred Bonus Plan Under the Glencore Deferred Bonus Plan DBP the payment of a portion of a participants annual bonus is deferred for a period of one to two years as an award of either ordinary shares a Bonus Share Award or cash a Bonus Cash Award.
The awards are vested at grant date with no further service conditions however they are subject to forfeiture for malus events.
The Bonus Share Awards may be satisfied at Glencores option in shares by the issue of new ordinary shares by the transfer of ordinary shares held in treasury or by the transfer of ordinary shares purchased in the market or in cash with a value equal to the market value of the award at settlement including distributions paid between award and settling.
Glencore currently intends to settle these awards in shares.
The associated expense is recorded in the statement of incomeloss as part of the expense for performance bonuses.
Performance Share Plan Under the Glencore Performance Share Plan PSP participants are awarded PSP awards which vest in annual tranches over a specified period subject to continued employment and forfeiture for malus events.
At grant date each PSP award is equivalent to one ordinary share of Glencore.
The awards vest in three or five equal tranches on 30 June 31 December or 31 January of the years following the year of grant as may be the case.
The fair value of the awards is determined by reference to the market price of Glencores ordinary shares at grant date.
The PSP awards may be satisfied at Glencores option in shares by the issue of new ordinary shares by the transfer of ordinary shares held in treasury or by the transfer of ordinary shares purchased in the market or in cash with a value equal to the market value of the award at vesting including distributions paid between award and vesting.
Glencore currently intends to settle these awards in shares.
Sharebased awards assumed in previous business combinations Total options outstanding thousands
1 January 2017 141272 3.89 Lapsed 8756 4.45 Exercised 7913 1.60 31 December 2017 124603 1 January 2016 146602 3.89 Adjustment due to share issue 322 Lapsed 5424 2.85 Exercised 228 1.10 31 December 2016 141272 1 The weighted average share price at date of exercise of the share based awards was GBP3.45 2016 GBP2.80.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 18.
Sharebased payments continued As at 31 December 2017 a total of 124602481 options 2016 141271783 options were outstanding and exercisable having a range of exercise prices from GBP1.1 to GBP6.87 2016 GBP1.1 to GBP6.87 and a weighted average exercise price of GBP4.00 2016 GBP3.89.
These outstanding awards have expiry dates ranging from March 2018 to February 2022 2016 March 2017 to February 2022 and a weighted average contractual life of 2.97 years 2016 3.6 years.
The awards may be satisfied at Glencores option by the issue of new ordinary shares by the transfer of ordinary shares held in treasury or by the transfer of ordinary shares purchased in the market.
Glencore currently intends to settle these awards when exercised by the transfer of ordinary shares held in treasury.
Borrowings
US million Notes 2017 2016 Noncurrent borrowings Capital market notes 22628 21968 Committed syndicated revolving credit facilities 994 476 Finance lease obligations 29 328 326 Other bank loans 582 418 Total noncurrent borrowings 24532 23188 Current borrowings Secured inventoryreceivablesother facilities 91 112 1060 2990
Capital market notes 3550 4388 Finance lease obligations 29 64 75 Other bank loans 3498 2577 Total current borrowings 9402 10030 Total borrowings 33934 33218 1 Comprises various uncommitted bilateral bank credit facilities and other financings.
Reconciliation of cash flow to movement in borrowings US million 2017 2016 Cash related movements in borrowings Proceeds from issuance of capital market notes 2026 1366 Repayment of capital market notes 4539 4748 Repurchase of capital market notes  2629 Proceeds fromrepayment of revolving credit facilities 501 2644 Proceeds fromrepayment of other noncurrent borrowings 19 79 Repayment of finance lease obligations 105 125 Proceeds from U.
Repayment ofproceeds from current borrowings 1266 1035 2184 7839 Noncash related movements in borrowings Borrowings acquireddisposed in business combinations 761 2709 Foreign exchange movements 1840 296 Hedge fair value movements 192 76 Change in finance lease obligations 73 67 Other noncash movements 34 22 2900 2992 Increasedecrease in borrowings for the year 716 10831 Total borrowings  opening 33218 44049 Total borrowings  closing 33934 33218 1 See consolidated statement of cash flows.
2 2016 includes a settlement of debt due from Glencore Agri of 1670 million see note 24.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Capital Market Notes US million Maturity 2017 2016 AUD 500 million 4.50% coupon bonds Sep telEuro 1250 million 4.625% coupon bonds Apr 2018  1296 Euro 1000 million 2.625% coupon bonds Nov 2018  1055 Euro 750 million 3.375% coupon bonds Sep telEuro 1250 million 1.25% coupon bonds Mar 2021 1491 1294 Euro 600 million 2.75% coupon bonds Apr telEuro 700 million 1.625% coupon bonds Jan telEuro 1000 million 1.875% coupon bonds Sep 2023 1195 1048 Euro 400 million 3.70% coupon bonds Oct telEuro 750 million 1.75% coupon bonds Mar telEuro 500 million 3.75% coupon bonds Apr telEurobonds 7297 8552 JPY 10 billion 1.075% coupon bonds May 2022 89 86 GBP 650 million 6.50% coupon bonds Feb telGBP 500 million 7.375% coupon bonds May telGBP 500 million 6.00% coupon bonds Apr telSterling bonds 2286 2108 CHF 450 million 2.625% coupon bonds Dec 2018  443 CHF 175 million 2.125% coupon bonds Dec telCHF 500 million 1.25% coupon bonds Dec telCHF 250 million 2.25% coupon bonds May telSwiss Franc bonds 957 1353 US 250 million LIBOR plus 1.06% coupon bonds Apr 2018  48 US 500 million 2.125% coupon bonds Apr 2018  159 US 200 million LIBOR plus 1.20% coupon bonds May 2018  200 US 500 million LIBOR plus 1.36% coupon bonds Jan telUS 1500 million 2.50% coupon bonds Jan telUS 1000 million 3.125% coupon bonds Apr telUS 1000 million 2.875% coupon bonds Apr telUS 1000 million 4.95% coupon bonds Nov 2021 1045 1056 US 600 million 5.375% coupon bonds Feb 2022 535 US 250 million LIBOR plus 1.65% coupon bonds May telUS 1000 million 4.25% coupon bonds Oct 2022 1011 1013 US 500 million 3.00% coupon bonds Oct 2022 496 US 1500 million 4.125% coupon bonds May 2023 1520 1536 US 1000 million 4.625% coupon bonds Apr 2024 1024 1034 US 500 million 4.00% coupon bonds Apr telUS 1000 million 4.00% coupon bonds Mar 2027 986 US 50 million 4.00% coupon bonds Mar 2027 50 US 500 million 3.875% coupon bonds Oct 2027 491 US 250 million 6.20% coupon bonds Jun telUS 500 million 6.90% coupon bonds Nov telUS 500 million 6.00% coupon bonds Nov telUS 500 million 5.55% coupon bonds Oct telUS bonds 11601 9499 Total noncurrent bonds 22628 21968 1 Assumed in the Volcan acquisition see note 24.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 19.
Borrowings continued Capital Market Notes US million Maturity 2017 2016 Euro 1250 million 5.25% coupon bonds Mar 2017  1244 Euro 500 million 5.25% coupon bonds Jun 2017  514 Euro 1250 million 4.625% coupon bonds Apr 2018 1480 Euro 1000 million 2.625% coupon bonds Nov 2018 1202 Eurobonds 2682 1758 CHF 450 million 2.625% coupon bonds Dec 2018 461 US 700 million 3.60% coupon bonds Jan 2017  660 US 250 million 5.50% coupon bonds Jun 2017  254 US 1750 million 2.70% coupon bonds Oct 2017  1716 US 250 million LIBOR plus 1.06% coupon bonds Apr 2018 48 US 500 million 2.125% coupon bonds Apr 2018 159 US 200 million LIBOR plus 1.20% coupon bonds May 2018 200 US bonds 407 2630 Total current bonds 3550 4388 2017 Bond activities In March issued a 10 year 1000 million 4% coupon bond In August issued a 10 year 50 million 4% coupon bond as a private placement In October issued a 5 year 500 million 3% coupon bond In October issued a 10 year 500 million 3.875% coupon bond 2016 Bond activities In May issued a 5 year CHF 250 million 2.25% coupon bond In September issued a 7 year Euro 1000 million 1.875% coupon bond In October repurchased bonds with a nominal value of 1492 million comprising primarily 2018 and 2019 maturities In December repurchased bonds with a nominal value of 1137 million comprising primarily 2019 and 2020 maturities Committed syndicated revolving credit facilities In May 2017 Glencore signed new oneyear revolving credit facilities for a total amount of 7335 million refinancing the 7700 million oneyear revolving facilities signed in February 2016.
Funds drawn under the facilities bear interest at USLIBOR plus a margin of 40 basis points.
Glencore also voluntarily reduced the medium term facility size from 6800 million to 5425 million and extended its maturity by 24 months to 2022.
As at 31 December 2017 the active facilities comprise a 7335 million one year revolving credit facility with a 12 month borrowers termout option to May 2019 and 12 month extension option and a 5425 million mediumterm revolving credit facility to May 2022 Secured facilities US million Maturity Borrowing base Interest 2017 2016 Syndicated committed metals inventory facilities Nov 2018 83 3%  100 Syndicated uncommitted metals inventoryreceivables facilities Feb MarJul 2018 1480 US JIBAR 1 10 bps US LIBOR 7590160 bps 590 2340 Syndicated uncommitted oil receivables facilities Oct 2018 750 US LIBOR Other secured facilities Mar 2018 170 US LIBOR Total 2483 1060 2990 1 Since yearend in the ordinary course of business these maturities have been rolledextended as required.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 20.
Deferred income US million
1 January 2017 617 1787 2404 Additions  675 675 Accretion in the year  164 164 Utilised in the year 64 240 304 Effect of foreign currency exchange difference 32  32 31 December 2017 585 2386 2971 Current 59 351 410 Noncurrent 526 2035 2561 1 January tel1539 Additions  971 971 Accretion in the year  109 109 Utilised in the year 74 179 253 Effect of foreign currency exchange difference 38  38 31 December 2016 617 1787 2404 Current 56 82 138 Noncurrent 561 1705 2266 Unfavourable contracts In previous business combinations Glencore recognised liabilities related to various assumed contractual agreements to deliver tonnes of coal and zinc concentrates over periods ending between 2018 and 2034 at fixed prices lower than the prevailing market prices on the respective acquisition dates.
These amounts are released to revenue as the underlying commodities are delivered to the buyers over the life of the contracts at rates consistent with the implied forward price curves at the time of the acquisitions.
Prepayments
In November 2017 Glencore entered into a silver supply arrangement in exchange for an upfront advance payment of 675 million.
Under the terms of the arrangement Glencore is required to deliver an average of 19 million ounces of silver per annum over a 3 year period.
The arrangement has been accounted for as an executory contract whereby the advance payment has been recorded as deferred revenue.
The revenue from the advance payment is being recognised as the silver is delivered consistent with the implied forward price curve at the time of the transaction.
An accretion expense representing the time value of the upfront deposit on the deferred revenue balance is also being recognised.
In 2015 and 2016 Glencore entered into various longterm streaming agreements for the future delivery of gold andor silver produced over the life of mine from our Antamina Antapaccay and Ernest Henry operations in exchange for an upfront prepayment and for Antamina and Antapaccay an ongoing amount equal to 20% of the spot silver and gold price.
Once certain delivery thresholds have been met at Antapaccay the ongoing cash payment increases to 30% of the spot gold and silver prices.
The arrangements have been accounted for as executory contracts whereby the advance payments have been recorded as deferred revenue.
The revenue from the advance payments is being recognised as the gold andor silver is delivered at an amount consistent with the implied forward price curve at the time of the transaction along with ongoing cash payments if any.
An accretion expense representing the time value of the upfront deposit on the deferred revenue balance is also being recognised.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 21.
Provisions
US million
Other
Rehabilitation costs
1 January tel3194 1305 812 6389 Provision utilised in the year 96 40 191 325 106 758 Accretion in the year   260 1  261 Assumed in business combination Disposals of subsidiaries Reclassification to held for sale Additional provision in the year 3tel424 1474 Effect of foreign currency exchange difference 48 1 51   100 31 December tel4180 1092 1158 7571 Current  56 9telNoncurrent 847 238 4090 916 1003 7094 1 January tel2905 1478 990 6397 Provision utilised in the year 92 34 140 381 555 1202 Accretion in the year   181 2  183 Assumed in business combination Disposals of subsidiaries Additional provision in the year 160 3tel926 Effect of foreign currency exchange difference 5  37  3 35 31 December tel3194 1305 812 6389 Current   14telNoncurrent 860 218 3050 1127 676 5931 1 See note 24.
2 See note 14.
Postretirement employee benefits The provision for postretirement employee benefits includes pension plan liabilities of 392 million 2016 428 million and postretirement medical plan liabilities of 455 million 2016 432 million see note 22.
Other employee entitlements The employee entitlement provision represents the value of governed employee entitlements due to employees upon their termination of employment.
The associated expenditure will occur in a pattern consistent with when employees choose to exercise their entitlements.
Rehabilitation costs Rehabilitation provision represents the accrued cost required to provide adequate restoration and rehabilitation upon the completion of production activities.
These amounts will be settled when rehabilitation is undertaken generally at the end of a projects life which ranges from two to in excess of 50 years with an average for all sites weighted by closure provision of some 21 years 2016 16 years.
As at 31 December 2017 the discount rate applied in calculating the restoration and rehabilitation provision is a pretax risk free rate specific to the liability and the currency in which they are denominated as follows US dollar 2.0% South African rand 4.0% Australian dollar 3.0% Canadian dollar 2.5% and Chilean peso 3.0%.
Decreasing the discount rates used by 0.5% would result in an increase in the overall rehabilitation provision by 326 million with a resulting equal movement in property plant and equipment.
In the following year the depreciation expense would increase by some 15 million with an opposite direction interest expense adjustment of 10 million.
The resulting net impact in the statement of income would be a decrease of 5 million eventually netting to Nil over the weighted average settlement date of the provision.
As outlined in note 1 significant estimates are required in determining the rehabilitation provisions and during the year certain cost and timing estimates that were previously incorporated into the discount rate are now incorporated into the underlying rehabilitation cash flow forecasts.
As a result of these changes in estimates the rehabilitation provision increased by 312 million with a resulting equivalent increase in property plant and equipment.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Onerous contracts Onerous contracts represent liabilities related to contractual take or pay commitments for securing coal logistics capacity at fixed prices and quantities higher than the acquisition date forecasted usage and prevailing market price.
The provision is released to costs of goods sold as the underlying commitments are incurred.
Other
Other comprises provisions for possible demurrage mine concession tax and construction related claims.
Tax disputes Glencore assesses its liabilities and contingencies for all tax years open to audit based upon the latest information available.
Inherent
For those matters where it is probable that an adjustment will be made the Group records its best estimate of these tax liabilities including related interest charges.
The current open tax matters are spread across numerous jurisdictions and consist primarily of legacy transfer pricing matters that have been open for a number of years and may take several more years to resolve.
Reasonably possible adverse outcomes are not considered to be individually material.
Accordingly management does not anticipate a significant risk of material change in estimates within the next financial year.
Personnel costs and employee benefits Total personnel costs which include salaries wages social security other personnel costs and sharebased payments incurred for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016 were 4656 million and 4245 million respectively.
Personnel costs related to consolidated industrial subsidiaries of 3593 million 2016 3355 million are included in cost of goods sold.
Other personnel costs including the deferred bonus and performance share plans are included in selling and administrative expenses.
The Company and certain subsidiaries sponsor various pension schemes in accordance with local regulations and practices.
Eligibility for participation in the various plans is either based on completion of a specified period of continuous service or date of hire.
Among these schemes are defined contribution plans as well as defined benefit plans.
Defined contribution plans Glencores contributions under these plans amounted to 133 million in 2017 2016 1 18 million.
Postretirement medical plans The Company participates in a number of postretirement medical plans principally in Canada which provide coverage for prescription drugs medical dental hospital and life insurance to eligible retirees.
Almost all of the postretirement medical plans in the Group are unfunded.
Defined benefit pension plans The Company operates defined benefit plans in various countries the main locations being Canada Switzerland UK and the U.
Approximately 72% of the present value of obligations accrued to date relates to the defined benefit plans in Canada which are pension plans that provide benefits to members in the form of a guaranteed level of pension payable for life.
Contributions to the Canadian plans are made to meet or exceed minimum funding requirements based on provincial statutory requirements and associated federal taxation rules.
The majority of benefit payments are from trusteeadministered funds however there are also a number of unfunded plans where Glencore meets the benefit payments as they fall due.
Plan assets held in trusts are governed by local regulations and practices in each country.
Responsibility for governance of the plans  overseeing all aspects of the plans including investment decisions and contribution schedules  lies with Glencore.
Glencore has set up committees to assist in the management of the plans and has also appointed experienced independent professional experts such as investment managers actuaries custodians and trustees.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 22.
Personnel costs and employee benefits continued The movement in the defined benefit pension and postretirement medical plans over the year is as follows Defined benefit pension plans US million Notes
Present value of defined benefit obligation Fair value of plan assets Net liability for defined benefit pension plans 1 January 2017 432 2946 2518 428 Current service cost 8 55  55 Past service cost  plan amendments  8  8 Settlement  79 75 4 Interest expenseincome 17 98 86 12 Total expense recognised in consolidated statement of income 25 66 11 55 Gain on plan assets excluding amounts included in interest expense  net   169 169 Gain from change in demographic assumptions  11  11 Gainloss from change in financial assumptions 15 87  87 Lossgain from actuarial experience 3 8  8 Change in asset ceiling excluding amounts included in interest expense Actuarial gainslosses recognised in consolidated statement of comprehensive income 12 68 169 101 Employer contributions   76 76 Employee contributions  1 1 Benefits paid directly by the Company 20 9 9 Benefits paid from plan assets  171 171 Net cash outflowinflow 20 179 103 76 Exchange differences 30 189 171 18 31 December 2017 455 3090 2766 324 Of which Pension surpluses 10  68 Pension deficits 21 455 392 The actual return on plan assets in respect of defined benefit pension plans amounted to a gain of 426 million 2016 206 million comprising interest income and the remeasurement of plan assets.
During the next financial year the Group expects to make a contribution of 105 million to the defined benefit pension and post retirement medical plans across all countries including current service costs and contributions required by pension legislation.
Contributions over the next five years for the Canadian plans only based on the most recently filed actuarial reports approximate 337 million.
Future funding requirements and contributions are reviewed and adjusted on an annual basis.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Defined benefit pension plans US million Notes
Present value of defined benefit obligation Fair value of plan assets Net liability for defined benefit pension plans 1 January 2016 457 3405 3059 346 Current service cost 7 67  67 Past service cost  plan amendments 1 3  3 Settlement  94 90 4 Termination benefit  4  4 Interest expenseincome 18 126 116 10 Total expense recognised in consolidated statement of income 26 100 26 74 Gain on plan assets excluding amounts included in interest expense  net   59 59 Gain from change in demographic assumptions  13  13 Loss from change in financial assumptions 5 137  137 Gain from actuarial experience 3 3  3 Change in asset ceiling excluding amounts included in interest expense  4  4 Actuarial lossesgains recognised in consolidated statement of comprehensive income 2 117 59 58 Employer contributions   72 72 Employee contributions  1 1 Benefits paid directly by the Company 20 9 9 Benefits paid from plan assets  192 192 Net cash outflowinflow 20 200 128 72 Disposal of subsidiaries Exchange differences 15 11 31 20 31 December 2016 432 2946 2518 428 Of which Pension surpluses 10 Pension deficits See note 24.
The defined benefit obligation accrued in Canada represents the majority for the Company.
The breakdown below provides details of the Canadian plans for both the statement of financial position and the weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation as at 31 December 2017 and 2016.
The defined benefit obligation of any of the Groups defined benefit plans outside of Canada as at 31 December 2017 does not exceed 230 million 2016 227 million.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 22.
Personnel costs and employee benefits continued 2017 US million Canada Other Total Postretirement medical plans Present value of defined benefit obligation 425 30 455 of which amounts owing to active members 132 4 136 of which amounts owing to pensioners 293 26 319 Defined benefit pension plans Present value of defined benefit obligation 2217 873 3090 of which amounts owing to active members 586 389 975 of which amounts owing to nonactive members 40 214 254 of which amounts owing to pensioners 1591 270 1861 Fair value of plan assets 2167 599 2766 Net defined benefit liability at 31 December Of which Pension surpluses 68  68 Pension deficits 118 274 392 Weighted average duration of defined benefit obligation  years US million Canada Other Total Postretirement medical plans Present value of defined benefit obligation 402 30 432 of which amounts owing to active members 123 4 127 of which amounts owing to pensioners 279 26 305 Defined benefit pension plans Present value of defined benefit obligation 2112 834 2946 of which amounts owing to active members 545 383 928 of which amounts owing to nonactive members 44 241 285 of which amounts owing to pensioners 1523 210 1733 Fair value of plan assets 1981 537 2518 Net defined benefit liability at 31 December tel428 Of which Pension surpluses Pension deficits 131 297 428 Weighted average duration of defined benefit obligation  years 12 18 14 Estimated future benefit payments of the Canadian plans which reflect expected future service but exclude plan expenses up until 2027 are as follows US million
Defined benefit pension plans Total 2018 19tel 19tel 20tel 20tel 21teltel713 Total 202 1237 1439 The plan assets consist of the following US million 2017 2016 Cash and shortterm investments 31 105 Fixed income 1343 1210 Equities 1189 1076 Other 203 127 Total 2766 2518 All investments have been fair valued based on quoted market prices with the exception of securities of 23 million 2016 18 million included in Other.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 The fair value of plan assets includes none of Glencores own financial instruments and no property occupied by or other assets used by Glencore.
For many of the plans representing a large portion of the global plan assets assetliability matching strategies are in place where the fixedincome assets are invested broadly in alignment with the duration of the plan liabilities and the proportion allocated to fixedincome assets is raised when the plan funding level increases.
The asset mix for each plan reflects the nature expected changes in and size of the liabilities and the assessment of longterm economic conditions market risk expected investment returns as considered during a formal asset mix study including sensitivity analysis andor scenario analysis conducted periodically for the plans.
Through its defined benefit plans Glencore is exposed to a number of risks the most significant of which are detailed below Asset volatility The plan liabilities are calculated using a discount rate set with reference to corporate bond yields if plan assets underperform this yield this will create a deficit.
The funded plans hold a significant proportion of equities which are expected to outperform bonds in the long term while contributing volatility and risk in the short term.
Glencore believes that due to the long term nature of the plan liabilities a level of continuing equity investment is an appropriate element of Glencores longterm strategy to manage the plans efficiently.
Change in bond yields A decrease in bond yields will increase plan liabilities although this will be partially offset by an increase in the value of the plans bond holdings.
Inflation risk Some of the plans benefit obligations are linked to inflation and higher inflation will lead to higher liabilities although in most cases caps on the level of inflationary increases are in place to protect the plan against extreme inflation.
Life expectancy The majority of the plans obligations are to provide benefits for the life of the member so increases in life expectancy will result in an increase in the plans liability.
Salary increases Some of the plans benefit obligations related to active members are linked to their salaries.
Higher salary increases will therefore tend to lead to higher plan liabilities.
The principal weightedaverage actuarial assumptions used were as follows Postretirement medical plans Defined benefit pension planstel 2016 Discount rate 3.8% 4.1% 3.2% 3.5% Future salary increases   2.7% 2.8% Future pension increases   0.3% 0.3% Ultimate medical cost trend rate 4.3% 4.2% Mortality assumptions are based on the latest available standard mortality tables for the individual countries concerned.
As at 31 December 2017 these tables imply expected future life expectancy for employees aged 65 19 to 24 years for males 2016 19 to 24 and 23 to 25 years for females 2016 22 to 25.
The assumptions for each country are reviewed regularly and are adjusted where necessary to reflect changes in fund experience and actuarial recommendations.
The sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to changes in principal assumptions as at 31 December 2017 is set out below assuming that all other assumptions are held constant and the effect of interrelationships is excluded.
Increasedecrease in pension obligation US million
Defined benefit pension plans Total Discount rate Increase by 100 basis points 71 360 431 Decrease by 100 basis points 60 428 488 Rate of future salary increase Increase by 100 basis points  38 38 Decrease by 100 basis points  35 35 Rate of future pension benefit increase Increase by 100 basis points  34 34 Decrease by 100 basis points  32 32 Medical cost trend rate Increase by 100 basis points 61  61 Decrease by 100 basis points 50  50 Life expectancy Increase in longevity by one year Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 23.
Accounts payable US million 2017 2016 Trade payables 24664 22438 Trade advances from buyers 451 892 Margin calls received Associated companies 1052 635 Other payables and accrued liabilities 2216 2032 Total 28826 26176 1 Includes 325 million 2016 Nil of cash collateral receipts under margin arrangements related to cross currency swaps held to hedge nonU. dollar denominated bonds.
Trade payables are obligations to pay for goods and services.
Trade payables typically have maturities up to 90 days depending on the type of material and the geographic area in which the purchase transaction occurs and the agreed terms.
The carrying value of trade payables approximates fair value.
Acquisition and disposal of subsidiaries 2017 Acquisitions In 2017 Glencore acquired controlling interests in Volcan Compania Minera S.
Volcan and other businesses none of which are individually material.
The net cash receivedused in the acquisition of subsidiaries and the provisional fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on the acquisition date are detailed below US million Volcan Other Total Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 4656 43 4699 Intangible assets 76  76 Other investments 52  52 Deferred tax assets  2 2 Advances and loans 816 46 4862 Current assets Inventories 80 2 82 Accounts receivable Other financial assets 30  30 Cash and cash equivalents Noncontrolling interest 1733  1733 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 629  629 Deferred tax liabilities 986  986 Provisions 174 26 200 1789 26 1815 Current liabilities Borrowings 175  175 Accounts payable 386 6 392 Other financial liabilities 37  37 Total fair value of net assets acquired 1093 24 1117 Less cash and cash equivalents acquired 81 3 84 Less amounts previously recognised as other investments Net cash used in acquisition of subsidiaries There is no material difference between the gross contractual amounts for loans and advances and accounts receivable and their fair value.
2 See note 9.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Volcan On 9 November 2017 Glencore completed a tender offer acquiring an additional 42.3% of the Class A common voting shares in Volcan a Peruvian zinc mining business listed on the Lima stock exchange for a consideration of 734 million thereby increasing its voting shares interest from 20.7% to 63.0%.
Glencores total economic interest including the class B common nonvoting shares and excluding treasury shares increased from 7.7% to 23.3%.
As Glencore holds the majority of the voting shares providing it the ability to appoint a controlling number of directors to the board Glencore is required to account for Volcan using the full consolidation method in accordance with IFRS 10.
The fair values are provisional due to the complexity of the valuation process and the proximity of the transaction to year end.
The finalisation of the fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities will be completed within 12 months of the acquisition.
It is expected that adjustments could be made to the allocation of value between fixed asset classes deferred taxes rehabilitation and other provisions.
If the acquisition had taken place effective 1 January 2017 the operation would have contributed additional revenue of 696 million and additional attributable income of 93 million.
From the date of acquisition the operation contributed 160 million of revenue and Nil of attributable income.
2016 Acquisitions In 2016 Glencore acquired controlling interests in Newlands Collinsville Abbot Point Joint Venture NCA.
The net cash received in the acquisition of subsidiaries and the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on the acquisition date are detailed below US million NCA Other Total Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 39 20 59 Advances and loans 2  Current assets Inventories 41 7 48 Accounts receivable Cash and cash equivalents 11  Noncurrent liabilities Provisions 242 4 246 Current liabilities Borrowings  10 10 Accounts payable 33 17 50 Provisions 1  1 Other financial liabilities 8  8 Total fair value of net liabilitiesassets acquired 167 2 165 Less cash and cash equivalents acquired 11  11 Net cash receivedused in acquisition of subsidiaries 178 2 176 1 There is no material difference between the gross contractual amounts for loans and advances and accounts receivable and their fair value.
NCA
In September 2016 Glencore completed the acquisition of the remaining 45% interest in NCA for cash consideration received of 167 million.
This increased Glencores ownership from 55% to 100% providing the ability to exercise control over NCA.
If the acquisition had taken place effective 1 January 2016 the operation would have contributed additional revenue of 173 million and an additional attributable loss of 21 million.
From the date of acquisition the operation contributed 72 million and 25 million of revenue and attributable income respectively.
The acquisition accounting for NCA has now been finalised with no adjustments to the previously reported provisional fair values.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 24.
Acquisition and disposal of subsidiaries continued 2017 Disposals In 2017 Glencore disposed of its controlling interest in the Rosh Pinah mine in Namibia Rosh Pinah and Perkoa mine in Burkina Faso Perkoa together referred to as Zinc Africa and 51% of the large majority of its petroleum storage and logistics businesses HG Storage.
The carrying value of the assets and liabilities over which control was lost and the net cash received from these disposals are detailed below US million Zinc Africa HG Storage Others Total Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment Intangible assets 3   3 Investments in associates  170  170 Advances and loans  11 Current assets Inventories Accounts receivable Cash and cash equivalents Noncontrolling interest 4  25 29 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings  31 10 41 Deferred tax liabilities 50 17 5 72 Provisions 24  33 57 Current liabilities Borrowings 2   2 Accounts payable 56 67 9 132 Income tax payable  2  2 Carrying value of net assets disposed Cash and cash equivalents received 245 530  775 Shares received 222   222 Future consideration   13 13 Items recycled to the statement of income 22  121 143 Reclassified to investment in joint venture Provision for guarantees  20  20 Transaction fees  12  12 Net gain on disposal Cash and cash equivalents received 245 530  775 Less Cash and cash equivalents disposed 23 28 18 69 Net cash received from disposal 222 502 18 706 1 Includes a gain of 383 million attributable to the remeasurement of the retained investment to its fair value upon change in control in HG Storage 363 million and Other 20 million.
Zinc Africa On 31 August 2017 Glencore completed the transaction with Trevali Mining Corporation Trevali a TSX listed zinc company to sell its 80.1% equity interest in Rosh Pinah and its 90.0% equity interest in Perkoa.
The aggregate consideration received was 467 million of which 245 million was cash and the remaining balance 222 million was 193.4 million shares in Trevali.
As a result of the transaction Glencores direct ownership in Trevali increased from 4% to 25.6%.
Glencore is no longer able to unilaterally direct the key strategic operating and capital decisions of Rosh Pinah and Perkoa and was deemed to have disposed of its controlling interest at fair value.
The difference to the net carrying value was recognised through the statement of income with Glencore subsequently accounting for its share in Trevali using the equity method in accordance with IAS 28 see note 9.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 HG Storage On 29 December Glencore completed the sale of a 51% interest in HG Storage International Ltd HG Storage a group comprising the majority of Glencores petroleum products storage and logistics businesses excluding the U.
Group Co Ltd HNA for cash consideration of 530 million including the assumption of certain debt.
Glencore is no longer able to unilaterally direct the key strategic operating and capital decisions of HG Storage and was deemed to have disposed of its controlling interest at fair value.
The difference to the net carrying value was recognised through the statement of income with Glencore subsequently accounting for its remaining remeasured share in HG Storage using the equity method in accordance with IAS 28 see note 9.
2016 Disposals In 2016 Glencore disposed of its controlling interest in the Glencore Agricultural Products business Glencore Agri Ernest Henry mining operation EHM and its New South Wales coal rail haulage business GRail.
The carrying value of the assets and liabilities over which control was lost and the net cash received from these disposals are detailed below US million Glencore Agri EHM GRail Others Total Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 291tel3788 Intangible assets 892   24 916 Investments in associates 624    624 Advances and loans 116   13 129 Deferred tax assets 103   1 104 465tel5561 Current assets Inventories 2725 6  57 2788 Accounts receivable 2854 Other financial assets 746   2 748 Cash and cash equivalents 469   27 496 Noncontrolling interest 37   29 66 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 602   1 603 Deferred tax liabilities 138 36  30 204 Provisions 111 9  40 160 Current liabilities Borrowings 3751   35 3786 Accounts payable 2315 7 5 54 2381 Provisions 36 1   37 Other financial liabilities 629   2 631 6731 8 5 91 6835 Carrying value of net assets disposed 374tel4579 Cash and cash equivalents received 3125 198 840 198 4361 Future consideration    46 46 Items recycled to the statement of income 602    602 Reclassified to investment in joint venture 3125    3125 Transaction fees 51    51 Net gain on disposal 1848  430 22 2300 Cash and cash equivalents received 312tel4361 Less Cash and cash equivalents disposed 469   27 496 Settlement of debt due from Glencore Agri 1670    1670 Net cash received from disposal 432tel5535 1 Includes a gain of 1252 million attributable to the remeasurement of the retained Glencore Agri investment to its fair value upon change in control.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 24.
Acquisition and disposal of subsidiaries continued Glencore Agri On 6 April 2016 Glencore announced that it had entered into an agreement with the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board for the sale of a 40% equity interest in Glencore Agri and on 9 June 2016 entered into an agreement with British Columbia Investment Management Corporation for the sale of a 10% equity interest in Glencore Agri.
The aggregate equity consideration for the combined 50% interest including the indirect assumption of certain levels of net working capital and debt amounted to 3.125 billion payable in cash upon closing.
Glencore Agri represents the entire Agricultural products operating segment and was determined to be a discontinued operation prior to the close of transaction on 1 December 2016 and has been disclosed as such.
Upon closing of the sale Glencore is no longer able to unilaterally direct the key strategic operating and capital decisions of Glencore Agri and was deemed to have disposed of its controlling interest at fair value.
The difference to the net carrying value was recognised through the statement of income with Glencore subsequently accounting for its share of the resulting joint venture using the equity method in accordance with IFRS 1 1 and IAS 28 see note 9.
The results of Glencore Agri included in the consolidated statement of income until loss of control are detailed below US million 2016 Revenue 20885 Cost of goods sold 20256 Selling and administrative expenses 175 Share of income from associates 15 Gain on disposals and investments 33 Other expense  net 26 Interest income 9 Interest expense 79 Income before income taxes from discontinued operations 406 Income tax expense 131 Gain on disposal of Glencore Agri including items recycled to the statement of income of 602 million 1848 Income for the year from discontinued operations 2123 Attributable to Noncontrolling interests Equity holders of the Parent 2123 Earnings per share  discontinued operations Basic US 0.15 Diluted US 0.15 The net cash flows incurred by Glencore Agri are as follows US million 2016 Net cash used from operating activities after working capital changes 855 Net cash used in investing activities 11 Net cash generated in financing activities 671 Net cash used in discontinued operations 195
In October 2016 Glencore entered into an agreement with Evolution Mining Limited Evolution whereby Glencore received 669 million cash in return for a 30% economic interest in the Ernest Henry Mine mining operation EHM and an entitlement to 100% of the gold produced from Glencores remaining 70% interest in EHM.
The consideration received was allocated between the two elements of the transaction sale of the 30% interest and the 70% gold prepaid streaming arrangement by estimating the fair value of the gold stream by reference to the net present value of the anticipated gold to be delivered over the life of mine 471 million with the residual amount representing the consideration for the 30% interest 198 million.
Also see note 20.
As part of the transaction Glencore and Evolution entered into a 7030 joint venture agreement governing the operations of EHM.
As
Glencore is no longer able to unilaterally direct the key strategic operating and capital decisions of EHM it is deemed to have lost control of EHM and together with Evolution jointly controls it.
As the new arrangement is an unincorporated joint venture Glencore derecognised 30% of the identified assets and liabilities of EHM against the proceeds received as noted above.
GRail
In December 2016 Glencore disposed of its New South Wales coal rail haulage business to Genesee and Wyoming for cash consideration of 840 million A1.1 billion.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 25.
Financial and capital risk management Financial risks arising in the normal course of business from Glencores operations comprise market risk including commodity price risk interest rate risk and currency risk credit risk including performance risk and liquidity risk.
It is Glencores policy and practice to identify and where appropriate and practical actively manage such risks for management of margin risk within Glencores extensive and diversified industrial portfolio refer net present value at risk below to support its objectives in managing its capital and future financial security and flexibility.
Glencores overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to protect its financial security and flexibility by using derivative financial instruments where possible to substantially hedge these financial risks.
Glencores finance and risk professionals working in coordination with the commodity departments monitor manage and report regularly to senior management and the Board of Directors on the approach and effectiveness in managing financial risks along with the financial exposures facing the Group.
Glencores objectives in managing its capital attributable to equity holders include preserving its overall financial health and strength for the benefit of all stakeholders maintaining an optimal capital structure in order to provide a high degree of financial flexibility at an attractive cost of capital and safeguarding its ability to continue as a going concern while generating sustainable longterm profitability.
Central to meeting these objectives is maintaining an investment grade credit rating status.
Glencores current credit ratings are Baa2 stable from Moodys and BBB positive outlook from SandP.
Distribution policy and other capital management initiatives Glencores cash distribution policy comprises two components 1 a fixed 1 billion component and 2 a variable element representing a minimum 25% of free cash flow generated by our industrial assets during the year.
The actual variable distribution component minimum 25% payout guidance will reflect prevailing balance sheet position market conditions and outlook and be confirmed annually in respect of prior periods cash flows.
Distributions are expected to be formally declared by the Board annually with the preliminary fullyear results.
Distributions when declared will be settled equally in May and September of the year they are declared in.
In addition alongside our halfyear results reporting the Board could formally declare an additional distribution to be included with the distribution confirmed with respect to the prior year.
Notwithstanding that the distribution is declared and paid in U. based on the exchange rates in effect around the date of payment.
Shareholders on the JSE will receive their distributions in South African Rand.
Commodity price risk Glencore is exposed to price movements for the inventory it holds and the products it produces which are not held to meet priced forward contract obligations and forward priced purchase or sale contracts.
Glencore manages a significant portion of this exposure through futures and options transactions on worldwide commodity exchanges or in over the counter OTC markets to the extent available.
Commodity price risk management activities are considered an integral part of Glencores physical commodity marketing activities and the related assets and liabilities are included in other financial assets from and other financial liabilities to derivative counterparties including clearing brokers and exchanges.
Whilst it is Glencores policy to substantially hedge its commodity price risks there remains the possibility that the hedging instruments chosen may not always provide effective mitigation of the underlying price risk.
The hedging instruments available to the marketing businesses may differ in specific characteristics to the risk exposure to be hedged resulting in an ongoing and unavoidable basis risk exposure.
Residual basis risk exposures represent a key focus point for Glencores commodity department teams who actively engage in the management of such.
Value at risk One of the tools used by Glencore to monitor and limit its primary market risk exposure principally commodity price risk related to its physical marketing activities is of a value at risk VaR computation.
VaR is a risk measurement technique which estimates a threshold for potential loss that could occur on risk positions as a result of movements in risk factors over a specified time horizon given a specific level of confidence and based on a specific price history.
The VaR methodology is a statistically defined probability based approach that takes into account market volatilities as well as risk diversification by recognising offsetting positions and correlations between commodities and markets.
In this way risks can be measured consistently across markets and commodities and risk measures can be aggregated to derive a single risk value.
Glencores Board has set an unchanged consolidated VaR limit one day 95% confidence level of 100 million representing less than 0.5% of total equity which the Board reviews annually.
There were no breaches of this limit during the year.
Glencore uses a VaR approach based on Monte Carlo simulations computed at a 95% confidence level and utilising a weighted data history for a oneday time horizon.
Position sheets are regularly distributed and monitored and daily Monte Carlo simulations are applied to the various business groups net marketing positions to determine potential losses.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 25.
Financial and capital risk management continued Market risk VaR oneday 95% confidence level ranges and yearend positions were as follows US million 2017 2016 Yearend position 18 31 Average during the year 25 42 High during the year 41 101 Low during the year 13 16 VaR does not purport to represent actual gains or losses in fair value on earnings to be incurred by Glencore nor does Glencore claim that these VaR results are indicative of future market movements or representative of any actual impact on its future results.
VaR should always be viewed in the context of its limitations notably the use of historical data as a proxy for estimating future events market illiquidity risks and tail risks.
Glencore recognises these limitations and thus complements and continuously refines its VaR analysis by analysing forward looking stress scenarios benchmarking against an alternative VaR computation based on historical simulations and back testing calculated VaR against the hypothetical portfolio returns arising in the next business day.
Glencores VaR computation currently covers its business in the key base metals including aluminium nickel zinc copper and lead coal iron ore and oilnatural gas and assesses the open priced positions which are subject to price risk including inventories of these commodities.
Due to the lack of a liquid terminal market Glencore does not include a VaR calculation for products such as alumina molybdenum cobalt freight and some risk associated with concentrates as it does not consider the nature of these markets to be suited to this type of analysis.
Alternative measures are used to monitor exposures related to these products.
Net present value at risk Glencores future cash flows related to its forecast energy and metals and minerals production activities are also exposed to commodity price movements.
Glencore manages this exposure through a combination of portfolio diversification occasional shorterterm hedging via futures and options transactions insurance products and continuous internal monitoring reporting and quantification of the underlying operations estimated cash flows and valuations.
Interest rate risk Glencore is exposed to various risks associated with the effects of fluctuations in the prevailing levels of market interest rates on its assets and liabilities and cash flows.
Matching of assets and liabilities is utilised as the dominant method to hedge interest rate risks other methods include the use of interest rate swaps and similar derivative instruments.
Floating rate debt which is predominantly used to fund fast turning working capital interest is internally charged on the funding of this working capital is primarily based on US LIBOR plus an appropriate premium.
Accordingly prevailing market interest rates are continuously factored into transactional pricing and terms.
Assuming the amount of floating rate liabilities at the reporting period end were outstanding for the whole year interest rates were 50 basis points higherlower and all other variables held constant Glencores income and equity for the year ended 31 December 2017 would decreaseincrease by 1 10 million 2016 100 million.
Currency risk The U. dollar is the predominant functional currency of the Group.
Currency risk is the risk of loss from movements in exchange rates related to transactions and balances in currencies other than the U. dollar.
Such transactions include operating expenditure capital expenditure and to a lesser extent purchases and sales in currencies other than the functional currency.
Purchases or sales of commodities concluded in currencies other than the functional currency apart from certain limited domestic sales at industrial operations which act as a hedge against local operating costs are ordinarily hedged through forward exchange contracts.
Consequently foreign exchange movements against the U. impact.
Glencore enters into currency hedging transactions with leading financial institutions.
Glencores debt related payments both principal and interest are primarily denominated in or swapped using hedging instruments into U. dollars.
Glencores operating expenses being a small portion of its revenue base are incurred in a mix of currencies of which the U.
African Rand are the predominant currencies.
Glencore has issued Euro Swiss Franc Sterling Yen and Australian dollar denominated bonds see note 19.
Cross currency swaps were concluded to hedge the currency risk on the principal and related interest payments of these bonds.
These contracts were designated as cash flow hedges of the foreign currency risks associated with the bonds.
The fair value of these derivatives is as follows Notional amounts Recognised fair values
Cross currency swap agreements  2017  15387 421 1137 2020 Cross currency swap agreements  2016  14179 26 2873 2020 1 Refer to note 19 for details.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Credit risk Credit risk arises from the possibility that counterparties may not be able to settle obligations due to Glencore within their agreed payment terms.
Financial assets which potentially expose Glencore to credit risk consist principally of cash and cash equivalents receivables and advances derivative instruments and noncurrent advances and loans.
Glencores credit management process includes the assessment monitoring and reporting of counterparty exposure on a regular basis.
Glencores cash and cash equivalents are placed overnight with a diverse group of highly credit rated financial institutions.
Credit risk with respect to receivables and advances is mitigated by the large number of customers comprising Glencores customer base their diversity across various industries and geographical areas as well as Glencores policy to mitigate these risks through letters of credit netting collateral and insurance arrangements where appropriate.
Additionally it is Glencores policy that transactions and activities in trade related financial instruments be concluded under master netting agreements or long form confirmations to enable offsetting of balances due tofrom a common counterparty in the event of default by the counterparty.
Glencore actively and continuously monitors the credit quality of its counterparties through internal reviews and a credit scoring process which includes where available public credit ratings.
Balances with counterparties not having a public investment grade or equivalent internal rating are typically enhanced to investment grade through the extensive use of credit enhancement products such as letters of credit or insurance products.
Glencore has a diverse customer base with no customer representing more than 3.3% 2016 2.9% of its trade receivables on a gross basis taking into account credit enhancements or accounting for more than 3.5% of its revenues over the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 3.9%.
The maximum exposure to credit risk including performance risk  see below without considering netting agreements or without taking account of any collateral held or other credit enhancements is equal to the carrying amount of Glencores financial assets see note 26.
Performance risk Performance risk part of the broader credit risk subject matter discussed above is inherent in contracts with agreements in the future to physically purchase or sell commodities with fixed price attributes and arises from the possibility that counterparties may not be willing or able to meet their future contractual physical sale or purchase obligations tofrom Glencore.
Glencore undertakes the assessment monitoring and reporting of performance risk within its overall credit management process.
Glencores market breadth diversified supplier and customer base as well as the standard pricing mechanism in the vast majority of Glencores commodity portfolio which does not fix prices beyond three months with the main exception being coal where longerterm fixed price contracts are common ensure that performance risk is adequately mitigated.
The commodity industry has trended towards shorter term fixed price contract periods in part to mitigate against such potential performance risk but also due to the continuous development of transparent and liquid spot commodity markets with their associated derivative products and indexes.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that Glencore is unable to meet its payment obligations when due or that it is unable on an ongoing basis to borrow funds in the market on an unsecured or secured basis at an acceptable price to fund actual or proposed commitments.
Prudent liquidity risk management implies maintaining sufficient cash and cash equivalents and availability of adequate committed funding facilities.
Glencore has set itself an internal minimum liquidity target to maintain at all times including via available committed undrawn credit facilities of 3 billion 2016 3 billion which has purposely been substantially exceeded in recent years accounting for the more volatile market backdrop.
Glencores credit profile diversified funding sources and committed credit facilities ensure that sufficient liquid funds are maintained to meet its liquidity requirements.
As part of its liquidity management Glencore closely monitors and plans for its future capital expenditure and proposed investments as well as credit facility refinancing extension requirements well ahead of time.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 25.
Financial and capital risk management continued As at 31 December 2017 Glencore had available committed undrawn credit facilities and cash amounting to 12874 million 2016 16740 million.
The maturity profile of Glencores financial liabilities based on the contractual terms is as follows 2017 US million After 5 years Due 3  5 years Due 2  3 years Due 1  2 years Due 0  1 year Total Borrowings 10071 7637 2710 4114 9402 33934 Expected future interest payments 3256 111tel6977 Accounts payable     28826 28826 Other financial liabilities 513    4522 5035 Total 13840 8753 3438 5027 43714 74772 Current assets 49726 49726 2016 US million After 5 years Due 3  5 years Due 2  3 years Due 1  2 years Due 0  1 year Total Borrowings 10687 5726 2937 3838 10030 33218 Expected future interest payments 3394 109tel7041 Accounts payable     26176 26176 Other financial liabilities 403    6386 6789 Total 14484 6825 3659 4683 43573 73224 Current assets 43412 43412 1 The amount of disclosed expected future interest payments have been restated to include omitted future interest payments of 804 million and to collect the maturity profile.
Financial instruments Fair value of financial instruments The following tables present the carrying values and fair values of Glencores financial instruments.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the principal most advantageous market at the measurement date under current market conditions.
Where available market values have been used to determine fair values.
When market values are not available fair values have been calculated by discounting expected cash flows at prevailing market interest and exchange rates.
The estimated fair values have been determined using market information and appropriate valuation methodologies but are not necessarily indicative of the amounts that Glencore could realise in the normal course of business.
The financial assets and liabilities are presented by class in the tables below at their carrying values which generally approximate the fair values with the exception of 33934 million 2016 33218 million of borrowings the fair value of which at 31 December 2017 was 34776 million 2016 33673 million based on observable market prices applied to the borrowing portfolio a Level 2 fair value measurement.
2017 US million
Available for sale FVtPL
Assets
Other investments 2268 690 2958 Advances and loans 2976   2976 Accounts receivable 20359   20359 Other financial assets see note 27   2311 2311 Cash and cash equivalents 2124 2124 Total financial assets 23335 2268 5125 30728
Borrowings 33934   33934 Noncurrent other financial liabilities see note 27   513 513 Accounts payable 28826   28826 Other financial liabilities see note 27   4522 4522 Total financial liabilities 62760  5035 67795 1 Carrying value comprises investments loans accounts receivable accounts payable and other liabilities measured at amortised cost.
2 FVtPL  Fair value through profit and loss  held for trading.
3 Other investments of 2871 million 2016 1715 million are classified as Level 1 measured using quoted market prices with the remaining balance of 87 million 2016 38 million being investments in private companies whose fair value cannot be reliably measured and therefore carried at cost.
4 Classified as Level 1 measured using quoted exchange rates andor market prices.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 2016 US million
Available for sale FVtPL
Assets
Other investments 1457 296 1753 Advances and loans 3483   3483 Accounts receivable 20066   20066 Other financial assets see note 27   2212 2212 Cash and cash equivalents 2518 2518 Total financial assets 23549 1457 5026 30032
Borrowings 33218   33218 Noncurrent other financial liabilities see note 27   403 403 Accounts payable 26176   26176 Other financial liabilities see note 27   6386 6386 Total financial liabilities 59394  6789 66183 1 Carrying value comprises investments loans accounts receivable accounts payable and other liabilities measured at amortised cost.
2 FVtPL  Fair value through profit and loss  held for trading.
3 Other investments of 1715 million are classified as Level 1 measured using quoted market prices with the remaining balance of 38 million being investments in private companies whose fair value cannot be reliably measured and therefore carried at cost.
The movement in Level 1 measured investments compared to prior year see below mainly relates to the Groups share in Russneft which after the listing on the Moscow stock exchange in November 2016 is measured at fair value.
4 Classified as Level 1 measured using quoted exchange rates andor market prices.
Offsetting of financial assets and liabilities In accordance with IAS 32 the Group reports financial assets and liabilities on a net basis in the consolidated statement of financial position only if there is a legally enforceable right to set off the recognised amounts and there is intention to settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
The financial assets and liabilities subject to offsetting enforceable master netting and similar agreements as at 31 December 2017 and 2016 were as follows Amounts eligible for set off under netting agreements Related amounts not set off under netting agreements
Total as presented in the consolidated statement of financial position 2017 US million
Amounts offset
Financial instruments
Net amount Derivative assets 13220 11907 1313 347 426 540 998 2311 Derivative liabilities 15162 11907 3255 347 2430 478 1267 4522 1 Presented within current other financial assets and current other financial liabilities.
Amounts eligible for set off under netting agreements Related amounts not set off under netting agreements
Total as presented in the consolidated statement of financial position 2016 US million
Amounts offset
Financial instruments
Net amount Derivative assets 10679 9834 845 288 171 386 1367 2212 Derivative liabilities 14288 9834 4454 288 3784 382 1932 6386 1 Presented within current other financial assets and current other financial liabilities.
For the financial assets and liabilities subject to enforceable master netting or similar arrangements above each agreement between the Group and the counterparty allows for net settlement of the relevant financial assets and liabilities when both elect to settle on a net basis.
In the absence of such an election financial assets and liabilities may be settled on a gross basis however each party to the master netting or similar agreement will have the option to settle all such amounts on a net basis in the event of default of the other party.
Per the terms of each agreement an event of default includes failure by a party to make payment when due failure by a party to perform any obligation required by the agreement other than payment if such failure is not remedied within periods of 30 to 60 days after notice of such failure is given to the party or bankruptcy.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 27.
Fair value measurements Fair values are primarily determined using quoted market prices or standard pricing models using observable market inputs where available and are presented to reflect the expected gross future cash inoutflows.
Glencore classifies the fair values of its financial instruments into a three level hierarchy based on the degree of the source and observability of the inputs that are used to derive the fair value of the financial asset or liability as follows Level 1 Inputs are quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that Glencore can assess at the measurement date or Level 2 Inputs other than quoted inputs included in Level 1 that are observable for the assets or liabilities either directly or indirectly or Level 3 Unobservable inputs for the assets or liabilities requiring Glencore to make marketbased assumptions Level 1 classifications primarily include futures with a tenor of less than one year and options that are exchange traded whereas Level 2 classifications primarily include futures with a tenor greater than one year over the counter options swaps and physical forward transactions which derive their fair value primarily from exchange quotes and readily observable broker quotes.
Level 3 classifications primarily include physical forward transactions which derive their fair value predominantly from models that use broker quotes and applicable marketbased estimates surrounding location quality and credit differentials and financial liabilities linked to the fair value of certain mining operations.
In circumstances where Glencore cannot verify fair value with observable market inputs Level 3 fair values it is possible that a different valuation model could produce a materially different estimate of fair value.
It is Glencores policy that transactions and activities in trade related financial instruments be concluded under master netting agreements or long form confirmations to enable balances due tofrom a common counterparty to be offset in the event of default insolvency or bankruptcy by the counterparty.
The following tables show the fair values of the derivative financial instruments including trade related financial and physical forward purchase and sale commitments by type of contract and noncurrent other financial liabilities as at 31 December 2017 and 2016.
Other assets and liabilities which are measured at fair value on a recurring basis are marketing inventories other investments cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Refer to notes 1 1 and 26 for disclosures in connection with these fair value measurements.
There are no nonrecurring fair value measurements.
Other financial assets 2017 US million Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Commodity related contracts Futures 227 42  269 Options 93 37  130 Physical forwards  582 356 938 Financial contracts Cross currency swaps  421  421 Foreign currency and interest rate contracts  83  83 Total 451 1504 356 2311 2016 US million Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Commodity related contracts Futures 207 154  361 Options 31 37  68 Physical forwards  763 558 1321 Financial contracts Cross currency swaps  26  26 Foreign currency and interest rate contracts  124  124 Total 404 1250 558 2212 Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Other financial liabilities 2017 US million Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Commodity related contracts Futures 2029 84  2113 Options Swaps 121 372  493 Physical forwards  468 184 652 Financial contracts Cross currency swaps  1137  1137 Foreign currency and interest rate contracts  53  53 Current other financial liabilities 2187 2143 192 4522 Noncurrent other financial liabilities Nondiscretionary dividend obligation Noncurrent other financial liabilities   513 513 Total 2187 2143 705 5035 2016 US million Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Commodity related contracts Futures 1068 150  1218 Options Swaps 846 321  1167 Physical forwards  859 203 1062 Financial contracts Cross currency swaps  2873  2873 Foreign currency and interest rate contracts  43  43 Current other financial liabilities 1919 4258 209 6386 Noncurrent other financial liabilities Nondiscretionary dividend obligation Noncurrent other financial liabilities   403 403 Total 1919 4258 612 6789 1 A ZAR denominated derivative liability payable to ARM Coal one of the Groups principal coal joint operations based in South Africa.
The liability arises from ARM Coals rights as an investor to a share of agreed free cash flows from certain coal operations in South Africa and is valued based on those cash flows using a risk adjusted discount rate.
The derivative liability is settled over the life of those operations modelled mine life of 25 years as at 31 December 2017 and has no fixed repayment date and is not cancellable within 12 months.
The following table shows the net changes in fair value of Level 3 other financial assets and other financial liabilities US million
Total
Level 3 1 January 2017 355 6 403 54 Total gainloss recognised in cost of goods sold 58 8  50 Nondiscretionary dividend obligation   110 110 Realised 241 6  235 31 December 2017 172 8 513 349 1 January 2016 19 1 186 168 Total gainloss recognised in cost of goods sold 258 6  252 Nondiscretionary dividend obligation   217 217 Realised 78 1  79 31 December 2016 355 6 403 54 During the year no amounts were transferred between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy and no amounts were transferred into or out of Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy for either other financial assets or other financial liabilities.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 27.
Fair value measurements continued Some of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities are measured at fair value at the end of each reporting period.
The following table provides information about how the fair values of these financial assets and financial liabilities are determined in particular the valuation techniques and inputs used.
Fair value of financial assetsfinancial liabilities US million 2017 2016 Futures  Level 1 Assets 227 207 Liabilities 2029 1068 Valuation techniques and key inputs Quoted bid prices in an active market Significant unobservable inputs None Futures  Level 2 Assets 42 154 Liabilities 84 150 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Inputs include observable quoted prices sourced from exchanges or traded reference indices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Prices are adjusted by a discount rate which captures the time value of money and counterparty credit considerations as required.
Significant unobservable inputs None Options  Level 1 Assets 93 31 Liabilities 37 5 Valuation techniques and key inputs Quoted bid prices in an active market Significant unobservable inputs None Options  Level 2 Assets 37 37 Liabilities 29 12 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Inputs include observable quoted prices sourced from exchanges or traded reference indices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Prices are adjusted by a discount rate which captures the time value of money and counterparty credit considerations as required.
Significant unobservable inputs None Options  Level 3 Assets Liabilities 8 6 Valuation techniques and key inputs Standard option pricing model Significant unobservable inputs Prices are adjusted by volatility differentials.
This significant unobservable input generally represents 2%  20% of the overall value of the instruments.
A change to a reasonably possible alternative assumption would not result in a material change in the underlying value.
Swaps  Level 1 Assets 131 166 Liabilities 121 846 Valuation techniques and key inputs Quoted bid prices in an active market Significant unobservable inputs None Swaps  Level 2 Assets 339 146 Liabilities 372 321 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Inputs include observable quoted prices sourced from exchanges or traded reference indices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Prices are adjusted by a discount rate which captures the time value of money and counterparty credit considerations as required.
Significant unobservable inputs None Physical Forwards  Level 2 Assets 582 763 Liabilities 468 859 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Inputs include observable quoted prices sourced from exchanges or traded reference indices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Prices are adjusted by a discount rate which captures the time value of money and counterparty credit considerations such as history of nonperformance collateral held and current market developments as required.
Significant unobservable inputs None Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 US million 2017 2016 Physical Forwards  Level 3 Assets 356 558 Liabilities 184 203 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Significant unobservable inputs Valuation of the Groups commodity physical forward contracts categorised within this level is based on observable market prices that are adjusted by unobservable differentials as required including
Geographic location Local supply and demand Customer requirements and Counterparty credit considerations.
These significant unobservable inputs generally represent 2%30% of the overall value of the instruments.
The valuation prices are applied consistently to value physical forward sale and purchase contracts and changing a particular input to reasonably possible alternative assumptions does not result in a material change in the underlying value of the portfolio.
Cross currency swaps  Level 2 Assets 421 26 Liabilities 1137 2873 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Inputs include observable quoted prices sourced from exchanges or traded reference indices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Prices are adjusted by a discount rate which captures the time value of money and counterparty credit considerations as required.
Significant unobservable inputs None Foreign currency and interest rate contracts  Level 2 Assets 83 124 Liabilities 53 43 Valuation techniques and key inputs Discounted cash flow model Inputs include observable quoted prices sourced from exchanges or traded reference indices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Prices are adjusted by a discount rate which captures the time value of money and counterparty credit considerations as required.
Significant unobservable inputs None Nondiscretionary dividend obligation  Level 3 Assets Liabilities 513 403 Valuation techniques Discounted cash flow model Significant observable inputs  Forecast commodity prices Discount rates using weighted average cost of capital methodology Production models Operating costs and Capital expenditures.
The resultant liability is essentially a discounted cash flow valuation of the underlying mining operation.
Increasesdecreases in forecast commodity prices will result in an increasedecrease to the value of the liability though this will be partially offset by associated increasesdecreases in the assumed production levels operating costs and capital expenditures which are inherently linked to forecast commodity prices.
The valuation remains sensitive to price and a 10% increase decrease in commodity price assumptions would result in an 1 15 million adjustment to the current carrying value.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 28.
Auditors remuneration US million 2017 2016 Remuneration in respect of the audit of Glencores consolidated financial statements 3 3 Other audit fees primarily in respect of audits of accounts of subsidiaries 18 17 Auditrelated assurance services Total audit and related assurance fees 23 22 Transaction services 4 3 Taxation compliance services 2 3 Other taxation advisory services 2 2 Other assurance services 1 1 Total nonaudit fees 9 9 Total professional fees 32 31 1 Auditrelated assurance services primarily related to interim reviews of the Groups halfyear accounts and quarterly accounts of the Groups publicly listed subsidiaries.
Future commitments Capital expenditure for the acquisition of property plant and equipment is generally funded through the cash flow generated by the respective industrial entities.
As at 31 December 2017 987 million 2016 776 million of which 93% 2016 81% relates to expenditure to be incurred over the next year was contractually committed for the acquisition of property plant and equipment.
Certain of Glencores exploration tenements and licences require it to spend a minimum amount per year on development activities a significant portion of which would have been incurred in the ordinary course of operations.
As at 31 December 2017 139 million 2016 177 million of such development expenditures are to be incurred of which 36% 2016 20% are for commitments to be settled over the next year.
Glencore procures seagoing vesselschartering services to meet its overall marketing objectives and commitments.
As at 31 December 2017 Glencore has committed to future hire costs to meet future physical delivery and sale obligations and expectations of 247 million 2016 217 million of which 76 million 2016 105 million are with associated companies.
72% 2016 46% of the total charters are for services to be received over the next two years.
As part of Glencores ordinary sourcing and procurement of physical commodities and other ordinary marketing obligations the selling party may request that a financial institution act as either a the paying party upon the delivery of product and qualifying documents through the issuance of a letter of credit or b the guarantor by way of issuing a bank guarantee accepting responsibility for Glencores contractual obligations.
Similarly Glencore is required to post rehabilitation and pension guarantees in respect of some of these future primarily industrial longterm obligations.
As at 31 December 2017 17578 million 2016 17358 million of procurement and 3615 million 2016 2972 million of rehabilitation and pension commitments have been issued on behalf of Glencore which will generally be settled simultaneously with the payment for such commodity and rehabilitation and pension obligations.
Glencore has entered into various operating leases mainly as lessee for office and warehousestorage facilities.
Rental expenses for these leases totalled respectively 173 million and 157 million for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016.
Future net minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows US million 2017 2016 Within 1 year 203 106 Between 2  5 years 401 245 After 5 years 189 97 Total 793 448 Glencore has entered into finance leases for various plant and equipment items primarily vessels and machinery.
Future net minimum lease payments under finance leases together with the future finance charges are as follows Undiscounted minimum lease payments Present value of minimum lease payments US milliontel 2016 Within 1 year Between 1 and 5 years 25telAfter 5 years 20telTotal minimum lease payments 55telLess amounts representing finance lease charges 164 179 Present value of minimum lease payments 39telNotes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Future development and related commitments Acquisition of HVO On 27 July 2017 Glencore and Yancoal signed agreements relating to the acquisition of a 49% interest in the Hunter Valley Operations HVO coal mine in New South Wales Australia following Yancoals acquisition of Coal and Allied CandA from Rio Tinto.
Under the terms of the agreements Glencore will pay cash consideration of 1139 million effective 1 September 2017 plus a 27.9% share of 240 million noncontingent royalties over five years and 49% of price contingent royalties payable by Yancoal to Rio Tinto on production from HVO in respect of the CandA acquisition.
The transaction is subject to customary regulatory approvals and is expected to close in H1 2018.
Acquisition of Chevron South Africa and Botswana On 6 October 2017 Glencore entered into an agreement with Off the Shelf Investments Fifty Six RF Proprietary Limited OTS to acquire from OTS i a 75% stake in Chevron South Africa Proprietary Limited Chevron SA and certain related interests and ii the entire issued share capital of Chevron Botswana Proprietary Limited Chevron Botswana following closing of OTSs exercise of its preemptive right to acquire these operations from the Chevron group.
The aggregate consideration subject to adjustment for debt and working capital is 973 million.
The transaction is conditional on the receipt of all necessary regulatory approvals by OTS and Glencore and is expected to close in mid2018.
Contingent liabilities The amount of corporate guarantees in favour of third parties as at 31 December 2017 was Nil 2016 Nil.
Also see note 9.
The Group is subject to various claims which arise in the ordinary course of business as detailed below.
These contingent liabilities are reviewed on a regular basis and where practical an estimate is made of the potential financial impact on the Group.
As at 31 December 2017 and 2016 it was not practical to make such an assessment.
Litigation
Certain legal actions other claims and unresolved disputes are pending against Glencore.
Whilst Glencore cannot predict the results of any litigation it believes that it has meritorious defences against those actions or claims.
Glencore believes the likelihood of any material liability arising from these claims to be remote and that the liability if any therefore resulting from any litigation will not have a material adverse effect on its consolidated income financial position or cash flows.
Environmental contingencies Glencores operations are subject to various environmental laws and regulations.
Glencore is in material compliance with those laws and regulations.
Glencore accrues for environmental contingencies when such contingencies are probable and reasonably estimable.
Such accruals are adjusted as new information develops or circumstances change.
Recoveries of environmental remediation costs from insurance companies and other parties are recorded as assets when the recoveries are virtually certain.
At this time Glencore is unaware of any material environmental incidents at its locations.
Any potential liability arising from these allegations is not expected to have a material adverse effect on its consolidated income financial position or cash flows.
Margin Call Guarantee As part of the partnership with Qatar Investment Authority see note 9 and in relation to the joint ventures QHG ownership of Rosneft shares Glencore provided a margin guarantee up to EUR1.4 billion.
The margin guarantee is subject to various loan to value thresholds related to the financing provided to QHG.
Appropriate Russian banks have in turn provided Glencore with a guarantee which can and will be called upon in the event of drawdown under Glencores margin guarantee facility with QHG.
As at 31 December 2017 Nil has been called under the QHG margin guarantee.
In September 2017 QHG concluded an agreement with CEFC China Energy Company Limited to dispose of the majority of the shares it held amounting to a 14.16% stake in Rosneft.
Following completion of the transaction the margin guarantees provided by Glencore will terminate.
The transaction subject to customary regulatory approval processes is expected to complete in H1 2018.
Related party transactions In the normal course of business Glencore enters into various arms length transactions with related parties including fixed price commitments to sell and to purchase commodities forward sale and purchase contracts agency agreements and management service agreements.
Outstanding balances at period end are unsecured and settlement occurs in cash see notes 10 12 and 23.
There have been no guarantees provided or received for any related party receivables or payables.
All transactions between Glencore and its subsidiaries are eliminated on consolidation along with any unrealised profits and losses between its subsidiaries associates and joint ventures.
In 2017 sales and purchases with associates and joint ventures amounted to 1859 million 2016 1570 million and 7485 million 2016 3194 million respectively.
Remuneration of key management personnel Glencores key management personnel are the members of the Board of Directors CEO CFO and the heads of the operating segments.
The remuneration of Directors and other members of key management personnel recognised in the consolidated statement of income including salaries and other current employee benefits amounted to 22 million 2016 13 million.
There were no other longterm benefits or sharebased payments to key management personnel 2016 Nil.
Further details on remuneration of Directors are set out in the Directors remuneration report on page 101.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 32.
Principal subsidiaries with material noncontrolling interests Noncontrolling interest is comprised of the following US million 2017 2016 Volcan 1733 Kazzinc 1438 1396 Koniambo 2905 2653 Katanga 965 511 Mutanda  767
Total 300 462 1 Other comprises various subsidiaries in which no individual balance attributable to noncontrolling interests is material.
Summarised financial information in respect of Glencores subsidiaries that have material noncontrolling interest as at 31 December 2017 reflecting 100% of the underlying subsidiarys relevant figures is set out below.
US million Kazzinc Koniambo Katanga Volcan 31 December 2017 Noncurrent assets 4659 1502 4333 4754 Current assets 123telTotal assets 5893 1816 5222 5177 Noncurrent liabilities 763 10273 3760 1789 Current liabilities 378 112 2593 562 Total liabilities 1141 10385 6353 2351 Net assets 4752 8569 1131 2826 Equity attributable to owners of the Company 3314 5664 166 1093 Noncontrolling interests 1438 2905 965 Noncontrolling interests in % 30.3% 51.0% 13.7% 76.7% Revenue 3078  25 160 Expenses 2517 494 1004 160 Net profitloss for the year 561 494 979 Profit attributable to owners of the Company 395 242 575 Profit attributable to noncontrolling interests 166 252 404 Other comprehensive income attributable to owners of the Company Other comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year 561 494 979 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 124 Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities 764  177 Net cash outflow from investing activities 196 241 369 Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities 511 256 583 Total net cash inflow 57 15 37 1 Glencore has a 86.3% interest in Katanga Mining Limited which in turn has a 75% interest in Kamoto Copper Company KCC the entity engaged in copper mining activities.
The noncontrolling interests balance includes negative 939 million and the profit attributable to noncontrolling interests balance includes negative 310 million related to noncontrolling interests arising at the KCC level.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 US million Kazzinc Koniambo Katanga Mutanda 31 December 2016 Noncurrent assets 4703 1226 4424 4763 Current assets 101telTotal assets 5717 1520 5076 5312 Noncurrent liabilities 719 9494 3380 1885 Current liabilities 391 101 1848 281 Total liabilities 1110 9595 5228 2166 Net assets 4607 8075 152 3146 Equity attributable to owners of the Company 3211 5422 359 2379 Noncontrolling interests 1396 2653 511 Noncontrolling interests in % 30.3% 51.0% 24.7% 31.0% Revenue 2602 152  1322 Expenses 2211 529 625 1147 Net profitloss for the year 391 377 625 175 Profit attributable to owners of the Company 273 184 310 121 Profit attributable to noncontrolling interests 118 193 315 Other comprehensive income attributable to owners of the Company Other comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year 391 377 625 175 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 38 Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities 856  161 428 Net cash outflow from investing activities 122 263 213 234 Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities 567 210 338 195 Total net cash inflowoutflow 167 53 36 1 1 Glencore has a 75.3% interest in Katanga Mining Limited which in turn has a 75% interest in Kamoto Copper Company KCC the entity engaged in copper mining activities.
The noncontrolling interests balance includes negative 629 million and the profit attributable to noncontrolling interests balance includes negative 214 million related to noncontrolling interests arising at the KCC level.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 33.
Principal operating finance and industrial subsidiaries and investments
2016 Main activity Principal subsidiaries Metals and minerals Minera Alumbrera Limited Antigua 50.0 50.0 Copper production Cobar Group Australia 100.0 100.0 Copper production Compania Minera Lomas Bayas Chile 100.0 100.0 Copper production Complejo Metalurgico Altonorte S.
Chile 100.0 100.0 Copper production Minera Altos de Punitaqui Limitada Chile 100.0 100.0 Copper production Compania Minera Antapaccay S.
Peru 100.0 100.0 Copper production Pasar Group Philippines 78.2 78.2 Copper production Glencore Recycling Inc.
USA 100.0 100.0 Copper production Mopani Copper Mines plc Zambia 73.1 73.1 Copper production Sable Zinc Kabwe Limited Zambia 100.0 100.0 Copper production Katanga Mining Limited Canada 86.3 75.3 CopperCobalt production Mutanda Group DRC 100.0 69.0 CopperCobalt production Mount Isa Mines Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 CopperZincLead production Kazzinc Ltd.
Kazakhstan 69.7 69.7 CopperZincLead production Zhairemsky GOK JSC Kazakhstan 69.7 69.7 CopperZincLead production Vasilkovskoye Gold Kazakhstan 69.7 69.7 Gold production Energia Austral Joint Venture Chile 66.6 66.6 Hydroelectric project African Carbon Producers Pty Ltd South Africa 100.0 100.0 Char production African Fine Carbon Pty Ltd South Africa 100.0 100.0 Char production Char Technology Pty Ltd South Africa 100.0 100.0 Char production Sphere Minerals Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Iron Ore exploration Britannia Refined Metals Limited UK 100.0 100.0 Lead production Glencore Manganese Group FranceNorway 100.0 100.0 Manganese furnace Access World Group Switzerland 100.0 100.0 Logistics services Murrin Murrin Group Australia 100.0 100.0 Nickel production Koniambo Nickel S.
New Caledonia 49.0 49.0 Nickel production Glencore Nikkelverk AS Norway 100.0 100.0 Nickel production Eland Platinum Mines Pty Limited South Africa 0.0 74.0 Platinum production McArthur River Mining Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Zinc production Perkoa Group Burkina Faso 0.0 90.0 Zinc production Nordenhammer Zinkhtte GmbH Germany 100.0 100.0 Zinc production Asturiana de Zinc S.
Spain 100.0 100.0 Zinc production Volcan Compania Minera S.
Peru 23.3 7.3 Zinc production AR Zinc Group Argentina 100.0 100.0 ZincLead production Portovesme S.
Italy 100.0 100.0 ZincLead production Rosh Pinah Zinc Corporation Pty Limited Namibia 0.0 80.1 ZincLead production Empresa Minera Los Quenuales S.
Peru 97.6 97.6 ZincLead production Sinchi Wayra Group Bolivia 100.0 100.0 ZincTin production 1 This investment is treated as a subsidiary as the Group is entitled to elect the chairman of the Board who has the casting vote where any vote is split equally between the four board positions.
Minera Alumbrera Limiteds principal place of business is Argentina.
2 Publicly traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange under the symbol KAT.
O and principal place of business is DRC.
Glencore owns 1435848228 shares.
3 The Group has control of Koniambo Nickel S. provided by the terms of the financing arrangements underlying the Koniambo project.
4 The Group has control of Volcan Compania Minera S. the economic interest is diluted by the outstanding nonvoting shares Class B.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Country of incorporation % interest % interest 2016 Main activity Energy products Cumnock No.
1 Colliery Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Enex Foydell Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Enex Liddell Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Oakbridge Pty Ltd Australia 78.0 78.0 Coal production Glencore Coal Queensland Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Jonsha Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Mangoola Coal Operations Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Mt Owen Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Newlands Collinsville Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Oceanic Coal Australia Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Ravensworth Operations Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Ulan Coal Mines Limited Australia 90.0 90.0 Coal production United Collieries Pty Ltd Australia 95.0 95.0 Coal production Prodeco Group Colombia 100.0 100.0 Coal production Izimbiwa Coal Pty Ltd South Africa 49.9 49.9 Coal production Umcebo Mining Pty Ltd South Africa 48.7 48.7 Coal production Tavistock Collieries Pty Limited South Africa 100.0 100.0 Coal production Topley Corporation B.
100.0 100.0 Ship owner Glencore Exploration Cameroon Ltd.
Bermuda 100.0 100.0 Oil production Glencore Exploration EG Ltd.
Bermuda 100.0 100.0 Oil production Petrochad Mangara Limited Bermuda 100.0 100.0 Oil explorationproduction Chemoil Energy Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 Oil storage and bunkering 5 Although Glencore holds less than 50% of the voting rights it has the ability to exercise control over Izimbiwa through the ability to direct the key activities of the operation and to appoint key management personnel provided by the terms of the shareholders agreement.
6 Although Glencore holds less than 50% of the voting rights it has the ability to exercise control over Umcebo as a result of shareholder agreements which provide Glencore the ability to control the Board of Directors.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 33.
Principal operating finance and industrial subsidiaries and investments continued
2016 Main activity Other operating and finance Xstrata Limited UK 100.0 100.0 Holding Glencore Australia Investment Holdings Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Holding Glencore Operations Australia Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Holding Glencore Queensland Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Holding Glencore Investment Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Holding Glencore Australia Holdings Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Finance Bermuda Ltd Bermuda 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Canada Financial Corp Canada 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Finance Europe Limited Jersey 100.0 100.0 Finance Finges Investment B.
Netherlands 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Schweiz AG Switzerland 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Group Funding Limited UAE 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Funding LLC USA 100.0 100.0 Finance Glencore Australia Oil Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore Canada Corporation Canada 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore Singapore Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 Operating ST Shipping and Transport Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore AG Switzerland 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore International AG Switzerland 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore Commodities Ltd UK 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore Energy UK Ltd UK 100.0 100.0 Operating Glencore UK Ltd UK 100.0 100.0 Operating Principal joint ventures Glencore Agriculture Limited Jersey 49.9 49.9 Agriculture business Clermont Coal Group Australia 25.1 25.1 Coal production BaseCore Metals LP Canada 50.0 0.0 Copper production Compania Minera Dona Ines de Collahuasi Chile 44.0 44.0 Copper production El Aouj Joint Venture Mauritania 50.0 50.0 Iron Ore production Principal joint operations United Joint Venture Australia 95.0 95.0 Coal exploration Wandoan Joint Venture Australia 75.0 75.0 Coal exploration Bulga Joint Venture Australia 68.3 68.3 Coal production Cumnock Joint Venture Australia 90.0 90.0 Coal production Foybrook Joint Venture Australia 67.5 67.5 Coal production Liddell Joint Venture Australia 67.5 67.5 Coal production Oaky Creek Coal Joint Venture Australia 55.0 55.0 Coal production Rolleston Joint Venture Australia 75.0 75.0 Coal production Ulan Coal Mines Joint Venture Australia 90.0 90.0 Coal production 7 The principal joint arrangements are accounted for as joint ventures as the shareholder agreements do not provide the Group the ability to solely control the entities.
8 The Groups effective 25.05% economic interest in Clermont Coal is held through GS Coal Pty Ltd a 5050 joint venture with Sumitomo Corporation.
9 Classified as joint operations under IFRS 11 as these joint arrangements are not structured through separate vehicles.
Notes to the financial statements continued Glencore Annual Report 2017 Country of incorporation % interest % interest 2016 Main activity Principal joint operations continued ARM Coal Pty Ltd.
South Africa 49.0 49.0 Coal production Goedgevonden Joint Venture South Africa 74.0 74.0 Coal production Ernest Henry Mining Pty Ltd.
Australia 70.0 70.0 Copper production Merafe Pooling and Sharing Joint Venture South Africa 79.5 79.5 Ferroalloys production Kabanga Joint Venture Tanzania 50.0 50.0 Nickel production Mototolo Joint Venture South Africa 38.0 37.0 Platinum production Rhovan Pooling and Sharing Joint Venture South Africa 74.0 74.0 Vanadium production Principal associates Carbones del Cerrejon LLC Colombia 33.3 33.3 Coal production Port Kembla Coal Terminal Limited Australia 29.7 29.7 Coal terminal Port Waratah Coal Services Ltd Australia 15.5 15.5 Coal terminal Wiggins Island Coal Export Terminal Australia 20.0 16.7 Coal terminal Richards Bay Coal Terminal Company Limited South Africa 26.7 26.7 Coal terminal Polymet Mining Corp.
Canada 28.4 28.4 Copper production Century Aluminum Company USA 47.4 47.5 Diversified production HG Storage International Limited Jersey 49.0 100.0 Oil storage Noranda Income Fund Canada 25.0 25.0 Zinc production Trevali Mining Company Canada 25.6 5.3 Zinc production Compania Minera Antamina S.
Peru 33.8 33.8 ZincCopper production Recylex S.
France 32.2 32.2 ZincLead production Other investments United Company Rusal plc Jersey 8.8 8.8 Aluminium production OAO NK Russneft Russia 25.0 25.0 Oil production 10 Represents the Groups economic interest in Century comprising 42.9% 2016 42.9% voting interest and 4.5% nonvoting interest 2016 4.6%.
Century is publicly traded on NASDAQ under the symbol CENX.
11 In August 2017 the Group acquired an additional interest in Trevali Mining Corporation in exchange for interests in Rosh Pinah Perkoa and cash consideration of 245 million.
12 Although the Group holds more than 20% of the voting rights in Russneft it is unable to exercise significant influence over the financial and operating policy decisions of Russneft.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information 197 Alternative performance measures 202 Other reconciliations Production by quarter  Q4 2016 to QResources and reserves 219 Shareholder information
Glencore Annual Report 2017 197 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Alternative performance measures are denoted by the symbol When assessing and discussing the Groups reported financial performance financial position and cash flows Glencore makes reference to Alternative performance measures APMs which are not defined or specified under the requirements of IFRS but are derived from the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS.
The APMs are consistent with how the business performance is measured and reported within the internal management reporting to the Board and management and assist in providing meaningful analysis of the Groups results both internally and externally in discussions with the financial analyst and investment community.
The Group uses APMs to improve the comparability of information between reporting periods and segments and to aid the understanding of the activity taking place across the Group by adjusting for items that are of an infrequent nature and by aggregating or disaggregating notably in the case of relevant material associates and joint ventures accounted for on an equity basis certain IFRS measures.
APMs are also used to approximate the underlying operating cash flow generation of the operations Adjusted EBITDA.
Investments in the extractive industry are typically significant and the initial spend generally occurs over several years upfront prior to the operations generating cash.
As a result the investments are sometimes made with partners and an assessment to approximate the operating cash flow generationpayback of the investment Adjusted EBITDA is required.
Against this backdrop the key APMs used by Glencore are Adjusted EBITDA Net fundingNet debt and the disaggregation of the equivalent key APMs of our relevant material associates and joint ventures Proportionate adjustment to enable a consistent evaluation of the financial performance and returns attributable to the Group.
Adjusted EBITDA is a useful approximation of the operating cash flow generation by eliminating depreciation and amortisation adjustments.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a direct measure of our liquidity which is shown by our cash flow statement and needs to be considered in the context of our financial commitments.
Proportionate adjustments are useful to enable a consistent evaluation of the financial performance and returns available to the Group irrespective of the differing accounting treatments required to account for our minorityjoint ownership interests of our relevant material investments.
Net funding is an aggregation of IFRS measures Borrowings less cash and cash equivalents and Net debt is Net funding less Readily marketable inventories and provides a measure of our financial leverage and through Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA relationships provides an indication of relative financial strength and flexibility.
APMs used by Glencore may not be comparable with similarly titled measures and disclosures by other companies.
APMs have limitations as an analytical tool and a user of the financial statements should not consider these measures in isolation from or as a substitute for analysis of the Groups results of operations and they may not be indicative of the Groups historical operating results nor are they meant to be a projection or forecast of its future results.
Listed below are the definitions and reconciliations to the underlying IFRS measures of the various APMs used by the Group.
Proportionate adjustment For internal reporting and analysis management evaluates the performance of Antamina copperzinc mine 34% owned Cerrejn coal mine 33% owned Collahuasi copper mine 44% owned and Glencore Agri 50% owned under the proportionate consolidation method reflecting Glencores proportionate share of the revenues expenses assets and liabilities of these investments.
See reconciliation of revenue and relevant material associates and joint ventures Adjusted EBIT to Share of net income from associates and joint ventures below.
APMs derived from the statement of income
Revenue represents revenue by segment see note 2 of the financial statements as reported on the face of the statement of income plus the relevant Proportionate adjustments.
See reconciliation table below.
US million 2017 2016 Revenue  Marketing activities 181827 145984 Revenue  Industrial activities 39552 31367 Revenue 221379 177351 Proportionate adjustment  revenue 15903 3518 Discontinued operations  revenue  20885 Revenue  reported measure 205476 152948 Alternative performance measures 198 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Alternative performance measures continued Share of income from material associates and joint ventures US million 2017 2016 Associates and joint ventures Adjusted EBITDA 2440 1447 Depreciation and amortisation 812 705 Associates and joint ventures Adjusted EBIT 1628 742 Impairment net of tax Net finance costs 74 16 Income tax expense 517 248 Share of income from material associates and joint ventures 1037 133 Share of incomeloss from other associates 121 122 Share of income from associates and joint ventures 1158 11 1 In 2016 Energy products segment comprises an impairment of 345 million net of taxes of 176 million relating to Cerrejn resulting from reduced near term production estimates due to increased risk related to the possibility of delays in sourcing approvals as a result of the continued social and environmental challenges to current mine plans.
2 Comprises share in earnings of 164 million 2016 12 million from Marketing activities and 994 million 2016 losses of 1 million from Industrial activities.
Adjusted EBITEBITDA Adjusted EBITEBITDA provide insight into our overall business performance a combination of cost management seizing market opportunities and growth and are the corresponding flow drivers towards our objective of achieving industryleading returns.
Adjusted EBIT is the net result of revenue less cost of goods sold and selling and administrative expenses plus share of income from associates and joint ventures dividend income and the attributable share of Adjusted EBIT of relevant material associates and joint ventures which are accounted for internally by means of proportionate consolidation excluding Significant items see definition below.
In addition the segment information includes Glencore Agri which was disclosed as a discontinued operation until close of transaction on 1 December 2016 see note 24 of the financial statements.
Adjusted EBITDA consists of Adjusted EBIT plus depreciation and amortisation including the related Proportionate adjustments.
See reconciliation table below.
US million 2017 2016 Reported measures Revenue 205476 152948 Cost of goods sold 197695 149763 Selling and administrative expenses 1310 1102 Share of income from associates and joint ventures 1158 11 Dividend income 28 27 7657 2121 Adjustments to reported measures Share of associates significant items 6 132 Unrealised intergroup profit elimination 523 374 Marktomarket valuation on certain coal hedging contracts 225 225 Proportionate adjustment  net finance and income tax expense 591 609 Adjusted EBIT from discontinued operations  469 Adjusted EBIT from continuing and discontinued operations 8552 3930 Depreciation and amortisation from continuing operations 5398 5573 Proportionate adjustment  depreciation 812 705 Discontinued operations  depreciation  60 Adjusted EBITDA from continuing and discontinued operations 14762 10268 199 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Significant items Significant items of income and expense which due to their variable financial impact or the expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them are separated for internal reporting and analysis of Glencores results to provide a better understanding and comparative basis of the underlying financial performance.
Refer to reconciliation below.
Reconciliation of net significant items 2017 US million Gross significant charges
Equity holders share Share of Associates significant items Marktomarket valuation on certain coal hedging contracts Unrealised intergroup profit elimination Gains on disposals and investments 1309  1309 Other expense  net Income tax impact from significant items 187  187 Total significant items See note 2 of the financial statements.
2 See note 3 of the financial statements.
3 See note 4 of the financial statements.
Reconciliation of net significant items 2016 US million Gross significant charges
Equity holders share Share of Associates significant items Marktomarket valuation on certain coal hedging contracts Unrealised intergroup profit elimination Gains on disposals and investments Gains on disposals and investments related to discontinued operations Gain on disposals of discontinued operations 1848  1848 Other expense  net 1626 21 1605 Other expense  net related to material associates and joint ventures Other expense  net related to discontinued operations Income tax impact from significant items 276  276 Total significant items 634 21 613 1 See note 2 of the financial statements.
2 See note 3 of the financial statements.
3 See note 24 of the financial statements.
4 See note 4 of the financial statements.
5 See Proportionate adjustment reconciliation above.
Net income attributable to equity shareholder presignificant items Net income attributable to equity shareholders presignificant items is a measure of our ability to generate shareholder returns.
The calculation of tax items to be excluded from Net income includes tax significant items and the tax effect of nontax significant items themselves.
Refer to earnings summary in the financial review section and reconciliation of tax expense below.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 APMs derived from the statement of financial position Net fundingNet debt and Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA Net fundingdebt demonstrates how our debt is being managed and is an important factor in ensuring we maintain an investment grade rating status and a competitive cost of capital.
Net debt is defined as total current and noncurrent borrowings less cash and cash equivalents readily marketable inventories and related Proportionate adjustments.
The net debt assumed in the Volcan acquisition completed midNovember 2017 has also been adjusted to provide a more consistent and comparative analysis but mostly to reflect the Groups relatively low 23.3% economic ownership compared to its 63.0% voting interest in this still fully ringfenced listed entity with its standalone independent and separate capital structure.
In addition the relationship of Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA provides an indication of financial flexibility.
See reconciliation table below.
Readily marketable inventories RMI RMI comprising the core inventories which underpin and facilitate Glencores marketing activities represent inventories that in Glencores assessment are readily convertible into cash in the short term due to their liquid nature widely available markets and the fact that price risk is primarily covered either by a forward physical sale or hedge transaction.
Glencore regularly assesses the composition of these inventories and their applicability relevance and availability to the marketing activities.
As at 31 December 2017 22225 million 2016 17093 million of inventories were considered readily marketable.
This comprises 16649 million 2016 12707 million of inventories carried at fair value less costs of disposal and 5576 million 2016 4386 million carried at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Total readily marketable inventories includes 1559 million related to the relevant material associates and joint ventures see note 2 presented under the proportionate consolidation method comprising 1305 million of inventory carried at fair value less cost of disposal and 254 million carried at lower of cost or net realisable value.
Given the highly liquid nature of these inventories which represent a significant share of current assets the Group believes it is appropriate to consider them together with cash equivalents in analysing Group net debt levels and computing certain debt coverage ratios and credit trends.
Net fundingnet debt at 31 December 2017 US million
Proportionate adjustment Volcan
Noncurrent borrowings 24532 356 629 24259 Current borrowings 9402 1650 177 10875 Total borrowings 33934 2006 806 35134 Less cash and cash equivalents 2124 214 102 2236 Net funding 31810 1792 704 32898 Less Readily marketable inventories 20666 1559  22225 Net debt 11144 233 704 10673 Adjusted EBITDA 14762 Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA 0.72x Net fundingnet debt at 31 December 2016 US million
Proportionate adjustment
Noncurrent borrowings 23188 380 23568 Current borrowings 10030 1737 11767 Total borrowings 33218 2117 35335 Less cash and cash equivalents 2518 198 2716 Net funding 30700 1919 32619 Less Readily marketable inventories 15375 1718 17093 Net debt 15325 201 15526 Adjusted EBITDA 10268 Net debt to Adjusted EBITDA 1.51x Alternative performance measures continued 201 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
APMs derived from the statement of cash flows Capital expenditure Capex Capital expenditure is cash expenditure on property plant and equipment.
For internal reporting and analysis Capex includes related Proportionate adjustments.
See reconciliation table below.
US million 2017 2016 Capital expenditure  Marketing activities 214 182 Capital expenditure  Industrial activities 4020 3315 Capital expenditure 4234 3497 Proportionate adjustment  capital expenditure 611 407 Capital expenditure  reported measure 3623 3090 Funds from operations FFO and FFO to Net debt FFO is a measure that reflects our ability to generate cash for investment debt servicing and distributions to shareholders.
It comprises cash provided by operating activities before working capital changes less tax and net interest payments plus dividends received related Proportionate adjustments and Significant items mainly comprising movements in coal related marktomarket items.
In addition the relationship of FFO to net debt is an indication of our financial flexibility and strength.
See reconciliation table below.
2017 US million
Proportionate adjustment
Cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 11866  11866 Addback EBITDA of relevant material associates and joint ventures  2440 2440 Share in earnings from associates included in EBITDA  39 39 Adjusted cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 11866 2401 14267 Coal related hedging included above via statement of income  refer to note 2 225  225 Income taxes paid 921 451 1372 Interest received 106 8 114 Interest paid 1269 44 1313 Dividend received from associates and joint ventures 1081 996 85 Funds from operations FFO 10638 918 11556 Net debt 10673 FFO to Net debt 108.3% 2016 US million
Proportionate adjustment
Cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 7868  7868 Addback EBITDA of relevant material associates and joint ventures  1447 1447 Adjusted cash generated by operating activities before working capital changes 7868 1447 9315 Coal related hedging and legal costs included above via statement of income  refer to note 2 368  368 Income taxes paid 584 96 680 Interest received 111  111 Interest paid 1376 6 1382 Dividend received from associates and joint ventures 833 795 38 Funds from operations FFO 7220 550 7770 Net debt 15526 FFO to Net debt 50% 202 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Other reconciliations Available committed liquidity US million 2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents  reported 2124 2518 Proportionate adjustment  cash and cash equivalents 214 198 Headline committed syndicated revolving credit facilities 12760 14500 Amount drawn under syndicated revolving credit facilities 994 476 Amounts drawn under U.
Total 12874 16740 1 Presented on an adjusted measured basis.
Cash flow related adjustments 2017 US million
Proportionate adjustment
Funds from operations FFO 10638 918 11556 Working capital changes 4965 108 5073 Net cash used in acquisitions of subsidiaries Net cash received from disposal of subsidiaries Purchase of investments Proceeds from sale of investments Purchase of property plant and equipment 3586 605 4191 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment Margin receipts in respect of financing related hedging activities 1255  1255 Acquisition of additional interests in subsidiaries Return of capitaldistributions to noncontrolling interests 194  194 Disposal of own shares 17  17 Distributions paid to equity holders of the Parent 998  998 Coal related hedging 225  225 Cash movement in net funding 1803 184 1987 1 Cash flows related to capital efficient growth.
2 Cash flows related to disposals.
Cash flow related adjustments 2016 US million
Proportionate adjustment
Funds from operations FFO 7220 550 7770 Working capital changes excluding gold and silver streaming proceeds 2157 214 2371 Gold and silver streaming proceeds 971  971 Net cash received in acquisition of subsidiaries 176  176 Net cash received from disposal of subsidiaries 5535 233 5768 Purchase of investments 15 1 16 Proceeds from sale of investments 3  3 Purchase of property plant and equipment 3048 394 3442 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 128 8 136 Margin calls in respect of financing related hedging activities 695  695 Acquisition of additional interest in subsidiaries 7  7 Return of capitaldistributions to noncontrolling interests 91  91 Proceeds from own shares 3  3 Coal related hedging and legal costs 368  368 Cash movement in net funding 7655 182 7837 Other reconciliations 203 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Reconciliation of tax expense 2017 US million Total Adjusted EBIT presignificant items 8552 Net finance costs 1451 Adjustments for Net finance costs from material associates and joint ventures 74 Share of income from other associates presignificant items 127 Profit on a proportionate consolidation basis before tax and presignificant items 6900 Income tax expense presignificant items 1572 Adjustments for Tax expense from material associates and joint ventures 517 Tax expense on a proportionate consolidation basis 2089 Applicable tax rate 30.3% US million
Significant items tax
Tax expense on a proportionate consolidation basis 2089 187 2276 Adjustment in respect of material associates and joint ventures tax 517  517 Tax expense on the basis of the income statement 1572 187 1759 1 Represents the tax impact on current period significant items and tax significant items in their own right.
Reconciliation of tax expense 2016 US million Total Adjusted EBIT presignificant items 3930 Net finance costs 1533 Adjustments for Net finance costs from material associates and joint ventures 16 Net finance costs from discontinued operations Share of income from other associates presignificant items 10 Share of income from associates from discontinued operations Profit on a proportionate consolidation basis before tax and presignificant items 2286 Income tax expense presignificant items 362 Adjustments for Tax expense from material associates and joint ventures 248 Tax expense from discontinued operations Tax expense on a proportionate consolidation basis 741 Applicable tax rate 32.4% 1 See note 24 of the financial statements.
US million
Significant items tax
Tax expense on a proportionate consolidation basis 741 276 1017 Adjustment in respect of material associates and joint ventures tax 248  248 Adjustment in respect of discontinued operations 131  131 Tax expense on the basis of the income statement Represents the tax impact on current period significant items and tax significant items in their own right.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Production by quarter  Q4 2016 to Q4 2017 Metals and minerals Production from own sources  Total
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Copper kt 364.6 324.1 318.8 303.6 363.2 1309.7 1425.8 8 Gold koz 28tel262 1033 1027 1 7 Silver koz 10079 9295 10215 9298 8935 37743 39069 3 11 Ferrochrome kt 41tel424 1531 1523 1 2 Platinum koz  22 28 Palladium koz  23 20 Rhodium koz  19 Vanadium Pentoxide mlb 5.5 5.1 4.4 6.1 5.3 20.9 21.1 1 4 Production from own sources  Copper assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % African Copper Katanga Mutanda Mopani Katanga Copper metal kt     2.2 2.2  n. n.
Copper in concentrates kt     2.7 2.7  n. n.
Mutanda Copper metal kt 51.0 48.8 47.7 44.1 51.5 192.1 213.3 10 1
Mopani Copper metal kt 10.5 8.1 6.9 11.7 15.0 41.7 41.1 1 43 African Copper  total production including third party feed Mutanda Copper metal kt 51.0 48.8 51.7 45.1 53.2 198.8 213.3 7 4
Mopani Copper metal kt 28.4 21.9 12.5 23.7 40.8 98.9 110.0 10 44 Total Copper metal kt 61.5 56.9 54.6 55.8 68.7 236.0 254.4 7 12 Total Copper in concentrates kt     2.7 2.7  n. n.
Total Cobalt
Copper metal kt 0.3      2.1 100 100 Copper in concentrates kt 58.3 57.6 51.0 58.4 63.5 230.5 220.8 4 9 Silver in concentrates koz 76tel815 3103 3276 5 7
Copper in concentrates kt 33.2 30.3 40.0 37.2 35.1 142.6 145.5 2 6 Zinc in concentrates kt 26.7 24.5 34.5 34.5 34.6 128.1 66.8 92 30 Silver in concentrates koz 1607 1445 1882 1772 1480 6579 6778 3 8 205 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Metals and minerals Production from own sources  Copper assets continued
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Other South America Alumbrera Lomas Bayas Antapaccay Punitaqui Alumbrera Copper in concentrates kt 24.5 11.4 9.1 7.3 5.5 33.3 81.9 59 78 Gold in concentrates and in dor koz  27 46 Silver in concentrates and in dor koz  59 84 Lomas Bayas Copper metal kt 21.0 20.3 20.7 19.9 17.2 78.1 80.0 2 18 Antapaccay Copper in concentrates kt 55.6 46.4 50.1 47.3 62.7 206.5 219.9 6 13 Gold in concentrates koz Silver in concentrates koz 40tel446 1455 1536 5 11 Punitaqui Copper in concentrates kt 1.8 1.6 1.2 1.4 1.3 5.5 7.0 21 28 Gold in concentrates koz Silver in concentrates koz  27 54 Total Copper metal kt 21.0 20.3 20.7 19.9 17.2 78.1 80.0 2 18 Total Copper in concentrates kt 81.9 59.4 60.4 56.0 69.5 245.3 308.8 21 15 Total Gold in concentrates and in dor koz  9 16 Total Silver in concentrates and in dor koz 69tel501 1821 2366 23 28 Australia Mount Isa Ernest Henry Townsville Cobar Mount Isa Ernest Copper metal kt 56.1 48.5 42.5 27.0 46.6 164.6 205.1 20 17
Townsville Copper in concentrates kt    7.4 5.1 12.5  n. n.
Gold koz  22 20 Silver koz 34tel252 1096 1251 12 27 Silver in concentrates koz    38 23 61  n. n.
Mount Isa Ernest Henry Townsville  total production including third party feed Copper in concentrates kt    7.4 5.1 12.5  n. n.
Gold koz Silver koz 52tel253 1481 2271 35 52 Silver in concentrates koz    38 23 61  n. n.
Cobar Copper in concentrates kt 15.4 12.7 12.7 12.3 15.7 53.4 53.9 1 2 Silver in concentrates koz 15tel5 Total Copper in concentrates kt 15.4 12.7 12.7 19.7 20.8 65.9 53.9 22 35 Total Gold koz  22 20 Total Silver koz 49tel421 1721 1794 4 15 Total Copper department Copper kt 327.7 285.7 281.9 274.0 324.1 1165.7 1270.6 8 1 Gold koz 137 9tel415 468 11 17 Silver koz 3559 3071 3402 3534 3217 13224 14214 7 10 206 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Production by quarter  Q4 2016 to Q4 2017 continued Metals and minerals Production from own sources  Zinc assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs %
Lead in concentrates kt 1.5 2.3 1.6 0.8  4.7 15.2 69 100 Copper metal Gold koz 13tel Silver koz 1277 1152 1702 1591 1335 5780 4510 28 5 Silver in concentrates koz  72 76 Kazzinc  total production including third party feed Lead in concentrates kt 1.5 2.3 1.6 0.8  4.7 15.2 69 100 Gold koz 17tel Silver koz 6346 5572 6396 5201 5483 22652 27408 17 14 Silver in concentrates koz  72 76 Australia Mount Isa McArthur River Mount Isa Zinc in concentrates kt 75.3 68.7 64.0 51.3 42.0 226.0 288.2 22 44 Lead in concentrates kt 39.5 31.8 30.1 27.2 22.5 111.6 143.3 22 43 Silver in concentrates koz 2038 1658 1539 1251 1046 5494 7332 25 49 McArthur River Zinc in concentrates kt 62.9 46.9 38.2 45.6 79.3 210.0 200.2 5 26 Lead in concentrates kt 10.8 8.7 8.3 10.8 17.0 44.8 42.1 6 57 Silver in concentrates koz 29tel674 1620 1409 15 130 Total Zinc in concentrates kt 138.2 115.6 102.2 96.9 121.3 436.0 488.4 11 12 Total Lead in concentrates kt 50.3 40.5 38.4 38.0 39.5 156.4 185.4 16 21 Total Silver in concentrates koz 2331 1935 1808 1651 1720 7114 8741 19 26 North America Matagami Kidd Brunswick CEZ Refinery Matagami Zinc in concentrates kt 11.0 11.0 14.0 13.2 13.1 51.3 51.6 1 19 Copper in concentrates kt 1.8 2.0 2.1 1.3 2.0 7.4 9.7 24 11 Kidd Zinc in concentrates kt 22.2 24.0 22.2 11.4 14.8 72.4 78.5 8 33 Copper in concentrates kt 9.9 10.3 9.2 9.1 11.3 39.9 38.3 4 14 Silver in concentrates koz 67tel387 2271 2292 1 43 Total Zinc in concentrates kt 33.2 35.0 36.2 24.6 27.9 123.7 130.1 5 16 Total Copper in concentrates kt 11.7 12.3 11.3 10.4 13.3 47.3 48.0 1 14 Total Silver in concentrates koz 67tel387 2271 2292 1 43 North America  total production including third party feed
Smelter Lead metal kt 16.4 15.7 16.5 17.6 12.7 62.5 69.5 10 23 Silver metal koz 5048 4232 3480 5025 3689 16426 20764 21 27 CEZ Refinery Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Metals and minerals Production from own sources  Zinc assets continued
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Other Zinc South America Argentina Bolivia Peru Zinc in concentrates kt 22.5 24.9 26.3 23.0 25.6 99.8 99.0 1 14 Lead in concentrates kt 6.1 11.3 11.4 11.8 6.7 41.2 29.7 39 10 Copper in concentrates kt 0.5 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.3 3.4 2.1 62 160 Silver metal koz 20tel192 637 666 4 7 Silver in concentrates koz 1852 2081 2011 1764 1919 7775 7271 7 4 Other Zinc Africa Rosh Pinah Perkoa Zinc in concentrates kt 33.3 31.1 38.3 22.7  92.1 122.2 25 100 Lead in concentrates kt 1.4 0.9 1.5 1.3  3.7 7.2 49 100 Silver in concentrates koz  157 282 44 100 Total Zinc department Gold koz 13tel Silver koz 6422 6041 6670 5595 5560 23866 24231 2 13 South American production above excludes Volcan Compania Minera.
Owing to the recent timing of the share tender in Q4 2017 Glencore now has 63% of the voting shares and a 23% overall economic interest management is in preliminary stages of reviewing the operations and the associated reporting framework.
Therefore production data has been excluded which currently provides a more consistent comparative analysis.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Production by quarter  Q4 2016 to Q4 2017 continued Metals and minerals Production from own sources  Nickel assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Integrated Nickel Operations Sudbury Raglan Nikkelverk Nickel in concentrates kt 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.6 17 50 Copper metal kt 4.6 3.9 4.2 3.9 3.6 15.6 16.6 6 22 Copper in concentrates kt 7.7 9.0 5.6 8.0 5.4 28.0 34.6 19 30 Cobalt metal kt 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.8 1.0 20 33 Gold koz  14 13 Silver koz 9tel Platinum koz  17 Palladium koz  21 6 Rhodium koz   100 Integrated Nickel Operations  total production including third party feed Nickel in concentrates kt 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.6 0.7 14 Copper in concentrates kt 9.1 10.2 6.5 9.6 6.7 33.0 40.6 19 26 Cobalt metal kt 1.0 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.9 3.5 3.5  10 Gold koz  14 9 Silver koz 14tel232 976 994 2 65 Platinum koz  16 Palladium koz  17 12 Rhodium koz  13 Murrin Murrin Total Nickel metal kt 10.1 6.2 7.3 11.1 9.5 34.1 35.3 3 6 Total Cobalt metal kt 0.7 0.5 0.6 0.9 0.7 2.7 2.8 4 Murrin Murrin  total production including third party feed Total Nickel metal kt 13.2 8.2 9.5 13.0 11.3 42.0 46.0 9 14 Total Cobalt metal kt 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.9 0.8 3.0 3.2 6 Koniambo Nickel in ferronickel kt 4.1 4.6 3.4 4.3 5.2 17.5 13.6 29 27 Total Nickel department Gold koz  14 13 Silver koz 9tel Platinum koz  17 Palladium koz  21 6 Rhodium koz   100 209 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Metals and minerals Production from own sources  Ferroalloys assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs %
PGM
Platinum koz  29 69 Palladium koz  31 78 Rhodium koz  30 50 Gold koz    1  1 1  n.
4E koz  30 71
Pentoxide mlb 5.5 5.1 4.4 6.1 5.3 20.9 21.1 1 4 Total production  Custom metallurgical assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Copper Altonorte Pasar Horne CCR Zinc Portovesme San Juan de Nieva Nordenham Northfleet Lead metal kt 49.9 53.3 46.5 44.1 49.9 Silver koz 4270 3243 4222 2890 3301 13656 14845 8 23 1 Controlled industrial assets and joint ventures only.
Production is on a 100% basis except as stated.
2 Copper metal includes copper contained in copper concentrates and blister.
3 Cobalt contained in concentrates and hydroxides.
4 The Groups prorata share of Collahuasi production 44%.
5 The Groups prorata share of Antamina production 33.75%.
6 The Groups prorata share of CEZ production 25%.
7 The Groups attributable 79.5% share of the GlencoreMerafe Chrome Venture.
8 Consolidated 50% of Mototolo and 100% of the Groups PGM recovery plant.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Energy products Production from own sources  Coal assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Australian coking coal mt 1.7 1.7 1.0 1.8 1.6 6.1 5.3 15 6 Australian semisoft coal mt 1.1 1.0 1.2 1.0 0.8 4.0 4.2 5 27 Australian thermal coal export mt 14.7 12.8 13.4 11.2 11.7 49.1 52.5 6 20 Australian thermal coal domestic mt 1.0 1.6 1.7 1.6 2.6 7.5 5.6 34 160 South African thermal coal export mt 4.3 4.2 4.5 5.4 4.6 18.7 17.2 9 7 South African thermal coal domestic mt 3.1 2.6 2.2 2.7 2.5 10.0 12.1 17 19
Total Coal department mt 33.0 30.9 30.2 29.9 29.6 120.6 124.9 3 10 1 Controlled industrial assets and joint ventures only.
Production is on a 100% basis except for joint ventures where the Groups attributable share of production is included.
The Groups prorata share of Cerrejn production 33.3%.
Oil assets
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Glencore entitlement interest basis Equatorial Guinea kbbl 70tel574 2529 3629 30 19 Chad kbbl 77tel593 2524 3882 35 24 Total Oil department kbbl 1485 1365 1275 1246 1167 5053 7511 33 21 Gross basis Equatorial Guinea kbbl 3309 3249 3048 2896 2721 11914 16909 30 18 Chad kbbl 106tel810 3450 5308 35 24 Total Oil department kbbl 4372 4170 3914 3749 3531 15364 22217 31 19 Agricultural products Processingproduction data
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4tel
Change
2017 vs %
Q4 17 vs % Farming kt  55 55 Crushing kt 2333 1705 2075 2000 2285 8065 7680 5 2 Longterm toll agreement kt 1teln.
Biodiesel kt 21tel1 Rice milling kt  35 43 Wheat milling kt 24tel224 920 989 7 9 Sugarcane processing kt 746  1253 2302 1329 4884 3259 50 78 Total Agricultural products kt 3737 2355 4168 5181 4249 15953 14Reported on a 100% basis.
Production by quarter  Q4 2016 to Q4 2017 continued 211 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Resources and reserves The resource and reserve data in the following tables comprise summary extracts of the Glencore Resources and Reserves report as at 31 December 2017 as published on the Glencore website on 1 February 2018.
The Glencore Resources and Reserves report was publicly reported as appropriate for individual components in accordance with the 2012 edition of the Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves JORC Code the 2016 edition of the South African Code for Reporting of Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves SAMREC the Canadian Institute of Mining Metallurgy and Petroleum CIM Standards on Mineral Resources and Reserves 2014 edition and the Petroleum Resources Management System PRMS for reporting of oil and natural gas reserves and resources.
Data is reported as at 31 December 2017 unless otherwise noted.
For comparison purposes data for 2016 has been included.
Metric units are used throughout and all data is presented on a 100% asset basis with the exception of Oil assets which are shown on a working interest basis.
All tonnage information has been rounded to reflect the relative uncertainty in the estimates there may therefore be small differences in the totals.
Metals and minerals Copper Copper mineral resources Measured Mineral
Indicated Mineral
Measured and Indicated Resources
Mineral Resources Name of operation Commodityteltel 2017 2016 African copper Katanga Mt 16 1tel276 168 168 Copper % 3.58 3.58 3.60 3.66 3.60 3.66 3.79 3.78 Cobalt % 0.57 0.57 0.53 0.54 0.54 0.55 0.44 0.44 Mutanda Mt 25tel45telCopper % 1.36 1.52 1.11 1.10 1.24 1.33 0.71 0.81 Cobalt % 0.51 0.60 0.41 0.40 0.46 0.51 0.31 0.24 Mopani Mt Copper % 2.09 2.11 2.01 2.00 2.07 2.08 2.07 2.06 Cobalt % 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.10 Collahuasi Mt 934 859 4471 4263 5405 5122 4444 4853 Copper % 0.85 0.80 0.81 0.79 0.82 0.80 0.75 0.76 Molybdenum % 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 Antamina Mt 25tel1070 1085 1372 1247 Copper % 0.89 0.91 0.89 0.88 0.89 0.89 0.91 0.88 Zinc % 0.76 0.72 0.76 0.79 0.76 0.78 0.55 0.62 Silver gt Molybdenum % 0.024 0.025 0.020 0.019 0.021 0.021 0.020 0.018 Other South America Mt 651 701 2132 2195 2782 2896 838 886 Copper % 0.43 0.41 0.38 0.37 0.39 0.38 0.34 0.33 Australia Mt 11tel29telCopper % 1.82 1.89 1.37 1.37 1.54 1.58 1.1 1.1 Other projects Mt 534 534 1551 1551 2085 2085 2498 2537 El Pachon West Wall Copper % 0.67 0.67 0.51 0.51 0.55 0.55 0.44 0.44 Molybdenum % 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 212 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Copper ore reserves Proved Ore Reserves Probable Ore Reserves Total Ore Reserves Name of operation Commodityteltel African copper Katanga Mt 9 1tel125 Copper % 3.55 3.63 3.13 3.50 3.15 3.51 Cobalt % 0.55 0.41 0.51 0.53 0.51 0.52 Mutanda Mt Copper % 1.80 1.88 1.73 1.53 1.78 1.79 Cobalt % 0.69 0.74 0.59 0.65 0.66 0.72 Mopani Mt Copper % 1.91 1.90 1.97 1.95 1.92 1.91 Cobalt % 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 Collahuasi Mt 479 419 2740 2669 3220 3088 Copper % 1.14 1.08 0.89 0.87 0.93 0.90 Molybdenum % 0.023 0.025 0.024 0.023 0.024 0.023 Antamina Mt 18tel538 552 Copper % 0.97 1.01 0.89 0.92 0.92 0.95 Zinc % 0.89 0.82 1.00 1.10 0.96 1.01 Silver gt Molybdenum % 0.027 0.028 0.022 0.020 0.024 0.022 Other South America Mt 51tel1329 1365 Copper % 0.43 0.42 0.46 0.46 0.45 0.45 Silver gt 0.7 0.7 1.1 1.1 0.9 0.9 Australia Mt Copper % 2.16 2.25 1.48 1.38 1.66 1.59 Silver gt 2.3 2.2 0.4 0.5 0.9 0.9 Resources and reserves continued 213 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Metals and minerals Zinc Zinc mineral resources Measured Mineral
Indicated Mineral
Measured and Indicated Resources
Mineral Resources Name of operation Commodityteltel 2017 2016
Kazzinc Polymetallic Mt 90 87 97 9tel97 Zinc % 4.1 4.0 1.7 1.9 2.8 2.9 2.5 2 Lead % 1.5 1.5 0.5 0.6 1.0 1.0 1.2 1 Copper % 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Silver gt Gold gt 0.5 0.4 0.8 0.9 0.7 0.7 0.8 1 Kazzinc Gold Vasilkovskoye Mt .1 26
Mount Isa Mt 12tel48telZinc % 6.9 7.2 6.0 5.9 6.2 6.2 5 5 Lead % 4.2 4.5 3.2 3.1 3.4 3.5 3 3 Silver gt 81 87.
McArthur River Mt Zinc % 9.9 9.9 8.8 8.9 9.6 9.6 Lead % 4.6 4.6 4.0 4.1 4.5 4.5 Silver gt North America Zinc North America Mt 22.1 24.0 36.1 36.
Zinc % 4.3 4.32 4.7 4.7 4.6 4.6 3.7 3.7 Lead % 0.5 0.44 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Copper % 1.5 1.56 0.7 0.7 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.5 Silver gt 47 47.
Copper North America Mt 75 7tel330 120 120 Copper % 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 Zinc % 5.8 7.6 5.2 5.1 5.5 5.9 7.3 7.2 Lead % 2.0 3.0 1.8 1.8 1.9 2.2 1.3 1.0 Copper % 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.1 Silver gt 16tel Glencore Annual Report 2017 Resources and reserves continued Zinc ore reserves Proved Ore Reserves Probable Ore Reserves Total Ore Reserves Name of operation Commodityteltel
Kazzinc Polymetallic Mt Zinc % 3.9 3.9 4.3 4.8 4.0 4.1 Lead % 1.5 1.6 0.8 0.8 1.4 1.4 Copper % 0.2 0.1 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.2 Silver gt Gold gt 0.3 0.2 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.3 Kazzinc Gold Vasilkovskoye Mt 70.0 70.
Australia
Mount Isa Mt 26.3 22.
Zinc % 8.7 9.1 7.0 7.9 7.8 8.2 Lead % 4.3 4.8 3.2 3.8 3.8 4.1 Silver gt McArthur River Mt 70 71 44.1 45.2 114 117 Zinc % 10.6 10.6 7.4 7.4 9.3 9.4 Lead % 5.0 5.0 3.6 3.6 4.4 4.5 Silver gt North America Mt 6.3 7.7 4.1 4.8 10 12 Zinc % 4.1 4.2 6.4 6.2 5.0 5.0 Copper % 1.8 1.8 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.7 Silver gt Gold gt 0.04 0.1 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 Other Zinc Mt 5.5 4.0 10.9 10.2 16.5 14.2 Zinc % 5.2 5.8 4.3 4.9 5.5 5.2 Lead % 2.0 3.2 1.4 1.5 1.9 2.0 Copper % 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 Silver gt 12tel122 152 215 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Metals and minerals Nickel Nickel mineral resources Measured Mineral
Indicated Mineral
Measured and Indicated Resources
Mineral Resources Name of operation Commodityteltel 2017 2016 Nickel % 2.65 2.58 2.61 2.75 2.62 2.70 1.8 2.1 Copper % 1.28 1.44 1.81 0.99 1.66 1.14 1.8 2.4 Cobalt % 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.1 0.1 Nickel % 1.00 0.97 0.99 0.98 1.00 0.97 0.9 0.9 Cobalt % 0.074 0.071 0.084 0.078 0.078 0.073 0.07 0.06 Nickel % 2.49 2.50 2.40 2.44 2.42 2.46 2.5 2.5 Kabanga Nickel % 2.49 2.49 2.72 2.72 2.63 2.63 2.6 2.6 Copper % 0.34 0.34 0.36 0.36 0.35 0.35 0.3 0.3 Cobalt % 0.21 0.21 0.19 0.19 0.20 0.20 0.2 0.2 Nickel ore reserves Proved Ore Reserves Probable Ore Reserves Total Ore Reserves Name of operation Commodityteltel Nickel % 2.03 2.02 2.39 2.59 2.27 2.29 Copper % 1.15 1.46 0.92 0.73 1.00 1.10 Cobalt % 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 Murrin Murrin Mt 85.5 183.7 18.9 54.2 104.3 237.9 Nickel % 1.04 0.94 1.06 0.92 1.05 0.94 Cobalt % 0.080 0.064 0.077 0.061 0.079 0.064 Nickel % 2.30 2.30 2.22 2.28 2.25 2.29 216 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Resources and reserves continued Metals and minerals Ferroalloys Ferroalloys mineral resources Measured Mineral
Indicated Mineral
Measured and Indicated Resources
Mineral Resources Name of operation Commodityteltel 2017 2016 Cr 2O3 % 42.09 42.11 41.4 41.4 41.7 41.7 42 42 Cr2O3 % 40.32 40.33 40.4 40.2 40.3 40.3 38 38 V2O5 % 0.48 0.48 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 3PGE  Gold gt 4.21 3.89   4.2 3.9 SiO2 % Ferroalloys ore reserves Proved Ore Reserves Probable Ore Reserves Total Ore Reserves Name of operation Commodityteltel Western Chrome Mines Mt 18.477 17.157 7.37 8.11 25.84 25.26 Cr2O3 % 31.00 31.13 28.4 28.1 30.4 30.2 Eastern Chrome Mines Mt 27.050 25.517 9.09 8.15 36.14 33.66 Cr2O3 % 35.00 33.72 35.9 34.2 35.2 33.8 V2O5 % 0.47 0.47 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 3PGE  Gold gt 4.02 3.58   4.0 3.6 Silica Mt   1.70 2.05 1.70 2.05 SiO2 % Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Metals and minerals Iron Ore Iron ore mineral resources Measured Mineral
Indicated Mineral
Measured and Indicated Resources
Mineral Resources Name of operation Commodityteltel 2017 2016 El Aouj Mining Company S.
Mt 470 470 1435 1435 1905 1905 2520 2520 Iron % Sphere Mauritania S.
Mt 21tel40telAskaf Iron % Sphere Lebtheinia S.
Mt   2180 2180 2180 2180 560 560 Iron %   Jumelles Limited Mt 2300 2300 2500 2500 4800 4800 2100 2100 Zanaga Iron % Iron ore reserves Proved Ore Reserves Probable Ore Reserves Total Ore Reserves Name of operation Commodityteltel El Aouj Mining Company S.
Iron % Jumelles Limited Mt 770 770 1290 1290 2070 2070 Zanaga Iron % Energy products Coal Coal resources
Coal Resources
Coal Resources
Coal Resources Name of operation Commodityteltel
New South Wales CokingThermal Coal Mt 3002 3145 3079 2943 6011 5211 Queensland CokingThermal Coal Mt 3008 3033 3851 3685 8370 8030 South Africa Thermal Coal Mt 2475 2895 844 1136 355 435 Prodeco Thermal Coal Mt 22tel70 70 Cerrejn Thermal Coal Mt 3150 3000 1050 1250 700 650 Canada projects Suska Sukunka CokingThermal Coal Mt 45 4tel130 218 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Resources and reserves continued Coal reserves Coal Reserves
Coal Reserves Total Marketable Coal Reserves Proved Probable Proved Probable Name of operation Commodityteltel
New South Wales Thermal Coal Mt 77tel715 780 Coking Coal Mt Queensland Thermal Coal Mt 88tel1134 1152 Coking Coal Mt South Africa Thermal Coal Mt 71tel595 646 Prodeco Thermal Coal Mt Cerrejn Thermal Coal Mt Energy products Oil Net reserves Proven and Probable Working Interest Basis Equatorial Guinea Chad Cameroon Total Oil mmbbl Gas bcf Oil mmbbl Gas bcf Oil mmbbl Gas bcf Oil mmbbl Gas bcf
31 December 2016 13  152    165  165 Revisions 7 146 53    46 146 21 Discoveries     3  3  3 Production 3  3    6  6 31 December  3  116 146 141 Net contingent resources 2C Working Interest Basis Equatorial Guinea Chad Cameroon Total Oil mmbbl Gas bcf Oil mmbbl Gas bcf Oil mmbbl Gas bcf Oil mmbbl Gas bcf
31 December  18  52 530 143 Revisions 2 76 52  3  47 76 34 Divestments     11  11  11 31 December  4  Net reserves or resources are equivalent to Glencores working interest in the assetproperty.
Glencore Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report
Financial
Statements
Additional
Information
Shareholder information Glencore plc is registered in Jersey with headquarters in Switzerland and operations around the world.
Headquarters
Baarermattstrasse 3
Box 777 CH6341 Baar
Registered Office Queensway House Hilgrove Street St Helier
JE1 1 ES The Company has a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange LSE and a secondary listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange JSE.
Share registrars Jersey for London listing Computershare Investor Services Jersey Limited Queensway House Hilgrove Street St Helier Jersey JE1 1ES Channel Islands
44 0tel
Computershare Investor Services Pty Ltd 70 Marshall Street
2001 South Africa
27 0 Enquiries Corporate Services Glencore plc Baarermattstrasse 3
Box 777 CH6341 Baar
Tel.
41tel Fax 41tel email 220 Glencore Annual Report 2017 Important notice regarding compilation of report Important notice concerning this document including forward looking statements This document contains statements that are or may be deemed to be forwardlooking statements which are prospective in nature.
These forwardlooking statements may be identified by the use of forwardlooking terminology or the negative thereof such as outlook plans expects or does not expect is expected continues assumes is subject to budget scheduled estimates aims forecasts risks intends positioned predicts anticipates or does not anticipate or believes or variations of such words or comparable terminology and phrases or statements that certain actions events or results may could should shall would might or will be taken occur or be achieved.
Such statements are qualified in their entirety by the inherent risks and uncertainties surrounding future expectations.
Forwardlooking statements are not based on historical facts but rather on current predictions expectations beliefs opinions plans objectives goals intentions and projections about future events results of operations prospects financial condition and discussions of strategy.
By their nature forwardlooking statements involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties many of which are beyond Glencores control.
Forward looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and may and often do differ materially from actual results.
Important factors that could cause these uncertainties include but are not limited to those discussed in the Principal Risk and Uncertainties section on page 42.
Neither Glencore nor any of its associates or directors officers or advisers provides any representation assurance or guarantee that the occurrence of the events expressed or implied in any forwardlooking statements in this document will actually occur.
You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forwardlooking statements which only speak as of the date of this document.
Other than in accordance with its legal or regulatory obligations including under the UK Listing Rules and the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority and the Rules Governing the Listing of Securities on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited and the Listing Requirements of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange Limited Glencore is not under any obligation and Glencore and its affiliates expressly disclaim any intention obligation or undertaking to update or revise any forward looking statements whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise.
This document shall not under any circumstances create any implication that there has been no change in the business or affairs of Glencore since the date of this document or that the information contained herein is correct as at any time subsequent to its date.
No statement in this document is intended as a profit forecast or a profit estimate and no statement in this document should be interpreted to mean that earnings per Glencore share for the current or future financial years would necessarily match or exceed the historical published earnings per Glencore share.
This document does not constitute or form part of any offer or invitation to sell or issue or any solicitation of any offer to purchase or subscribe for any securities.
The making of this document does not constitute a recommendation regarding any securities.
The companies in which Glencore plc directly and indirectly has an interest are separate and distinct legal entities.
In this document Glencore Glencore group and Group are used for convenience only where references are made to Glencore plc and its subsidiaries in general.
These collective expressions are used for ease of reference only and do not imply any other relationship between the companies.
Likewise the words we us and our are also used to refer collectively to members of the Group or to those who work for them.
These expressions are also used where no useful purpose is served by identifying the particular company or companies.
This report is printed on UPM Fine SC which is FSC certified as well as having ISO14001 EMS EMAS and the European
Printed in the UK by Pureprint who are a company.
Both manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO 14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council FSC chainofcustody certified.
If you have finished with this document and no longer wish to retain it please pass it on to other interested readers or dispose of it in your recycled paper waste.
Thank you.
Designed and produced by Glencore plc Baarermattstrasse 3 CH6340 Baar
