Strategic Report IDH at a Glance Highlights in 2017 Financial and Operational Performance A Note from Our Chairman A Note from Our CEO
Markets
IDHs Competitive Strengths and Business Model Our Healthcare Systems Our Business Model Internationally Accredited Test Portfolio 30
Strategy
Principal Risks Uncertainties and Their Mitigation
Financial Review
Corporate Responsibility Corporate Governance Board of Directors Corporate Governance
Audit Committee
Remuneration Committee
Directors Report Financial Statements Cont Ent S TABl E OF Strategic
IDH is wellpositioned with trusted brands strong supplier relationships and a proven assetlight business model to deliver highquality medical diagnostics to the Middle East and Africa regions Strategic Report
Integrated Diagnostics Holdings IDH the Group or the Company is a leading consumer healthcare com pany with operations in Egypt Jordan Sudan and Nigeria.
A long track record for quality and safety has earned the Group a trusted reputation as well as internationally recognised accreditations for its portfolio of over 1400 diagnostics tests.
From its base of 383 branches as of 31 December 2017 the Company will continue to add labo ratories through a Hub Spoke and Spike business model that provides a scalable platform for efficient expansion.
Beyond organic growth IDHs expansion plans include acquisitions in new Middle Eastern and African markets where its model is wellsuited to capitalise on similar healthcare and consumer trends and capture a significant share of underpenetrated and highlyfragmented markets.
Notably in early 2018 the Group expanded its geographic footprint with an investment in Nigeria Africas largest and most populous country.
IDH has been a Jerseyregistered entity with a Standard Listing on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange since May 2015.
39 years 1400 26 mn 6.4 mn track record at the subsidiary level internationally accredited diagnostic tests offered tests completed across the Group in 2017 operational branch labs as at 31 December 2017 patients served across the Group in 2017 key brands with strong awareness in underserved markets As at January 2018.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 4 egp 1514 mn egp 384 mn vs.
US 0.14 in 2016 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 5 Strategic Report Highlights of 2017 rose 16% to EGP 540 million compared with EGP 466 million in 2016 also constrained by postdevaluation inflationary pressures. reflecting highly effective management of excess cash.
Operating profit Interest income to 383 in 2017 from 354 in 2016 represented 8% annual unit growth. per share equivalent to US 21 million in total in 2016.
Expansion of branch network Recommended final dividend increased 29% to EGP 1514 million in 2017 from EGP 1 171 million in 2016 driven by a combination of better pricing favourable currency translation and higher volumes. following the November 2016 floatation of the Egyptian pound.
Revenues Gross profit grew 18% to EGP 602 million from EGP 511 million in 2016 despite higher raw material costs as well as higher rent and utilities expenses.
267 million in 2016 benefiting from increased interest income and a lower foreign exchange loss.
EBITDA
Net profit of EGP 2.49 compared with EGP 1.74 in 2016. million in 2016.
Earnings per share Net foreign exchange loss to 383 in 2017 from 354 in 2016 represented 8% annual unit growth.
Earnings per share
Expansion of branch network EBITDA is calculated as operating profit EGP 540 million plus depreciation EGP 62 million and amortisation nil.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 6 Egypt
Sudan
Nigeria our Brands In Egypt IDHs largest market the Groups core brands include Al Borg and Al Mokhtabar each of which is wellknown and enjoys a loyal fol lowing.
In Jordan the Company op erates Biolab in Sudan Ultralab and Al Mokhtabar Sudan and in Nigeria
IDH offers more than 1400 diagnos tic pathology tests ranging from basic blood glucose tests for diabetes to advanced molecular testing for genetic disorders.
IDHs geographic platform has expand ed to include four countries across the Middle East and Africa including Egypt Sudan Jordan and Nigeria
Microbiology
Haematology
Endocrinology Clinical Chemistry Molecular Biology Cytogenetics Histopathology
As at January 2018.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 7 Strategic Report Financial and Operational
Indicator units 2017 2016
Number of Tests mn 25.7 24.1 Number of Patients mn 6.4 Number of Labs  383 354 Tests per Patient  4.03 4.16
Revenue EGP mn 1514 1171 Per Patient EGP 238 Per Test EGP 59.0 Per Lab EGP mn 4.0 EBITDA EGP mn 602 Net Profit EGP mn 384 Earnings per share EGP 2.49 EBITDA is calculated as operating profit EGP 540 million plus depreciation EGP 62 million and amortisation nil.
Revenue by Geography 2017 and 2016 Egypt 83% Jordan 14% Sudan 3% Egypt 83% Jordan 14% Sudan 3% % of total revenue in 2016 % of total revenue in 2017 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 8 IDH delivered strong operational and financial results in the year ended 31 December 2017 despite macroeconomic challenges in particular high inflation  in sharp contrast to many consumer names in Egypt Revenue by t ype in 2017 and 2016 Egypt 83% Jordan 14% Sudan 3% Walk in 39% Contract 61% Walk in 39% Contract 61% Egypt 83% Jordan 14% Sudan 3% % of total revenue in 2016 % of total revenue in 2017 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 9 Strategic Report A Note from Our Chairman In 2017 your Company delivered very encouraging op erational and financial performance despite the ongo ing macroeconomic challenges in our primary market.
We also expanded our footprint in Africa in early 2018 with a key strategic investment in Nigeria that will broaden our diagnostic services suite beyond pathology to include radiology.
We have seen more sustainable macroeconomic stability in Egypt.
Whilst inflationary pressures persist the Gov ernment has been implementing a robust programme of reforms that has resulted in stronger economic growth and led to increased foreign direct investment with the improvement in general confidence.
The Central Bank of Egypt CBEs floatation of the Egyptian pound in Novem ber 2016 with the ensuing lifting of capital controls has freed up the foreign exchange market thus improving the ease of doing business in the country.
Despite the ongoing inflationary headwinds IDH main tained both our profit margins and market share.
The wellentrenched strength of our brands and supplier relationships enabled our management to successfully execute our business model.
We are naturally delighted by the recovery in our stock price.
Your management are constantly seeking to consolidate and maintain the prof itability of the business with the provision of additional valueadded services.
With our longestablished presence in Egypt together with our loyal patient base we have built a considerable base of patient data whilst at all times maintaining strict confidentiality and privacy.
We remain committed to fulfilling our business strategy through expanding our geographical footprint in other countries both in Africa and in the Middle East.
We are delighted by the growth and strength of our subsidiaries in Jordan and Sudan which have successfully implemented our business model.
With the lifting of longstanding US sanctions on Sudan the outlook for that country has im proved markedly.
We remain committed to fulfilling our business strategy through expanding our geographical footprint  both in Africa and in the Middle East IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 10 With Nigeria having by far the largest population in Africa we are keen to expand our presence in that country.
We shall be building on our recent investment in EchoScan a network of radiology and diagnostic laboratories that has provided us with an attractive entry point into the country.
With its fragmented and largely unestablished healthcare services market we see huge potential for fu ture growth to match our successful track record in Egypt.
We are proud to be investing in Nigeria alongside Man Capital LLC and the IFC.
We are very cognisant that as we expand the geographical reach of our emerging market platform we must maintain our high standards of operational excellence and ensure that our balance sheet remains strong and resilient.
In
2017 we also focused on strengthening our senior finan cial management team and this year we will undertake a comprehensive review of all aspects of our human resources management so as to entrench and ensure sustainable performance at all levels of the organisation.
We are at an advanced stage in building and completing our new corporate headquarters in Cairo where consoli dating our offices will greatly facility the daily interaction of our staff.
In conclusion your Board and management are com mitted to maintaining strong corporate governance and promoting corporate social responsibility whilst under pinning our business model with the highest standards of accountability and transparency thus fulfilling the expectations of our shareholders.
Lord St John of Bletso
20 March 2018 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 11 Strategic Report A Note from Our CEO Fellow shareholders In 2017 IDH again delivered superior operational and financial performance despite ongoing macroeconomic challenges in Egypt our largest market.
We have also ex panded our geographic reach with an investment in Nigeria in early 2018 adding a fourth country to our platform.
We close the year as a leading consumer healthcare com pany in the Middle East and Africa.
Our proven business model allowed us to deliver revenue growth of 29% in 2017 reflecting our ability to deliver highquality medical diagnostic services to more than six million patients as measured by 26 million tests.
We now look to sustain that performance thanks to our presence in Egypt and Nigeria two of Africas largest and most populous countries as well as our operations in Jordan and Sudan.
Strong operational and Financial performance Our revenues were very strong throughout the 2017 year increasing 29% yearonyear to EGP 1514 million.
Whilst patient and test volumes gained 9% and 7% respectively the power of the Groups brands and the favourable impact of our tactical marketing campaigns can be seen most clearly in the recovery in volumes that is under way in our highermargin walkin patient category.
Walkin patient revenues grew 29% periodonperiod as patient volumes rose 2% compared with a yearearlier decrease of 4% and test volumes rose 7% versus a 2% yearago decline.
Understanding that protracted high inflation in Egypt has had the most significant impact on our patients who pay for their own healthcare we have developed our market ing programs to target them with a strong health aware ness message in combination with a compelling value component.
This includes offering bundled diagnostic test packages for lifestylerelated diseases and chronic health conditions an inhouse point redemption system and bank partnerships for more affordable payment plans.
Moreover in recognition of the pressures being felt by all our patients We enter 2018 in a strong financial position with an underleveraged and highly cashgenerative balance sheet that provides us with strategic flexibility IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 12 our price increases have been significantly below the high rates of inflation caused by the November 2016 devaluation of the Egyptian pound.
The brand equity we have built over many years has translated into strong loyalty among the millions of patients who came to know and trust us long before facing the current inflationary pressures.
We continued to expand our geographic footprint in 2017 bringing our total network of laboratories to 383 with 8% annual unit growth.
We opened 23 new branches in Egypt four in Jordan and two in Sudan.
It is noteworthy that our subsidiaries in both Jordan and Sudan continued their steady growth last year together contributing 17% of consolidated sales and 9% of consolidated EBITDA last year.
In Sudan the recent lifting of longstanding US sanc tions marked an important milestone signalling an end to the countrys economic isolation and paving the way for a brighter economic future.
IDH delivered EBITDA growth of 18% yearonyear to EGP 602 million  despite shouldering additional corporate expense burdens that accompanied the implementation of Egypts muchneeded macroeconomic reforms.
Beyond the lingering inflationary impact of the devaluation of the Egyptian pound the higher costs of rent transportation and utilities were all pressure points as was the value added tax imposed in July 2016 and increased to 14% from 13% in July 2017.
The effect of higher interest rates has been doubleedged as higher interest income on the large cash balances we carry on our balance sheet was partially offset by rising interest expenses on our mediumterm debt.
Our bottom line did benefit from a substantially lower foreign exchange loss this year than last helping net profit to rise 44% periodonperiod to EGP 384 million.
As IDH maintains internationalquality accreditations to ensure bestinclass service we are honoured to have been awarded the certification for our Cairo Mega Lab from the College of American Pathologists CAP widely considered the leader in laboratory quality assurance globally.
The international accreditation of our Mega Lab constructs a competitive barrier to entry to our markets and as importantly imparts an assurance of quality and safety that engenders strong loyalty among our valued corporate as well as individual customers.
IDH operates the only laboratory in Egypt with the dis tinguished CAP accreditation.
In sum our Company stayed the course last year relying on the fundamental strength of our brands and sharply focused on deploying our assetlight model.
We have suc cessfully managed to contain our costs whilst at the same time upholding our highquality standards Companywide and maintaining our high patient and physician satisfac tion levels.
By doing so we were able to both protect our margins and increase our market share in 2017.
In marked contrast to many consumer names in Egypt IDH has been able to successfully drive volumes and pass on selected price increases postdevaluation.
Beyond the insulation provided by the inherently defensive nature of the healthcare industry I believe it is also very much a testament of our trusted brands.
We enter 2018 in a strong financial position with an underleveraged and highly cashgenerative balance sheet that provides us with strategic flexibility.
Macroeconomic progress in our Largest Market There is welcome evidence that Egypt representing 83% of our 2017 revenues is turning the economic corner.
Last year demonstrable progress was seen regarding the imple mentation of reforms to stabilise the countrys finances as well as promote growth and employment.
With the floatation of the Egyptian pound in November 2016 the foreign exchange market has normalised and IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 13 Strategic Report the parallel market has been eliminated.
After losing more than 50% of its value in 2016 the Egyptian pound closed the 2017 year at 17.67 per US 1.00 down only slightly from 18.00 at 2016 year end.
Among other reforms the govern ment also began a gradual reduction of energy subsidies with some of the resources reallocated to strengthening the social safety net.
As a consequence of the sharp devaluation of the cur rency as well as the new energy policy however inflation has remained high.
In December 2017 headline inflation stood at 21.9% after peaking at 33% in July.
To address this extreme inflationary pressure the Central Bank of Egypt CBE has adopted tight monetary policy with aggressive interest rate hikes in May and July of 2017.
The Govern ment of Egypt expects headline inflation to fall to 1013% by the end of 2018 whilst the consensus forecast among analysts appears to be 1314% at midyear.
Expanding 0ur Geographic Footprint in Africa I am also pleased to report that in early 2018 we added Nigeria to our geographic footprint as a onestop shop diagnostics services provider.
We have accomplished this by forming a joint venture with Man Capital LLC the Londonbased investment arm of the Mansour Group called Dynasty Holding Group.
Dynasty is 51% owned and controlled by IDH and together with Man Capital we are very pleased to have partnered with the International Finance Corporation to invest in Eagle Eye EchoScan
EchoScan is a leading medical diagnostics business in Nigeria with all of the licenses it requires to operate and expand on a national scale in Africas most populous country.
The strategic rationale for making Nigeria the fourth country on our regional platform is compelling.
Nigerias diagnostic services market is very large highly fragmented and underpenetrated offering significant opportunities for growth and economies of scale.
As importantly it shares many similarities with Egypts market in the 1980s and 1990s in terms of structure pace of development and the emerging disease profile of patients.
Dynasty and the IFC have committed to invest significant capital in EchoScan over the next four years.
Dynasty has acquired a majority stake in EchoScan and assumed management control of the company whilst both Dynasty and the IFC will invest US 25 million to expand Echo Scans diagnostics network service offerings and quality standards.
I am especially pleased that we will be joining forces with Man Capital an organisation that matches our more than four decades of operating experience in the industry with similarly long experience working on the ground in West Africa.
We will continue to look beyond Egypt to accelerate our longterm growth through strategic acquisitions.
Consist ent with our aim to make modern medical diagnostics more accessible to the most resourcepoor populations we are eager to begin our work in Nigeria.
Diagnostic test ing is becoming even more essential to quality healthcare and we want to play a central role in improving health outcomes in all of our emerging markets.
In particular I believe we have a unique longterm opportunity to replicate our historical growth in Egypt by applying our extensive knowledge and experience to unlock the same potential in Nigeria.
IDH is pleased to propose paying a final dividend of US 0.16 sixteen US cents per share or US 24 million in aggregate to shareholders in respect of the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
This represents an increase of 14% compared to a final dividend of US 0.14 fourteen US cents or US 21 million in aggregate the previous financial year.
In view of the strong cashgenerative nature of our busi ness and its assetlight strategy our dividend policy is to return to shareholders the maximum amount of excess cash after taking careful account of the cash needed to support operations capital expenditure plans organic expansion opportunities and potential acquisitions.
2018 outlook The fundamentals of our inherently countercyclical healthcare industry remain sound.
We are well posi tioned with our strong brands and geographic position ing to capitalise on the structural drivers that support future growth in medical diagnostic services including IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 14 large rapidlygrowing populations a high prevalence of lifestylerelated medical conditions and a growing health consciousness in our emerging markets.
We are looking forward to moving to our new corporate headquarters in 2018 which is located in Smart Village a corporate office park in the city of Sixth of October slightly west of Cairo.
Our new headquarters will consolidate all of the offices we have been occupying in the city core into one building with sufficient space for the entire organisa tion making daytoday interaction much more efficient.
We are keen to begin the process of integrating our new Nigerian operations having determined our first priori ties.
We will implement the policies and procedures that underpin the strong IDH corporate organisation starting with the establishment of an IT infrastructure that fully connects and controls all EchoScan branches as well as a Human Resource structure that taps into the Groups highlyqualified and experienced staff to apply the Groups standards of efficiency to the Nigerian operations.
We look to the coming year with optimism that in our largest market of Egypt the economy will continue to gather strength characterised by an easing in inflation and some appreciation in the currency.
The fundamental strength of our brands and our solid relationships with our suppliers make it possible for us to successfully execute our scalable assetlight business model  even under difficult operating conditions such as those we faced in 2016 and 2017.
Accordingly we guide our val ued shareholders to once again expect annual revenue growth of 20% and an EBITDA margin of c.
40%.
I would like to thank our Board management team and employees for their dedication and commitment and our shareholders for their continued support.
I am honoured to have you with us on this journey as a rapidlygrowing consumer healthcare company across the Middle East and Africa.
Dr.
Hend ElSherbini
Chief Executive Officer
20 March 2018 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 15 Strategic Report
Markets
Egypt  our Largest Market The Egyptian diagnostics industry can be broadly divided into public and private sector infrastructure with the latter including both labs attached to private hospitals and inde pendent standalone labs chains and single labs.
According to the Boston Consulting Group BCG IDH is the largest fullyintegrated private sector diagnostics service provider with more than 50% share by revenue of the private chain market in Egypt.
Whilst the countercyclical nature of the healthcare system in Egypt has been challenged by ongoing difficult macro economic conditions powerful structural growth drivers continue to support future growth in diagnostic services With the countrys population crossing the 100 mil lion mark in 2017 Egypt is the most populous country in the Middle East North Africa MENA region in terms of demographics it hosts a significant propor tion of elderly people.
The population is marked by a high disease burden with high prevalence of both communicable and noncommunicable diseases tropical diseases and lifestyle diseases such as diabetes.
There is a rising prevalence of diseases commanding high test volumes indicating an expanding need gap compared with more developed markets.
There is ample opportunity to increase the usage of laboratory diagnostics as a tool in clinical practice the awareness of which will be raised with higher penetration of health insurance and improved cogni sance of preventive healthcare.
Most labs in Egypt are concentrated in big cities there is still substantial room to increase accessibility to lab services by adding branches in all of the countrys 29 governorates for greater coverage of the population.
The corporate market is emerging as a driver for di agnostic services as more companies offer healthcare coverage to their employees.
IDH is in a strong competitive position in the Egyptian diagnostic industry having created formidable barriers to entry with its 39year track record trusted brands scalable business model and network of 340 branch labs at 2017 year end.
This has been achieved by IDHs accreditations which underscore the high quality and safety of its testing capabilities are key to attracting patients.
In February 2018 the Groups central Mega Lab in Cairo earned the distinguished certification of The College of American Pathologists
The Mega Lab inaugurated in 2015 replaced two smaller independent  A labs that were also CAP certified.
IDHs longestablished brands have trusted reputa tions that have engendered strong patient loyalty.
With a wide geographic presence IDH is well po sitioned to cater to the fragmented nature of the regional market.
IDH has a strong relationship with key stakeholders such as physicians patients and hospitals.
In 2017 revenues in Egypt increased 22% yearonyear to EGP 1251 million driven by higher volumes as well as selected price increases.
Contract revenues gained 24% whilst revenues in the walkin category rose 19%.
EBITDA grew 14% yearonyear to EGP 547 million with an associ ated EBITDA margin of 44% versus 47%.
Egypt is the Com panys largest market contributing 83% of total revenues and 91% of total EBITDA in 2017.
Last year IDH treated 9% more patients and performed 5% more tests in Egypt.
At 2017 year end there were 340 branch labs in Egypt 7% more than a year earlier.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 16 On our way to realising our full po tential as a leading consumer health care company in the Middle East and Africa we are pleased to have added Nigeria Africas largest and most populous country to our geographic footprint in early 2018 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 17 Jordan Strategic Report Jordan has one of the most modern health care infrastructures in the Mid dle East.
Whilst medical services re main highly concentrated in Amman c.
70% of Jordanians have medical insurance.
Notably medical laborato ries must abide by the price list that was issued by the Jordanian Ministry of Health in 2008 which has not since changed.
Consequently Biolabs strat egy is to expand its range of checkup packages offered thereby increasing the number of tests per patient.
In
2017 Biolab performed c.
1.5 million tests for c.
242000 patients generat ing 6.2 average testsperpatient com pared with 6.1 in 2016.
Unlike Al Borg and Al Mokhtabar in Egypt Biolab does not operate a Hub Spoke and Spike business model.
Whilst Biolabs 18 central labs perform many of the 1000 pathology tests offered four that are considered spe cialty labs perform particular types of tests including but not limited to haematology endocrinology immu nochemistry parasitology oncology transfusion medicine molecular genet ics and antenatal diagnostics and gene sequencing.
Furthermore Biolab does not share purchasing supply and lo gistics IT marketing or sales functions with its Egyptian parent company.
In 2017 Biolab signed a joint venture agreement with Georgiabased EVEX Medical Corporation to establish the largest medical laboratory among West Asian countries which will be located in Tbilsi.
This 4000square metre facility will connect more than 40 hospitals and diagnostic centres that are part of the EVEX network.
EVEX Medical Corporation is the largest chain of hospitals in Georgia currently operating 78 clinics in six regions of the country.
The agreement between Biolab and EVEX has two components i the implementation of Biolabs technological platforms and laboratory information manage ment systems LIMS at EVEX and ii taking the Mega Lab through the Joint Commission International JCI accreditation within two years of the laboratorys expected launch date.
The new laboratory is expected to open in the second half of 2018 with initial installations and connectiv ity as well as the training of quality control officers in both Jordan and Georgia completed.
All tests that are not performed in Georgia will be referred to Biolab in Jordan.
In 2017 revenues from operations in Jordan increased 94% to EGP 218 mil lion in large part due to the favorable impact of translating Jordanian di nars  JOD into Egyptian pounds.
The subsidiary did perform well however notably achieving a 14% revenue gain in local currency.
Patient and test volumes were both strong rising 12% and 13% respectively.
Whilst EBITDA grew 71% yearonyear to EGP 41 mil lion higher salary and rental costs associated with the opening of four new branches in 2017 pressured the EBITDA margin by c.
200 basis points to 19%.
Jordan contributed 14% of 2017 revenues 2016 10% and 7% of EBITDA 2016 5%.
At 2017 year end there were 18 branch labs in Jordan 4% more than a year earlier.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT in revenues in 2017 for 94% yoy growth branch laboratories offer 1000 pathology tests egp mn IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 19 Strategic Report
IDH operates under two brand names in Sudan Ultralab and Al Mokhtabar
Al Borg acquired a majority interest in Ultralabs in 2011 whilst Al Mokhtabar Sudan had been es tablished in 2010 prior to the Groups acquisition of Al Mokhtabar in Egypt.
While Al Mokhtabar Sudan operates independently Ultralab shares pur chasing supply and logistics and IT functions with the Companys Egyp tian operations.
Sudan has endured social conflict civil war and with the 2011 seces sion of South Sudan the loss of c.
75% of the oil production that had underpinned the countrys economic growth since 1999 and had been its main source of foreign currency.
The government had been struggling to restabilise the economy pressured further by international sanctions imposed by the US and others.
In October 2017 the US decided to lift a host of sanctions imposed 20 years ago that included a comprehensive trade embargo a freeze on govern ment assets and tight restrictions on financial institutions dealing with the country.
The subsequent weak ening of the Sudanese pound SDG resulted in the governments January 2018 devaluation of the currency a necessary step toward growth and investment.
Meanwhile the lifting of longstanding sanctions is an important milestone for the people and businesses of Sudan signaling an end to the countrys economic isolation and a renewal of interest among Western investors eager to enter the region.
In 2017 revenues from operations in Sudan increased 34% yearonyear to EGP 46 million on a reported basis.
The impact of translating Sudanese dollars SDG into Egyptian pounds was negative however as revenues de nominated in the local currency gained 55%.
Importantly the top line was driven by the signing of a new and very substantial contract with the Sudanese government that contributed to 43% more patients and 84% more tests last year.
Whilst reported EBITDA declined 13% yearonyear to EGP 14 million in Sudanese dollars EBITDA would have gained 75%.
The associated EBITDA margin was 31% compared with 22% in 2016.
Sudan contributed 3% of total revenues 2016 3% and 2% of total EBITDA 2016 1%.
At 2017 year end there were 25 branch labs in Sudan 2% more than a year earlier.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT years in revenues in 2017 for 34% yoy growth after being imposed US trade sanctions are lifted egp mn IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 21 Strategic Report
In Nigeria the medical diagnostics industry is large val ued at c.
US 140 million in 2017 and projected to reach US 1 billion by 2025 driven primarily by increased access to and spending on healthcare overall.
This forecast could prove conservative should the government spend more than currently planned under difficult macroeconomic conditions and should health insurance be mandated for all companies sooner than expected.
Whilst also highly fragmented the industry can be broadly divided into three groups.
The largest is independent stan dalone labs chains and single labs representing c.
45% of the market.
This should be considered in the context of the fact that there are only five key multiunit players with different brand positioning and varied service offerings that on a combined basis account for just c.
7% of total test volumes and c.
20% of the diagnostic markets value due to their ability to perform advanced tests.
The other two groups include public hospitals with 35% of the mar ket and private hospitals that make up the remaining 20%.
IDH has expanded its geographic platform to four coun tries with an investment in Nigerias promising healthcare industry.
The Group closed on a transaction in February 2018 in which it formed a joint venture with Man Capital LLC Man Capital the Londonbased investment arm of the Mansour Group called Dynasty Holding Group Dynasty which is 51% owned and controlled by IDH.
In turn Dynasty partnered with the International Finance Corporation IFC to invest in Eagle Eye EchoScan Lim ited EchoScan a leading medical diagnostics business based in Nigeria.
Dynasty and the IFC have committed to invest significant capital in EchoScan over the next four years.
Dynasty has acquired a majority stake in EchoScan and assumed management control of the company whilst both Dy nasty and the IFC will invest US 25 million to expand EchoScans laboratory network service offerings and quality standards.
Dynasty combines IDHs c.
Africas medical diagnostics industry with Man Capitals similarly long experience on the ground in West Africa to drive EchoScans expansion and the institutionalization of all aspects of its operations.
EchoScan enjoys a strong repu tation among physicians and patients alike and will greatly benefit from Dynastys extensive expertise.
The process of integrating EchoScan will begin with the realignment of its existing labs into IDHs Hub Spoke and Spike business model to form three Blabs Spokes capable of processing routine tests in Nigerias three major cities of Abuja Lagos and Benin and 12 Clabs Spikes functioning as collection and basic test centres in less populated areas.
Dynastys fouryear plan calls for an EchoScan network of 50plus branches including conventional Blabs enhanced Blabs offering the most sophisticated radiology tests and Clabs that will reach patients nationwide.
In building the EchoScan brand Dynasty aims to equate the name with quality and safety embodying the same core values that have earned the Al Borg and Al Mokhtabar brands strong loyalty in Egypt over the years.
The Group will also reach out as it does in Egypt to physicians with joint programs and medical conferences and newsletters and to patients through public relations campaigns and digital media customer relationship management CRM programs among others.
Source Boston Consulting Group IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 22 190 mn 140 people in Nigeria Africas most populous country the value of Nigerias diagnostics industry
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 23 Strategic Report IDHs Competitive Strengths and Business Model IDHs markets are characterised as having strong structural growth driv ers and an underserved diagnostic services demand.
The Group has been able to demonstrate growth based on strong underlying industry fundamen tals despite political and economic turmoil in recent years in the regions in which it operates.
Barriers to entry are high which the Company has been able to surmount with established strong brands internationally accred ited laboratories a scalable business model and a wide geographic reach.
Notably consensus expectations are for further economic improvement in Egypt IDHs largest market in 2018.
IDHs Hub Spoke and Spike business model provides the Group with an ef ficient lowcapital intensive platform for organic expansion over a wide geo graphic area.
It enhances the consist ency of safety and testing procedures as more tests are conducted through its centralised Mega Lab with modern highcapacity equipment and signifi cant throughput.
The Group has a highly experienced management team with decades of experience in the healthcare sector.
Furthermore IDHs worldclass Board of Directors brings years of healthcare MENA region and investment experi ence to the table.
Exposure to resilient markets Established business model Experienced entrepreneurial management IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 24 Barriers to Entry Accreditation of Facilities Attracting contract clients requires accredited highquality testing capabilities.
Brand Equity and Reputation Patients are loyal to leading brands with a strong track record.
Market Reach Fragmented market necessitates a wide geographic presence to allow for broad customer reach.
Relationship with Key
Building a scalable platform requires strong relationship with stakeholders such as physicians patients and hospitals.
IDH has enjoyed a strong track record of profitable growth even under adverse macroeconomic conditions.
This was demonstrated again in 2017 when against the backdrop of persis tent inflationary pressures associated with 2016s currency devaluation the Group delivered an EBITDA margin of 40% versus 44% a year earlier.
In paral lel the Companys assetlight business model notably translates into minimal borrowings while allowing for signifi cant strategic flexibility.
The Group continues to explore op portunities to expand into new high growth markets in the Middle East and Africa as well as adjacent verti cals where complementary diagnos tic services would help to raise IDHs profile to that of a onestop shop diagnostics provider.
The Company executed on this strategy in January 2018 expanding into Nigeria with an investment in a chain of diagnostic laboratories offering both pathology and radiology services.
Strong unlevered balance sheet and cash generation capacity Substantial opportunities to expand into new geographies IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 25 Strategic Report Our Healthcare
The mechanics of the healthcare markets in which IDH operates are markedly different from those in many Western healthcare sectors.
Publicly funded and private healthcare systems exist in parallel and in the private market served by the Group patients have substantially more freedom to make healthcare decisions than their counterparts do in more institutionalised markets.
General practitioners also referred to as family medicine prac titioners or primary care specialists are rare in these emerging markets and are accordingly not the gatekeepers through which patients access primary or specialist care.
Patients seeking treatment may elect to obtain initial care by attending a hospital outpatient clinic or emergency room attending a polyclinic or directly seeking the services of a specialist physi cian.
The patients choice may be influenced by whether or not the patient has employerprovided health insurance or a corporate arrangement with a specific provider.
Physicians ordering diagnostic procedures to be completed outside a hospital setting may recommend that the patient complete these tests at a specific service provider but pa tients enjoy a high degree of freedom in choosing the service provider they attend based on perceived quality and pricing or on insurance or corporate arrangements.
Walkin patients also referred to as selfpayers pay out of pocket in advance of the tests being completed.
Patients then typically obtain test results in person often with an accompanying report from a pathologist ge neticist radiologist or other specialist and return with the results to the physician who requested the tests in the first instance.
It is noteworthy that IDH has the ability to deliver test results to patients on the same day electronically as well as via a mobile app.
IDH accordingly engages in sales and marketing activities that separately target Physicians through direct sales visits to individual practitioners periodic gatherings for physi cians within a speciality promo tional giveaways as well as dis count cards for physicians and their families incentivebased physician loyalty programs and the organisation or sponsorship of conferences Walkin patients through social media channels mass market and targeted health awareness campaigns outdoor advertising television radio and online advertising and Corporate patients through direct outreach to insurers and employers.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 26 our Suppliers IDH has an assetlight business model that is also illustrated by its supplier relationships.
The Groups contracts with its key suppliers of medical testing kits include the provision of the equipment to analyse the laboratory test results.
These agreements have minimum annual commitment payments to cover the supply of the medical diagnostic equipment kits and chemicals to be used for testing and ongoing main tenance and support services.
The agreement periods are typically for five to eight years.
The supply of the medical diagnostics equipment through these arrangements has been judged to be finance lease in nature.
The Companys main suppliers of kits are Roche Siemens and BM Sysmex who collectively represent 47% of total raw materials in 2017 compared with 49% in 2016 exclud ing the cost of tests conducted abroad.
On the whole raw materials as a percentage of sales increased to 20% in 2017 from 16% in 2016.
IDH does not rely on any single supplier of test kits or any other medical supply purchases in the Mega Lab so as to avoid backorders and any ensuing inter ruptions to operations.
The number of kits purchased is determined by a combina tion of historical consumption patterns and future growth plans with our high volume of kit consumption supporting our pricing power with suppliers going forward.
Increasing
IDH is exposed to foreign exchange risk in purchasing supplies as a significant portion of its purchases are either payable or effectively priced in foreign currency see Specific RiskMitigation table on page 36.
Siemens accounted for 15% of total raw materials and is the main supplier that the Group pays in US dollars.
While other suppliers provide the Company with imported products they are paid in Egyptian pounds.
IDH is one of the largest providers of diagnostic services in the MENA region and as such one of the largest volume purchasers of test kits.
Over the years IDH has developed strong and longstanding relationships with its supplier base.
Accordingly the Group has been able to successfully negotiate favourable contract terms against the backdrop of the currency devaluation so that the prices of its kits have been increasing at a slower rate than that at which the Egyptian pound has lost value against the US dollar.
It is noteworthy that management has been able to negoti ate an agreement with its main suppliers not to increase prices during 2018.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 27 Strategic Report Our Business
IDH operates an easily scalable busi ness model allowing for expansion in a capitalefficient manner and geared toward operational efficiency.
The Group deploys a Hub Spoke and Spike model in which the Mega Lab functions as the Hub that is equipped for all tests and services notably with advanced diagnostic tools for sam ples collected by the B and Clabs.
The
The Mega Lab the largest automated lab in Egypt serves as IDHs diagnos tic hub equipped with the latest technology and providing a full suite of diagnostic tests.
A majority of equipment is provided at no upfront cash cost in return for IDH agreeing to purchase minimum volumes of kits from equipment suppliers.
Specialty tests from IDH subsidiaries are shipped to the Mega Lab in Egypt and results are retrieved electronically.
Significant cost synergies are realised on kits logistics and quality control after the introduction of Mega Lab in 2015 the Groups contribution margin witnessed improvement on higher volumes.
Blabs serve as IDHs spokes that work to reduce traffic to Mega Lab by processing routine tests onsite including chemistry parasitology and haematology.
They are higher in capacity and larger in size than the Clabs.
At 2017 year end there were 7 Blabs in Egypt and 4 in Jordan.
Clabs are collection centres that allow for expansion of reach.
They conduct basic tests including urine stool semen ESR and preg nancy tests.
At 2017 year end there were 348 operational Clab branches.
Blabs Spokes are capable of process ing routine tests and they effectively reduce traffic to the Mega Lab where warranted.
The Clabs Spikes func tion as collection centres that most importantly increase the Groups reach to clients nationwide.
Supported by the strong operational backbone of the Mega Lab IDH is able to offer a broad range of tests and can plug and play new Clabs to extend its geographic reach.
The addition of new and esoteric test facilities at the Mega Lab provides a onestop solu tion for patients that in combination with valuepackage offerings drives the Companys key testperpatient financial metric.
Mega Lab Hub B Labs Spokes C Labs Spikes IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 28 IDH operates the only laboratory in Egypt that has been awarded certification from the College of American Pathologists CAP widely considered the leader in laboratory quality assurance MEGA LAB IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 29 Strategic Report Internationally Accredited Test Portfolio IDHs comprehensive pathology product portfolio cov ers immunology radiology haematology endocrinol ogy clinical chemistry molecular biology cytogenetics histopathology and microbiology.
Across its brand portfolio IDH maintains internationalquality accredi tations with a stringent internal audit process to ensure bestinclass service.
ISo
ISO accreditation requires an initial inspection of labo ratory practices calibration and medical analysis by an accreditation body.
For Al Mokhtabar and for Al Borg it was URS Certification accredited internationally by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service and for Biolab it was the Jordanian Accreditation System  JAS.
The inspection involves the clinical chemistry area the virology unit the haematology unit and the general laboratory management practice.
The accreditations standards include both management and technical requirements.
The Companys ISO 90012008 accredita tions for both Al Mokhtabar and Al Borg passed year end accreditation reviews in 2017 and will next be renewed in 2018.
College of American pathologists CAp Unlike ISO accreditation CAP certification is awarded to individual labs rather than the Groups operations as a whole.
In February 2018 IDHs central Mega Lab in Cairo earned certification from the College of American Pathologists CAP.
The Groups Mega Lab inaugurated in 2015 replaced two smaller independent Alabs one of which was also CAP certified.
IDH operates the only laboratory in Egypt to receive this distinguished certification.
The College of American Pa thologists widely considered the leader in laboratory qual ity assurance globally upholds standards that track four aspects of laboratory operations Directors and personnel The laboratory must be staffed with a sufficient number of personnel and the lines of authority should be well defined so that the directors can properly fulfil their responsibilities.
Physical resources There must be sufficient resourc es including physical space testing instruments reagents information processing and communica tion systems ventilation storage and waste disposal facilities and public utilities.
Furthermore there must be sufficient safeguards against hazardous conditions to ensure patient safety.
Quality management The laboratory must have poli cies and procedures in place to ensure quality testing and patient safety.
These should include the valida tion of test systems analytic quality control and qual ity management of pre and postanalytic processes proficiency testing human resource management information management ongoing quality improve ment and appropriate communication procedures.
Administrative requirements The laboratory must maintain appropriate records and adhere to CAP certification requirements and certain other policies and will be subject to onsite inspections interim inspections and interim selfassessments.
The CAP certification remains subject to renewal every two years.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 30 Quality Assurance IDHs quality assurance programme ensures that all inter nal diagnostic processes lab testing procedures and results analyses are accurate.
The quality assurance program ensures that all the standards of the CAP and ISO accredi tations are met by inspecting hardware and equipment ensuring compliance with procedure manuals inspecting the accuracy of results and administering competency assessments for employees.
The internal audit team also maintains a specific audit checklist for the basic and rou tine tests conducted in the Groups Clabs including con formity of process testing the competency of employees through oral observational practical and written tests and conducting managerial audits to assess the labs manage ment and administrative efficiency.
Employee training The Group views education as an essential means of ensur ing quality across its laboratories.
To help develop the skills of employees IDH has a dedicated training facility in Cairo with four training laboratories.
In 2017 the training centre employed one director eight fulltime specialists three ad ministrators two consultants and seven parttime instruc tors.
The centre provides training to around 350 employees per month including doctors chemists receptionists branch and area managers sales personnel and adminis trators.
The training curriculum is determined based on performance KPIs internal audit reports management re views competency assessment reports and analysis of cus tomer feedback and complaints.
IDHs employee training is structured along four modules new employee training competencybased needbased and practical retraining.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 31 Strategic Report
Strategy
IDHs growth strategy rests on leveraging its established business model to achieve four key strategic goals namely 1 continue to expand customer reach 2 increase tests per patient by expanding the Groups services portfolio 3 expand into new geographic markets through selec tive valueaccretive acquisitions and 4 introduce new medical services by leveraging the Groups network and reputable brand position.
Expand Customer Reach IDH intends to use its scalable low capitalintensive business model to quickly and efficiently open new labs and expand geographically in the Middle East and Africa.
A wider geo graphic reach will increase accessibility for patients thereby expanding the customer base.
Furthermore the Groups addon services such as house calls eservices and results delivery make its regular service offerings easier to use for both existing and prospective patients.
IDH is also actively engaged in advertising campaigns to raise awareness of par ticular diseases and the importance of being tested as well as to educate people with lifestyle diseases such as diabetes and high cholesterol to undergo frequent testing.
Increase tests per patient IDH intends to expand its branch network and diversify its portfolio of test services offered in order to take full advan tage of the strong demand for private healthcare services across its geographic platform.
The Group is expanding its ability to perform more complex tests not offered in other labs by broadening its portfolio of specialised and advanced tests which will help to drive testing volumes.
IDH is also focused on bundling testing services into health packages to offer to its existing customers at discounted rates as a way to increase tests thus revenues per patient.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 32 Expand Geographically IDH is looking to expand through valueaccreting acquisi tions in highlyfragmented and underpenetrated markets in the Middle East and Africa where our business model is wellsuited to capitalise on similar healthcare and con sumer trends.
Beyond acquisitions in new geographies the Group is also interested in acquiring complementary diag nostic services that in combination would enhance IDHs profile as that of a onestop shop diagnostics provider.
In sync with these strategies the Group was pleased to have closed on an investment in Nigeria in January 2018.
Diversify into n ew Medical Services As the medical testing market in Egypt is evolving from a single doctororiented model to a branded chain model IDH recognises the opportunity to offer services that are not currently being provided by any private healthcare provider on a large scale.
The Group believes that its scale and experience make it better positioned than its competitors to take advantage of developing diagnostic services opportunities in Egypt ranging from specialised physician services to radiology to invitro fertilisation among other possibilities.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 33 Strategic Report Principal Risks Uncertainties and Their Mitigation As in any corporation IDH has exposure to risks and uncertainties that may adversely affect its performance.
IDH Chairman Lord St John of Bletso has emphasised that ownership of the risk matrix is sufficiently important to the Groups longterm success that it must be equally shared by the Board and senior management.
While no system can mitigate every risk  and some risks as at the country level are largely without potential miti gants  the Group has in place processes procedures and baseline assumptions that provide mitigation.
The Board and senior management agree that the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group include Specific Risk Mitigation Country risk  political and Security Egypt and the wider MENA region where the Group oper ates have experienced political volatility since 2011 and continue to experience occasional terrorist incidents.
There remains a risk of occasional civil disorder.
Nigeria is facing security challenges on several fronts in cluding reemerging ethnic tensions and resurgent attacks by Islamist militants in the northeast.
Against the backdrop of a sluggish economy and the slow implementation of reforms mounting discontent could translate into further social unrest.
See mitigants for Countryregional risk  Economic below.
EchoScans laboratories are located primarily in Lagos Abuja and Benin far from the current unrest occurring in the northeast part of Nigeria.
Regarding other operating risks including but not limited to legal and compliance risks IDH will apply the same rig orous standards to evaluating all aspects of its business processes in Nigeria as it has implemented in all of the emerging markets in which it operates.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 34 Principal Risks Uncertainties and Their Mitigation Specific Risk Mitigation Countryregional risk  Economic The Group is subject to the economic conditions of Egypt specifically and to a lesser extent those of the wider MENA region.
Egypt accounted for c.
83% of our revenues in 2017 2016 87%.
High inflation According to Reuters Egypts annual infla tion rates fell in January 2018 to their lowest levels since the November 2016 devaluation of the Egyptian pound.
Annual
Urban Consumer Price Inflation eased to 17.1% in January 2018 from 21.9% in December 2017 whilst core inflation that strips out volatile items dropped to 14.4% from 19.9% for the same periods.
Inflation had reached a record high in July 2017 at c.
35% on the back of energy subsidy cuts but then subsequently declined gradually as inflationary pres sures caused by floating the currency eased. ficult in the short term. revenues.
Whilst capital controls have helped the official exchange converge with the blackmarket rate the central bank has yet to allow the naira to float freely.
As with country risk this is largely not subject to mitigation.
In both politicalsecurity and economic risk management notes that IDH operates in a defensive industry and that the business continued to grow yearonyear through two revolutions as well as under extremely difficult operating conditions in 2016.
High inflation is one consequence of Egypts policy restructuring cycle.
The structural change underway in government spending and general repricing of goods and services represents a reversal of 50 years of comprehensive government support.
Whilst it will take time the reform program is designed to put the country on a more sustain able path to growth and fiscal consolidation.
The Groups contemplated acquisitions outside of Egypt would also mitigate the Egyptspecific country risk over time.
In Nigeria until currency exchange policy is clarified and there is greater visibility regarding profit repatriation IDH expects to reinvest early profits into its Nigerian business.
Dividend payments are not expected to be repatriated in the first four years of operation.
IDH will capitalise on its regional agreements with suppli ers to procure kits at competitive prices.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 35 Strategic Report Specific Risk Mitigation Foreign currency and banking regulation risk Foreign currency risk The Group is exposed to foreign cur rency risk on the cost side of the business.
The majority of supplies it acquires are paid in Egyptian pounds EGP but given they are imported their price will vary with the rate of exchange between the EGP and foreign currencies.
In addition a portion of supplies are priced and paid in foreign currencies.
The CBE moved to a fully floating foreign exchange regime on 3 November 2016 since which time the value of the Egyptian pound against the US dollar has been set by the interbank market.
After losing more than 50% of its value in 2016 the Egyptian pound closed 2017 at 17.76 per US1 against an opening rate of EGP 18.00.
The Egyptian pound was valued at 17.60 to US 1.00 as of 15 March 2018.
Banking regulation risk A priority list and allocation mechanism imposed by the CBE was in effect through out 2016 to prioritise essential imports.
This mechanism was in place in response to an active parallel market for foreign exchange.
Whilst foreign exchange is increasingly available following the November 2016 float of the Egyptian pound and prices set by the interbank mechanism IDH faces the risk of variability in the exchange rate as a result of economic and other factors.
IDHs exposure to foreign currency risk takes two primary forms price and availability.
Price risk impacts the cost of supplies almost all imported either directly by IDH or by third parties on which spending was equivalent to c.
20% of revenues in 2017 2016 16%.
Management believes that it can mitigate the effects of devaluation through a combination of improved pricing and cost efficiencies see Supplier Risk below for more.
Only 15% of IDHs cost of supplies c.3% of revenues are payable in US dollars minimising the Groups exposure to foreign exchange FX scarcity and in part the volatility of the Egyptian pound.
In 2017 IDH recorded a net foreign exchange loss of EGP 20 million compared with a net foreign exchange loss of EGP 89 million in 2016.
With bank liquidity improving helped by Egypts three year US 12 billion IMF loan agreement and the November 2016 floatation of the Egyptian pound 2017 saw the CBE remove the strict capital controls that had been imposed following the countrys 2011 political uprising.
Foreign exchange is now freely available in the market from banks and exchange companies alike and the parallel market has been eliminated.
The priority list and allocation mechanism have been relaxed following the Egyptian pound devaluation.
Compa nies now report increasing availability of foreign exchange for imports.
The parallel market for foreign exchange is presently dormant.
Caps on deposits of foreign exchange into the banking system which were in place during 2015 and throughout much of 2016 have been removed.
There are currently no restrictions in Egypt on repatriation of dividends by foreign companies.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 36 Specific Risk Mitigation Supplier risk In the year to December 2016 the EGP lost 56% of its value against the US creating significant risk of suppliers re opening negotiations in the face of cost pressure.
In the year to 31 December 2017 the value of the Egyp tian pound has remained consistent against the US at 17.671.00 closing rate.
IDHs supplier risk is concentrated amongst three key sup pliers  Siemens Roche and BM Sysmex who provide it with kits representing 47% of the total value of total raw materials in 2017 2016 49%.
IDH has strong longstanding relationships with its suppli ers to whom it is a significant regional client.
Due to the volumes of kits the Company purchases IDH is able to ne gotiate favourable pricing that in 2016 saw the price it pays for kits rise slower than inflation which rose to new highs as a result of the devaluation of the EGP .
IDH management has agreed with its main suppliers that no price increases will be imposed during 2018.
Total raw materials costs as a percentage of sales were 20% in 2017 compared with 16% in 2016.
Remittance of dividend regulations and repatriation of profit risk The Groups ability to remit dividends abroad may be adversely affected by the imposition of remittance restric tions where under Egyptian law companies must obtain government clearance to transfer dividends overseas and are subject to higher taxation on payment of dividends.
As a foreign investor in Egypt IDH does not have issues with the repatriation of dividends but is exposed to risk in the form of cost of foreign exchange in the markets in which the Group operates particularly Egypt.
As a provider of medical diagnostic services IDH s operations in Sudan are not subject to sanctions.
Notably  in October 2017 the US lifted a host of sanctions imposed 20 years ago that included a comprehensive trade embargo a freeze on government assets and tight restrictions on financial institutions dealing with the country.
Management views this as an important milestone signaling the end to the country s economic isolation.
Legal and regulatory risk to the business The Groups business is subject to and affected by exten sive stringent and frequently changing laws and regula tions as well as frequently changing enforcement regimes in each of the countries in which it operates.
Moreover as a significant player in the Egyptian private clinical laboratory market the Group is subject to antitrust and competition related restrictions as well as the possibility of investiga tion by the Egyptian Competition Authority.
The Groups general counsel and the quality assurance team work together to keep IDH abreast of and in compliance with both legislative and regulatory changes.
On the antitrust front the private laboratory segment of which IDH is a part accounts for a small proportion of the total market which consists of small private labs private chain labs and large governmental and quasi governmental institutions.
Quality control risks Failure to establish and comply with appropriate quality standards when performing testing and diagnostics ser vices could result in litigation and liability for the Group and could materially and adversely affect its reputation and results of operations.
This is particularly key as the Group depends heavily on maintaining good relationships with healthcare professionals who prescribe and recommend the Groups services.
The Groups quality assurance QA function ensures com pliance with best practices across all medical diagnostic functions.
All laboratory staff participate in ongoing pro fessional education with quality assurance emphasised at each juncture.
The head of quality assurance for the Group is a member of the senior management team at the IDH level which meets weekly to review recent developments plan strategy and discuss issues of concern to the Group as a whole.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 37 Strategic Report Specific Risk Mitigation Risk from contract clients Contract clients including private insurers unions and corporations account for c.
61% of the Groups revenue.
Should IDHs relationship with these clients deteriorate for example if the Group was unable to negotiate and retain similar fee arrangements or should these clients be unable to make payments to the Group IDHs business could be materially and adversely affected.
IDH diligently works to maintain sound relationships with contract clients.
All changes to pricing and contracts are ar rived at through discussion rather than blanket imposition by IDH.
Relations are further enhanced by regular visits to contract clients by the Groups sales staff.
IDHs attractiveness to contract clients is enhanced by the extent of its national network.
No single client contract currently accounts for more than 0.8% of total revenues or 1.4% of Corporate revenues.
Prudent management of contract clients translated into the Group taking provisions of EGP 5.6 million in 2017 for doubtful accounts 2016 EGP 4.3 million.
See note 16 to the accompanying Financial Statements for more information.
The Group faces pricing pressure from various third party payers that could materially and adversely affect its revenue.
Pricing may be restrained in cases by recom mended or mandatory fees set by government ministries and other authorities.
This risk may be more pronounced in the context of headline monthly inflation which as of December 2017 stood at 21.9%.
This is an external risk for which there exist few mitigants.
In the event there is escalation of price competition be tween market players the Group sees its wide national footprint as a mitigant c.
61% of our revenue is generated by servicing contract clients private insurer unions and corporations who prefer IDHs national network to patch works of local players.
IDH has a limited ability to influence changes to manda tory pricing policies imposed by government agencies as is the case in Jordan where basic tests that account for the majority of IDHs business in that nation are subject to price controls.
Carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets A decline in financial performance could lead to an impair ment risk over the carrying value of IDHs goodwill and other intangible assets.
Goodwill and intangible assets have arisen from historic acquisitions made by the Group and include the brand names used in the business.
IDH carries out an annual impairment test on goodwill and other intangible assets in line with IAS 36.
The results of the annual impairment test show headroom between the recoverable amount based on value in use and the carrying value of each of the identified Cash Gen erating Units and no impairment is deemed to be required.
For more detail see note 13 of the Financial Statements.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 38 Specific Risk Mitigation Business continuity risks Management concentration risk IDH is dependent on the unique skills and experience of a talented management team.
The loss of the services of key members of that team could materially and adversely affect the Companys operations and business.
Business interruption IT systems are used extensively in virtually all aspects of the Groups business and across each of its lines of business including test and exam results reporting billing customer service logistics and manage ment of medical data.
Similarly business interruption at one of the Groups larger laboratory facilities could result in significant losses and reputational damage to the Groups business as a result of external factors such as natural disasters fire riots or extended power failures.
The Groups operations therefore depend on the continued and uninter rupted performance of its systems.
IDH understands the need to support its future growth plans by strengthening its human capital and engaging in appropriate succession planning.
The Company is com mitted to expanding the senior management team led by its CEO Dr.
Hend El Sherbini to include the talent needed for a larger footprint.
The Group has constituted an Ex ecutive Committee led by Dr.
El Sherbini and composed of heads of departments.
The Executive Committee meets every second week.
The Group has in place a full disaster recovery plan with procedures and provisions for spares redundant power systems and the use of mobile data systems as alternatives to landlines among multiple other factors.
IDH tests its disaster recovery plans on a regular basis.
Loss of talent IDH depends on the skills knowledge experience and expertise of its senior managers to run its business and implement its strategies.
The Groups senior management has an average of 15 years of industry experience and the majority are medical doctors.
Furthermore IDH is reliant on its ability to recruit and retain laboratory professionals.
Loss of senior managers could materially and adversely af fect the Groups results of operations and business.
In Nigeria IDH will face a more limited talent pool of healthcare workers due to a weak education system and the tendency for trained professionals to move abroad.
In addition to competitive compensation packages the Group also ensures it has access to a broad pool of trained laboratory professionals through its own inhouse recruit ment and training program.
We furthermore have in place a program to monitor the performance of graduates of the training program.
Egypt is a net exporter of trained healthcare professionals as there is surplus staff in the market.
IDHs efforts are ac cordingly focused on retention of qualified staff as opposed to recruitment of new personnel.
In Nigeria IDH intends to offer a strong value proposition for staff that includes opportunity for both compensation and training.
The Group will seek to bring in expatriates to fill key leadership roles whilst local teams are being trained and developed.
Loss of certifications and accreditations Many of IDHs facilities have received internationally ac creditations for highquality standards.
The failure to renew these certifications including the College of American Pathologists CAP accreditation for the Mega Lab or the International Organization for Standards IOS for other fa cilities would call into question the Groups quality stand ards and competitive differentiators.
In February 2018 IDHs central Mega Lab in Cairo received CAP certification.
The CAP certification will thereafter be subject to renewal every two years.
The Company also re newed its ISO certifications in 2017 with the next renewal due in 2018.
IDHs ability to keep current its certifications and accreditation are supported by ongoing QA training and internal audit procedures.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 39 Strategic Report
Review
2017 performance overview IDH delivered strong operational and financial results in the year ended 31 December 2017 despite macroeconomic challenges in particular high inflation that continued in the aftermath of the November 2016 floatation of the Egyp tian pound.
This is noteworthy as it stands in sharp contrast to many consumer names in Egypt.
Whilst the healthcare industry is inherently defensive this performance also reflects the customer loyalty that has been earned by the Companys trusted brands over many years.
On a 29% yearonyear revenue increase in 2017 EBITDA gained 18% constrained somewhat by ongoing pressure from higher raw material costs.
Net profits however surged by 44% yearonyear helped by higher interest income and a sharp yearonyear decline in foreign exchange losses given what has been relative stability in exchange rates.
The Group continued to invest in expanding its geo graphic footprint in 2017 and notably through a trans action that closed in February 2018 entered the Nigerian market see discussion on page 22.
Supported by its stateoftheart Mega Lab with additional capacity the Company is able to deploy its Hub Spoke and Spike business model to open capital efficient C labs more rapidly.
During 2017 the Group added 29 new labs in total including 19 new branches for Al Mokhtabar in Egypt four for Al Borg in Egypt four for Biolab in Jor dan and two for MK Sudan.
Total IDH branches reached 383 as of 31 December 2017 versus 354 at 2016 year end for 8% total unit expansion.
The results for the year are summarised below EGp million 2017 2016 % Change
1171 29% Cost of sales 543 45% Gross profit 730 638 16% Gross profit margin % 48% 54% Operating expenses 189 162 17% Operating profit 540 466 16% Depreciation 62 45 38%
602 511 18% Net profit 384 267 44% EBITDA is calculated as operating profit EGP 540 million plus depreciation EGP 62 million and amortisation nil.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 40 IDH Revenue by t ype and Key performance Indicators our Customers IDH serves two principal types of clients contract cor porate and walkin individuals.
Within each of these categories the Group also offers a housecall service and within the contract segment a labtolab service.
Contract Clients IDHs contract clients who in 2017 represented 61% of the Groups revenues include institutions such as unions syndicates private and public insurance com panies banks and corporations who enter into oneyear renewable contracts at agreed rates pertest and on a perclient basis.
During 2017 IDH served 4.7 million patients under these contracts and performed a total of 19.7 million tests with no single contract client ac counting for more than 0.8% of total revenues.
Within the contract segment IDH also provides labtolab services for hospitals and other laboratories not able to process certain tests in house.
Walkin Clients IDH derived 39% of its revenues in 2017 from walkin clients.
Walkin clients numbered 1.7 million in 2017 representing 26% of total patients served.
As IDHs mar kets develop and become more institutionally oriented more patients will be performing pathology tests under corporate agreements a trend that plays to the Groups strength with the best economies of scale in the Egyp tian diagnostics industry.
2017 2016 Contract Clients Revenue EGP mn 923 713 Patients 000 4685 4174 Tests 000 19746 18540 Walkin Clients Revenue EGP mn 591 458 Patients 000 1682 1642 Tests 000 5918 5530 Total revenue EGP mn 1514 1171 Total patients 000 6367 5816 Total tests 000 25664 24070 Revenue per patient EGP 238 201 Revenue per test EGP 59 49 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 41 Strategic Report Breakdown of Contract Revenue t ype % of total 2017 % of total 2016 Contracts  Unions 13% 14% Contracts  Banks 2% 2% Contracts  Corporate 26% 26% Contracts  Government Institutions 2% 2% Contracts  Hospitals 3% 4% Contracts  Public Insurance 6% 6% Contracts  Medical Care 9% 7% Contracts as % of total revenue 61% 61% Walkins as % of total revenue 39% 39% Revenue Analysis Consolidated revenues increased 29% yearonyear to EGP 1514 million attributable to price and mix of tests followed by currency translation and test volumes.
The fa vourable impact of translating the revenues of IDHs Jorda nian operations into Egyptian pounds more than offset the negative effect of translating the revenues of its Sudanese operations.
In 2017 the Jordanian dinar JOD was trans lated at an average rate of 24.92 2016 14.573 the Sudanese pound SDG at an average rate of 1.04 2016 1.204.
Whilst patient and test volumes gained 9% and 7% respectively selected price increases and a better mix of test types were also key drivers of topline growth.
This can be seen in the key metrics of average revenueperpatient up 18% and average revenuepertest 21% higher.
Revenues from contract clients grew 29% yearonyear in 2017 supported by an overall trend toward corporate health insurance coverage in particular in Egypt IDHs largest market.
Whilst the number of contract patients was 12% higher and the number of contract tests was up 7% average revenueperpatient increased 15% and average revenuepertest gained 22% on better pricing and mix.
DH signed 311 new corporate contracts with insurers last year versus 456 in 2016.
Revenues from walkin clients also rose 29% yearonyear helped by improving patient volumes.
The Group served 2% more walkin patients in 2017 compared with a 4% decline in 2016.
Consequently the Company was able to achieve a 26% increase in revenueperpatient and on 4% more testsperpatient a 21% gain in revenuepertest in the walkin category.
In particular it is the improvement seen in the walkin pa tient category that highlights the loyalty consumers have to the Al Borg and Al Mokhtabar brands in Egypt IDHs largest market.
They have come to know and trust these names over the years and they return to the laboratories they equate with quality and safety.
Cognisant of the burden faced by its customers IDHs price increases have been significantly below the high inflation rates caused by the November 2016 currency devaluation.
The Group has also designed its tactical marketing programs with attractive features for them such as discounts on chronic disease tests as well as partnerships with banks for affordable payment programs.
On a geographic basis Egypt contributed 83% of total rev enues in 2017 followed by Jordan at 14% and Sudan at 3% in the same proportions as 2016.
Cost of Sales Cost of sales increased 45% yearonyear to EGP 785 mil lion in 2017 compared with EGP 543 million in 2016 pri marily due to raw material cost pressures.
Raw materials represented the largest component of cost of sales at 39% of total 2016 34% and rose 67%.
Whilst IDH was able to negotiate favourable contract terms with its three main suppliers  Roche Siemens and BM Sysmex  the prices of imported medical test kits continued to climb post devaluation.
Wages and salaries the second largest component of cost of sales in 2017 accounting for 30% of total 2016 36% were favourably leveraged on the strong revenues.
The
22% yearonyear increase in these expenses is mainly IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 42 attributable to the translation into Egyptian pounds of higher salaries for the Groups Jordanian subsidiary and Board of Directors caused by the exchange rate difference between the two reporting period.
The depreciation expense accounted for in COGS increased 40% to EGP 57 million in 2017 2016 EGP 41 million.
This increase in direct depreciation is primarily attributable to increased kit consumption related to leased equipment.
Gross Profit Gross profit increased 16% yearonyear to EGP 729 mil lion compared with EGP 628 million in 2016 constrained by higher raw material costs.
The associated gross margin decreased c.
600 basis points to 48% from 54% a year earlier.
This pressure could also be seen in the decline in gross profit contribution percentage from Egypt whose gross margin is higher than those of Jordan and Sudan.
Egypts contribution to total gross profit was 89% in 2017 compared with 92% in 2016.
Operating expenses gained 17% yearonyear to EGP 189 million in 2017 versus EGP 162 million in 2016.
As a per centage of sales however operating expenses decreased to 12% from 14% a year ago.
The favourable leverage of these largely fixed costs partially mitigated the negative impact of the higher raw material costs.
Operating Profit Operating profit for 2017 was accordingly EGP 540 million compared with EGP 466 million in 2016.
EBIt DA
EGP 511 in 2016.
The associated EBITDA margin came under pressure from higher raw material costs which was only partially offset by the favourable leverage of fixed costs.
The ratio stood at 40% in 2017 compared with 44% in 2016.
We consider EBITDA to be an appropriate alter native performance measure as it is a metric commonly followed by the institutional investment community.
By region Egypt contributed 91% of total EBITDA down from 94% in 2016 whilst Jordan and Sudan contributed 7% and 2% respectively compared with 5% and 1% a year earlier.
Foreign Exchange In 2017 the Groups net foreign exchange loss amounted to EGP 19.9 million as an FX loss of EGP 24.5 million was partially offset by an EGP 4.5 million FX gain.
This was substantially below the net foreign exchange loss of EGP 89 million in 2016.
EBITDA is calculated as operating profit EGP 540 million plus depreciation EGP 62 million and amortisation nil.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 43 Strategic Report The EGP 24.5 million foreign exchange loss was attrib utable to revalued foreign denominated contracts with major suppliers as well as the revaluation of intercom pany balances between IDH and its subsidiaries and with the different functional currencies within the group including the Egyptian pound the Sudanese pound the Jordanian dinar and the US dollar.
The EGP 4.5 million FX gain related to finance lease obligations resulting from appreciation of the Egyptian pound.
In 2017 IDH recorded tax expense of EGP 174 million with an effective tax rate of 31% 2016 31%.
There is no tax payable in the two IDH holding companies  Jersey and Cayman thus costs incurred at the holding company level are not tax deductible.
These would include but are not limited to KPMG UK fees and IDH administrative fees in London.
All tax is paid within the Groups operating companies.
The corporate income tax rates in countries in which IDH operates are as follows Egypt 22.5% Jordan 20.0% and Sudan 15.0%.
The Groups dividend policy is to distribute any excess cash after taking into consideration all business cash re quirements and potential acquisition considerations.
As a result a deferred tax liability is recognised for the 5% tax on dividends for the future expected distribution pay able by Egyptian entities under Egyptian tax legislation.
Deferred tax in 2017 amounted to EGP 56.9 million loss compared with EGP 14.1 million gain in 2016.
Net Profit Net profit for the year increased 44% to EGP 384 million versus EGP 267 million recorded in 2016.
This growth was spurred by effective cash management generating interest income that offset higher interest expense incurred due to the Central Bank of Egypts rate hike policy and the adoption of International Accounting Standard 23 that capitalised interest on the Groups MediumTerm Loan for its new corporate headquarters building.
The bottom line also benefited from a sharp yearonyear decline in foreign exchange losses given what has been relative stability in exchange rates.
Balance Sheet On the assets side of the balance sheet property plant and equipment PPE rose to EGP 486 million at 31 December 2017 from EGP 391 million a year earlier primarily due to new investment in the Groups new corporate headquar ters slated for completion in 2018 as well as the opening of 29 new branches regionwide.
In 2015 IDH entered into equipment lease agreements with its major suppliers that became effective in May 2015.
The agreement periods range from five to eight years which is deemed to reflect the useful life of the equipment.
The agreements include annual commit ment payments to cover the supply of medical diagnos tic equipment test kits and chemicals to be used for testing and ongoing maintenance and support services over the term of the agreement.
If the minimum annual commitment payments are met over the agreement pe riod ownership of the equipment supplied will legally transfer to IDH.
On one side the leased equipment is recorded in PPE and the finance lease is recorded as a liability on the other side.
Trade and other receivables rose 36% to EGP 202 million compared with EGP 148 million in 2016.
The difference was primarily related to an increase in the accounts receivable balance associated with the gain in contract revenues together with higher accrued revenues related to time deposit interest.
The total bad debt provision balance amounted to EGP 21.7 million out of which EGP 5.6 million was estab lished in 2017 EGP 4.7 million for Egypt EGP 0.4 million for Sudan and the remaining balance for Jordan.
On the Liabilities side trade and other payables de creased to EGP 333 million in 2017 from EGP 346 million in 2016 mainly due to the decline in put option liability related to the Jordanian operation given the spot rate as at 31 December 2016 stood at EGPJOD 25.41 versus EGPJOD 24.89 as at 31 December 2017.
Inventories at 2017 year end were EGP 70 million up 36% versus a year earlier largely due to higher raw mate rial prices in 2017 compared with 2016.
IDH managed to deliver strong operational cash flow with an ending cash balance at 2017 year end of EGP 694 million excluding restricted cash.
Dividend
Proposed dividends for ordinary shares are subject to the approval of the Annual General Meeting and are not recognised as a liability as at 31 December 2017.
The Board of Directors has recommended that a final dividend of US 24 million or US 0.16 per share should be paid to shareholders who appear on the register as at 18 May 2018 with an exdividend date of 17 May 2018.
The payment date for the dividend will be 8 June 2018.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 44 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 45 Strategic Report
Responsibility
Founded on the principle of providing quality medical assistance and services to better the lives of individu als and the community at large IDH views corporate responsibility initiatives as an extension of its core purpose with the aim of improving the communities in which it does business.
The Moamena Kamel Foundation for Training and Skill De velopment was established in 2006 by Dr.
Moamena Kamel a Professor of Pathology at Cairo University founder of IDH subsidiary AlMokhtabar Labs and mother of the CEO Dr.
Hend El Sherbini.
IDH commits up to 1% of the net aftertax profit of the subsidiaries Al Borg and Al Mokhtabar to the Foundation which in 2017 amounted to EGP 3.9 million compared with EGP 2.8 million in 2016.
The Foundation allocates this sum to organisations and groups in need of assistance with a particular focus on making a difference in the lives of residents of Cairos Al Duweiqa community along with several other villages across Egypt.
The Foundation deploys an integrated pro gram and vision for the communities it helps that include economic social and healthcare development initiatives.
The Foundations primary services include Free healthcare clinics Loans for entrepreneurial women Educational services for the children of Al Duweiqa community Providing food for families in need of such assistance Coverage of running costs for the ICU at Cairos publicsector Kasr El Aini Hospital IDH has also been expanding the reach of its Corporate Responsibility initiatives in recent years to include Additional services to Kasr El Aini Hospital that in clude providing medical supplies to the ICU and other units monthly incentives for nurses in the ICU and 1220 hospital beds Financial and inkind support to El Manial Hospital Financial and inkind support to the Egyptian people during natural disasters Ramadan Iftar  feast meals to underprivileged Egyp tians during the holy month of Ramadan Free medical tests to underprivileged Egyptian children Sponsorship of medical convoys to the city of Fayoum IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 46 Corporate responsibility initiatives are an extension of our core purpose to better the lives of individuals and improve the com munities in which we operate IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 47 Corporate
IDH is committed to implementing strong corporate governance upholding the highest standards of accountability and transparency Corporate Governance
The majority of members of IDHs Board of Directors are independent and offer significant experience in the healthcare market MENA region and investment activities.
Lord St John of Bletso Age 60 Independent n onExecutive Chairman Lord St John has been a member of the House of Lords of the U.
Par liament since 1978 and is currently Deputy Chairman of Strand Hanson
NonExecutive Chairman of Global Resources Investment Trust a member of the Advisory Board of Silicon Valley Bank NonExecutive Director of Albion Ventures LLP Chairman of the Governing Board of Certification International and holds advisory roles with Milio Interna tional Alliance Media Group USA Sapinda and ABN Corporation.
Lord
St John received a BA and a BSocSc in Psychology from Cape Town Univer sity a BProc in Law from the Univer sity of South Africa and an LLM from the London School of Economics. prof.
Dr.
Hend El Sherbini Age 49
Group Chief Executive Officer
Dr.
El Sherbini is a professor of clinical pathology at the Faculty of Medicine Cairo University and currently sits on the board of American Society of Clini cal Pathology Egypt and consults on the international certification process.
She received her MBBCh Masters in Clinical and Chemical pathology PhD in Immunology from Cairo Univer sity and MBA from London Business
Dr.
El Sherbini served as CEO of Al Mokhtabar since 2004 until be coming CEO of the Group in 2012.
Hussein Choucri Age 67 Independent n onExecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration
Mr.
Choucri is Chairman and Manag ing Director of HC Securities and Invest ment which he established in May 1996.
He currently sits on the boards of EDITA Food Industries S.
SODIC Sixth of October Develop ment and Investment Company as well as the Egyptian British Business Council and the Egyptian Greek Busi ness Council.
Mr.
Choucri served as a Managing Director of Morgan Stanley from 1987 to 1993 and served as Advisory Director at Morgan Stanley from 19932007.
He received his Man agement Diploma from the American University in Cairo in 1978.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 50 James patrick n olan Age 58 Independent n onExecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee
Nolan is an Independent Director.
He spent 15 years with Royal Philips NV latterly as Head of Mergers and Ac quisitions and has also served as Head of Mergers and Acquisitions at Veon Inc.
Emerging Markets.
During his time at Philips he led a series of acquisi tions in diagnostic imaging an area in which Philips is now a global leader.
He has extensive quotedcompany board experience having served on the boards of MModal Inc.
Navteq Inc and SHL Telemedicine Ltd.
Mr.
Nolan graduated from Oxford University in Law in 1983 and is a qualified barrister in England and Wales.
He also holds an MBA from INSEAD.
Dan olsson Age 52 Independent n onExecutive Director
Olsson is CEO of the Team Olivia Group AB a Swedish healthcare group.
He has long and extensive interna tional experience in the diagnostic sector where he has served in a range of executive positions among others as CEO of Unilabs Group in Geneva Switzerland from 2007 to 2009 and has worked in the healthcare sector since 1999.
Mr.
Olsson studied economics at the University of Lund in Sweden.
Richard Henry phillips Age 53 n onExecutive Director
Phillips is a founding partner of Actis LLP the emerging markets pri vate equity group.
As Actis LLP is one of the Companys major shareholders
Phillips is not considered by the Board as being independent.
He was previously responsible for the invest ment activity of Actis in North Africa and is currently responsible for Asia.
He is a member of the Actis Investment
Mr.
Phillips is a director on the board of a number of companies including Emerging Markets Knowl edge Holdings Mauritius Limited Les Laboratoires Medis SA and others.
Mr.
Phillips holds a degree in Economics from the University of Exeter.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 51 Corporate Governance
Your Board of Directors the Board is responsible for providing strong leadership and effective decision making safeguarding in the process the interests of all shareholders of Integrated Diagnostics Holdings.
Under my chairman ship the Board has been resolute in providing oversight and guidance to senior management as the Group continues to execute its regional growth strategy.
IDH has a standard listing on the London Stock Exchange and is thus not required to comply with the requirements of the 2014 U.
Corporate Governance Code the Code as issued by the Financial Reporting Council nor does IDH voluntarily comply with the Code.
That said it is the view of your Board that we continue our path of improving our corporate governance structure to adhere to best practices.
We strongly believe that the gradual adoption of best in dustry practices in governance will assist us in building a profitable and sustainable business as well as safeguarding shareholder interests.
We are compliant with Financial Conduct Authority Disclo sure and Transparency Rule DTR subchapters 7.1 and 7.2 which set out certain mandatory disclosures 7.1 concerns audit committees and bodies carrying out equivalent func tions 7.2 concerns corporate governance standards that are included in the Directors Report or in this case as part of the Strategic Review DTR 7.2.1.
To that end we have an Audit Committee as well as Re muneration and Nomination Committees.
The Board may establish additional committees as appropriate going for ward.
This Annual Report includes reports from both the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Your Board aims to work towards implementing best prac tices in corporate governance calling on both the expertise of individual Directors as well as that of outside parties in cluding legal counsel and global professional services firms.
Functioning of the Board We met five times as a Board during the course of 2017 including once in Cairo Egypt in November 2017.
I was delighted to have had the opportunity to visit IDHs main base of operations in Cairo during which time I engaged di rectly with senior management to discuss both the Groups strategic plans and how management including our Chief Executive is evolving the policies and procedures neces sary to continue the full institutionalisation of the business.
The Board has invested significant time discussing and evaluating the Groups strategy and prospects for future growth the outcome of which is presented in our state ment of strategy on page 32.
We are confident that we have in place the right strategy and the right management team to deliver shareholder returns going forward.
Composition of the Board Under its Articles of Association the Group must have a minimum of two Directors.
While there is no maximum number of Directors the Board presently includes six Board members and has no intention at present of appoint ing additional members.
Notably Directors have no share qualification meaning they do not need to be shareholders of the Group in order to serve.
I am pleased to report that we have four Independent Non Executive Directors.
Together the Directors offer IDH a world standard mix of expertise in areas including strategy finance and medical diagnostics  as well as diverse expe rience in Europe the Middle East and Africa.
We have rel evant commercial and technical experience to help direct the Group as it delivers on its strategy in a very technical field and across rapidly changing geographies.
Your Board in 2017 and their biographies are set out on pages 50 and 51 of this Annual Report and are summarised in the following table.
Corporate Governance IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 52 Board of Directors of Integrated Diagnostic Holdings plc n ame position Date of appointment Lord St John of Bletso Independent NonExecutive Chairperson 12 January 2015
Dr.
Hend El Sherbini Group Chief Executive Officer 23 December 2014 Hussein Choucri Independent NonExecutive Director 12 January 2015 James Patrick Nolan Independent NonExecutive Director 8 April 2015 Dan Olsson Independent NonExecutive Director 12 January 2015 Richard Henry Phillips NonExecutive Director 23 December 2014
We continue to operate on the basis of a clear division of responsibilities between the role of the Chairman and that of the Group Chief Executive.
This segregation of roles was agreed at the Board meeting held 12 January 2015.
The
Board continues to believe that this segregation of roles remains appropriate taking into account the size and structure of the Group.
As Chairman I ensure the Board is effective in the execution of all aspects of its role.
The Group Chief Executive Officer
In this she is supported by a senior management team.
The Group Chief Executive and I have a good working relationship and discuss matters of Group strategy and performance on a regular basis.
We also work together to ensure that Board meetings cover relevant matters including a quarterly review of financial and operational performance including key performance indicators and in partnership with the Group secretary ensure that all Directors are kept advised of key developments receive accurate timely and clear information upon which to call in the execution of their duties and actively participate in the decisionmaking process.
Agendas for meetings of the Board are reviewed and agreed in advance to ensure each Board meeting is efficiently run allowing all Directors to openly and constructively chal lenge the proposals made by the Groups senior manage ment.
I am pleased to report that throughout the year each Director has properly exercised those powers with which they have been vested by the Groups Articles of Association and relevant laws.
The Board operates under a Schedule of Matters Reserved the details of which are unchanged since our last Annual
Matters reserved to the Board means any decision that may affect the overall direction supervision and man agement of the Group including but not limited to a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 approving the Groups annual report and accounts and halfyearly financial statements andor any change in the accounting principles or tax policies of any member of the Groups group andor any change in the end of the financial year of any member of the Groups group except as contemplated by the busi ness plan or annual budget as required by law or to comply with a new accounting standard j. k. l. m. n. o. report.
The review should cover all controls including financial operational and compliance controls and
risk management
Apart from these Reserved matters the Board delegates specific items to its principal committees namely the committees on Audit Remuneration and Nomination.
Each Committee is authorised to seek any information it requires from senior management.
I provide brief recaps below on each of these committees.
Reports from the Chairmen of the Audit and Remunera tion Committees appear starting pages 58 and 62 of this Annual Report respectively.
Board activities during 2017 Your Board of Directors held five meetings in 2017 three in London one in Cairo and one via conference call.
The following standing items are considered at each meeting Determines that notice was given and that a quorum for the meeting has been obtained Hears declarations of interest and considers any con flicts of interest that may arise Establishes the purpose of the meeting and Reviews and approves minutes of the previous meet ing of the Board.
Meeting Highlights
2 February 2017 Review of strategy and business opportunities going forward.
21 March 2017 Approval of the Groups Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 De cember 2017.
Recommendation of a final dividend to shareholders for approval at the AGM.
Discussion of the macroeconomic backdrop in Egypt.
Review of the yeartodate financial highlights.
22 May 2017 Review of the Groups operational and financial performance during the interim threemonth period to 31 March 2017 and approval of the Quarterly Interim Management Statement.
Discussion of strategy and business opportunities going forward.
21 August 2017 Discussion of key operational and financial highlights in the first half of 2017.
Ap proval of the Groups Interim Financial Statements for the period to 30 June 2017.
Review of strategy and business opportunities going forward.
21 November 2017 Discussion of the Remuneration Committees report regarding the Groups Hu man Resources HR structure and newlyappointed HR Director.
Review of the Groups operational and financial performance during the ninemonth period to 30 September 2017.
Discussion of the Groups 2018 budget.
Review of strategy and business opportunities going forward.
Corporate Governance IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 54 Details of our Directors attendance at Board and Com mittee meetings are shown in the table on page 57.
In the event that any Director is unable to attend a meeting of the Board or Committee of which they are a member he or she receives the necessary papers including agendas meet ing outcomes and any documents presented for review or information.
Furthermore I endeavour to discuss with them in advance of the meeting to obtain their views and decisions on the proposals to be considered.
The Board meeting held one meeting in Cairo Egypt in 2017 to afford all Directors the opportunity to tour the Groups Egypt offices and diagnostic facilities as well as to meet with members of the Groups senior management on an asneeded basis.
Within the wider corporate governance framework man agement established in 2016 a Management Committee led by the Chief Executive.
Its members include all heads of departments and it meets every second week to discuss issues related to sales manual analysis units automated analysis units human resources finance marketing qual ity and investor relations.
The Groups general counsel also attends these meetings on an asneeded basis.
Senior man agement uses this as a forum to review upcoming priorities recent performance and the operational steps necessary to ensure the management team delivers on its business goals and the Groups strategic plan.
Effectiveness
The Board of IDH does not currently have formal mecha nisms in place to evaluate its effectiveness as regards to the onboarding of new Directors strategic planning or its formulation of goals.
That said having spent consider able time in both formal meetings and in learning about the skills of our Directors one on one  and drawing on my past experience as a Director  I am confident that the Board has the skills talent and industry knowledge it needs to effectively deliver the Groups agreed strategy.
It is moreover our hope that we will over time develop formal evaluation mechanisms that will allow us to report on our effectiveness in a more rigorous manner.
In the interim it is my considered judgement that the Board receives from senior management sufficiently detailed budgets forecasts strategy proposals reviews of the Groups financial position and operating performance and annual and half yearly reports to ensure that it may be effective.
This enables us to effectively ask questions of senior management and to hold discussions on the Groups strategy and performance.
In 2017 senior management delivered regular reports to the Board ahead of regularly scheduled Board meetings.
All meetings of the Board and its Committees are min uted by the Group Secretary or a designated alternate.
Any concerns raised by Directors are clearly recorded in the minutes of each meeting.
I review Board minutes in my capacity as Chairman before these minutes are circulated to all Directors in attendance and then tabled for approval at the next meeting at which time any necessary amend ments are made.
The Group has obtained customary directors and officers indemnity insurance covering the Chairman and the Non Executive Directors.
The Nomination Committee assists the Board in reviewing the structure size and composition of the Board.
It is also responsible for reviewing succession plans for the Directors including the Chairman and Chief Executive and other senior management.
The Nomination Committee met on 21 August 2017 within the context of the regular Board of Directors meeting where it was resolved to appoint Mr.
Omar Bedewy as Chief Financial Officer in succession to Mr.
T arek Hamida.
I note in this instance that all members of the Nomination Committee are NonExecutive Directors.
As a result we are fully compliant with the Codes recommendation that a majority of the Nomination Committee should comprise Independent NonExecutive Directors.
Hussein Choucri is deemed to be our NonExecutive Director with relevant financial experience in compliance with the DTR.
Chairman Members Lord St John of Bletso Hussein Choucri Dan Olsson overview of the Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee recommends the Groups policy on executive remuneration determines the levels of remuneration for Executive Directors and the Chairman and other senior management and prepares an annual re muneration report for approval by the Shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
The Code recommends that the Remuneration Committee should comprise in the case of smaller companies at least two Independent NonExecutive Directors.
As all of the members of the Committee are Independent NonExecutive Directors we are in full compliance with the recommenda tions of the Code in this respect.
The full report of the Remuneration Committee for 2017 appears starting on page 62 of this Annual Report.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 55 Chairman Members Hussein Choucri Dan Olsson James Patrick Nolan overview of the Audit Committee The Audit Committees role is to assist the Board with the discharge of its responsibilities in relation to financial reporting including reviewing the Groups annual and halfyear financial statements and accounting policies and internal and external audits and controls reviewing and monitoring the independence and scope of the annual audit and the extent of the nonaudit work undertaken by external auditors advising on the appointment of external auditors and reviewing the effectiveness of the internal audit internal controls whistleblowing and fraud systems in place within the Group.
The Audit Committee will meet not less than three times a year.
The Code requires that at least one member of the Audit Com mittee be independent and that at least one member has com petence in accounting and or auditing.
In addition the Code recommends that the Audit Committee should comprise in the case of smaller companies at least two Independent Non Executive Directors and that at least one member has recent and relevant financial experience and that members of the Committee must have competence relevant to the sector in which the Group is operating.
The Board considers that the Audit Committee complies with the requirements and recom mendations of the Code in those respects.
Chairman Members James Patrick Nolan Dan Olsson Hussein Choucri The full report of the Audit Committee for 2017 appears starting on page 58 of this Annual Report.
Internal Control and Risk Management Given the business and geographies in which the Group operates I believe as Chairman that risk mitigation will be key not just to the creation and preservation of shareholder value but in the Groups growth going forward.
The Com panys risk matrix outlined on pages 3439 is sufficiently vital that it must be owned equally by the management team and members of the Board.
Our view as a Board is that the Group must be proactive on risk in order to meet shareholder expectations and I have advised that I expect the IDH management team to be ahead of the curve in this area.
Senior management is working with the internal audit team to take the risk register forward.
You may expect risk and its mitigation will be a theme to which your Board returns repeatedly in 2018 as we did in 2017.
Corporate Governance The Board has ultimate responsibility for the Groups in ternal controls however they have delegated oversight of the Groups system of internal controls to the Audit Committee so as to safeguard the assets of the Group and the interests of shareholders.
The Audit Committee thus reviews the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls on an ongoing basis to ensure the keeping of proper accounting records safeguarding the assets of the Group and detecting fraud and other irregularities.
The Audit Committee reports back to the Board with their findings and recommendations.
The Board has accordingly established that the Group has in place internal controls to manage risk including an Internal Auditor was appointed in May 2016 the identification and management of risk at the level of operating departments by the heads of those departments and regular Board level discussion of the major busi ness risks of the Group together with measures being taken to contain and mitigate those risks.
The Groups principal risks and uncertainties and miti gation for them are set out on pages 3439 of this Annual
Your Board has furthermore put in place a control framework at the Group level that applies to all subsidi aries including Board approval of the overall Group budget and strategic plans a clear organisational structure delineating lines of re sponsibility authorities and reporting requirements defined expenditure authorisation levels a regular process for operational reviews at the senior management level on a weekly monthly and quarterly basis covering all aspects of the business a strategic planning process that defines the key steps senior management must take to deliver on the Groups long term strategy a comprehensive system of financial reporting including weekly flash reports to management monthly reporting to management and an annual budget process involving both senior management and the Board the Board received reports on a quar terly basis in 2017. where appropriate.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 56 An internal audit plan for 2018 was prepared and agreed with the Audit Committee.
Investor Relations Engagement with shareholders continues to be a key function at both the senior management and the Board level.
Our investor relations function held more than 50 meetings with current and potential investors dur ing the course of the year.
Management met investors at seven investor conferences organised by CI Capital Cairo and New York counted as one conference EFG Hermes Dubai and London two separate conferences Renaissance Capital Cape Town Arqaam Capital Dubai HSBC London and Deutsche Bank Dubai welcomed potential and current investors to meetings in Cairo and handled queries whether delivered ver bally or in writing from more than 100 investors.
We published both half and fullyear results and further released trading updates on performance at the three and ninemonth periods.
We intend to continue pub lishing trading updates at the first and thirdquarter marks in 2018 while simultaneously meeting the mini mum regulatory disclosure as required of a UK Standard listed entity.
The Board communicates with shareholders through public announcements disseminated via the London Stock Exchange analyst briefings roadshows and press interviews.
Copies of public announcements and finan cial results are published on the Groups website along with a number of other investor relations tools.
The Board receives regular updates from the senior management team on the views of major shareholders and on milestones in the investor relations program.
We will continue throughout 2018 to grow our investor relations program to ensure that our shareholders and stakeholders remain informed of the Groups strategy and ongoing financial and business performance.
Annual Reporting and Annual General Meeting of
We typically publish our Annual Report in March in respect of the prior year ended 31 December.
We voluntarily comply with the Codes requirement to send a Notice of Meeting of an An nual General Meeting AGM and related papers to sharehold ers at least 20 working days prior to the meeting.
The Groups second Annual General Meeting as a listed com pany will be held in London on 14 May 2018.
Shareholders are encouraged to attend the AGM and to ask questions about the business its financial performance and its strategy.
All Board members are scheduled to attend the upcoming AGM.
Details of the AGM are included in the Notice of Meeting that accompa nies this Annual Report and which is available on our website.
At the AGM all of the Groups Directors will retire and submit themselves for reelection.
The outcome of the voting at the AGM will be announced by way of a London Stock Exchange announcement and full details will be published on the Group s website shortly after the AGM.
Limitations of this Report As I noted earlier the Group is not bound to adhere to the re quirements of the 2016 U.
Code of Corporate Governance.
Nevertheless we have endeavoured to ensure that this An nual Report is as a whole fair balanced and understandable.
In formulating this Annual Report we have called on the Group Chief Executive and her senior management staff to provide us with clear documentary evidence of the Groups performance and policies for 2017.
The Audit Committee has confirmed to us that the financial statements as contained in the 2017 Annual Report are true and fair and that the work of the external auditor has been accurate and effective.
Lord St John of Bletso
20 March 2018 Board Audit Remuneration n omination Number of meetings Directors Lord St John of Bletso 5
Hend El Sherbini 5 Hussein Choucri James Nolan 5 3 1 Dan Olsson Richard Phillips 5 table of Director Attendance at 2017 Meetings IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 57 Corporate Governance Audit Committee
James n olan Chairman Audit Committee The Audit Committee is responsible for overseeing IDHs internal financial reporting and ensuring the integrity of the Groups financial statements.
The Committee is also responsible for reviewing and monitoring the ef fectiveness of the Groups risk management processes and internal controls as well as for ensuring that audit processes are robust.
At the date of this report the Audit Committee comprises three NonExecutive Directors all of whom are considered independent.
In addition to myself the members are Dan Olsson and Hussein Choucri.
2018 marks my third year as Chairman of the Audit Com mittee having been appointed to that role owing to my relevant financial experience as required by the Code.
I have served on the audit committees of three publicly quoted companies in the past.
I have held the positions of Global Head of Mergers and Acquisitions both at Veon and at Royal Philips.
I hold an MBA from INSEAD and studied law at university.
The other members of the Committee have a broad range of appropriate skills and experience covering financial and healthcare industry matters and their biogra phies are summarised on pages 50 and 51.
I am very grateful for their valuable contributions and am happy that we work well together as a team.
During 2017 the Audit Committee convened three times once each in March August and November.
We provided governance of external financial reporting risk manage ment and internal controls and reported our findings and recommendations to the Board.
Outside of scheduled committee meetings the Audit Committee also com municated throughout 2017 on an asneeded basis with the Group Chief Financial Officer and with KPMG as our external auditors.
The audit partner and audit manager from the Groups external auditor KPMG are invited to attend meetings of the Committee on a regular basis.
During 2017 they at tended meetings in whole or in part both in person and by telephone.
The VicePresident Finance and Strategy who is not a member of the executive board attends our meetings by invitation and other members of the senior manage ment team attend as required these include the Director of Investor Relations and the Group Secretary.
There are also private meetings between the Audit Commit tee and the external auditor outside the halfyear and year end timetable at which senior management is not present.
The Committee will continue with the practice of meeting in private with the external auditor in the future.
At our Board Meeting in August 2016 the Audit Com mittee approved the Internal Audit Activity Charter as well as the appointment of Mr.
Ashraf Hallaba as Internal Auditor reporting to the Audit Committee.
The
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 58 role reports functionally to the Audit Committee and administratively to the Chief Executive Officer.
Since in ception the Internal Auditor has been building a team writing a manual on operations reviewing process of key functions within the company and discussing the same with the companys management.
The Internal Auditor delivered his comprehensive risk register on 19 November 2017 as well as his progress report in setting up and establishing his department.
It was noted that the department was not yet fully staffed and that the position of Compliance Officer was not filled.
Adequate staffing is an essential ingredient of the success of the Internal Audit function and is under review.
FRC Audit Quality Review The FRC is the UKs independent regulator responsible for promoting highquality corporate governance and reporting to foster investment.
The FRCs responsibilities include independent monitoring of audits of listed and certain other public interest entities performed by firms registered to conduct audits in the UK by a Recognised Supervisory Body  further details are set out on the FRCs website.
This monitoring is performed by the FRCs Audit Quality Review  AQR team.
The reviews of individual au dit engagements are intended to contribute to safeguard ing and promoting improvement in the overall quality of auditing in the UK.
Roles and Duties of the Audit Committee The Audit Committees role is to assist the Board with the discharge of its responsibilities in relation to financial re porting including reviewing the Groups annual and halfyear financial statements reviewing the Groups accounting policies internal and external audits and controls reviewing and monitoring the scope of the annual au dit and the extent of the nonaudit work undertaken by external auditors and advising on the appointment of external auditors and reviewing the effectiveness of the internal audit internal controls whistleblowing and fraud systems in place within the Group.
During its scheduled meetings the Committee also consid ers the following matters confirm compliance with Directors duties and con sider any new conflicts of interest review minutes of previous meetings review actions from previous meetings and review progress against current year objectives.
Audit Committee Activities During 2017 During 2017 the Audit Committee had three scheduled meetings one each in March August and November.
At each scheduled meeting the Committee considers the matters outlined above under the subheading Roles and Duties of the Audit Committee.
21 March 2017 Overview of the 2016 audit of the Company Identification and discussion of key risk factors includ ing revenue recognition impairment of goodwill lease accounting and management override of controls Discussion of dividend policy Final dividend recommendation to the Board Letter of Representation recommended to the Board for signature Recommendation to the Board of approval for the Groups Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2016 Review of the Groups Internal Audit function 17 August 2017 Consideration of financials for the halfyear ended 30 June 2017 Discussion of auditors interim review including sig nificant risks and key areas of focus Recommendation to the Board of halfyear results to 30 June 2017 20 n ovember 2017 Review and discussion of KPMGs Audit Plan Discussion and approval of the Groups Internal Audit Plan Discussion and approval of the revised AntiBribery and AntiCorruption and Trade Controls Policy ABAC IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 59 Significant Issues The Committee considered several significant account ing issues matters and judgements in relation to the Groups financial statements and disclosures for the year ended 31 December 2017.
As part of the halfyear and fullyear reporting process management communicates key accounting issues to the Committee and the exter nal auditor is asked to comment on the key significant areas of accounting judgement and disclosure.
The infor mation presented is used by the Committee to critically review and assess the key policies and judgements that have been applied the consistency of policy application from year to year and the appropriateness of key disclo sures made together with compliance with the applica ble accounting standards.
The significant issue arising and a description of how it was addressed is shown in the following table.
External Auditor KPMG has acted as the Groups external auditor since ap pointment in July 2015 with Mr.
Adrian Wilcox serving as audit partner until August 2017 when the role was as sumed by Mr.
David Neale on behalf of KPMG.
The Auditors independence was considered by the Committee during the year and following careful consideration it was agreed that the Auditors remained independent.
We aim to comply with the requirement to rotate the audit partner every five years and thus the term of appointment of our audit partner is expected to end in 2022.
In acknowledgment of the Competition and Markets Au thoritys proposal that companies must put their statutory audit engagement out to tender at least every ten years it is possible that we will tender the audit process in 2025 or earlier if KPMGs performance falls short of the Audit Com mittees expectations.
IDH may on occasion retain the external auditor for non audit services on matters including accounting advice in relation to acquisitions and divestments corporate govern ance and risk management advice among other services.
The Audit Committee reviewed the work completed by the external auditor as well as the provision of nonaudit servic es to ensure that the auditor maintained its independence.
The Audit Committee confirms that during 2017 61500 was paid to KPMG in respect of nonaudit work compared to the audit fee for the Group financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 243500 audit fee for the Group financial statements for the year ended 31 Decem ber 2016 235000.
This nonaudit work was related to the review of the half year financial statements.
Recommendation
Ultimately it is the Boards responsibility to review and approve the Groups fullyear and halfyear financial state ments as well as to determine that taken as a whole the Annual Report is balanced understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
It is the Audit Committees role to assist the Board in discharging its responsibilities with regards to financial reporting external and internal audits and controls.
Following a review of the process around the annual audit and the content of the financial statements the Audit Committee advised the Board at its meeting on 20 March 2018 that is was their opinion that the financial statements as at 31 December 2017 provide a true and fair view of the financial performance of the Group and recommend that it be adopted by the Board and recom mended to shareholders for approval at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
The Audit Committee has recommended to the Board that the Auditors be put forward for reelection at the forthcom ing Annual General Meeting.
The Committee arrived at this recommendation after having met with the Audit partner and Audit team reviewed the quality of the Auditors reports and the quality of the work undertaken in respect of the halfyearly and Annual Report considered the Audit fees of both Audit and NonAudit work and reviewed the Auditors independence.
James n olan Chairman Audit Committee 20 March 2018 Issue How it is being addressed
The carrying value of goodwill is subject to annual impairment testing undertaken by management who apply a series of assumptions concerning future revenue and cash flows and appropriate discount rates for Cash Generating Units CGU.
Management presented the outcome of the impairment review to the Audit Committee highlighting the level of headroom.
The external auditor also commented on this.
The Committee critically reviewed managements assessment of the outlook and carrying value of these intangible assets and their disclosure in the Groups financial statements.
The Committee con curred with managements conclusion that the carrying value of goodwill attributed to each CGU was fully supported and no impairment is required at 31 December 2017.
Corporate Governance IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 60 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 61 Remuneration Committee
In this report from the Remuneration Committee I outline on behalf of my colleagues and myself the basis on which Directors and select members of senior management will be remunerated for their service in 2017.
A detailed discussion of the basis on which the aforemen tioned as well as one key member of senior management were remunerated for their service in 2017 appears below and is summarised in tabular form on page 63.
Remuneration Committee Activities During 2017 20 n ovember 2017 Overview of the Groups Human Resource HR organisational structure Review of HR workinprogress under the leadership of newlyappointed HR Director Identification of training needs Review of the Groups Compensation strategy includ ing its recent Salary Survey Discussion of a new Performance Management Sys tem to be introduced in 2018 The Remuneration Committee also met in February 2018 a meeting rescheduled from December 2017 to discuss appropriate revisions to senior management salaries the firms salaries compared with marketplace benchmarks and strategies to ensure that all employees are compen sated competitively relative to the marketplace.
Chairman Lord St John of Bletso is entitled to receive an annual salary of US 75000.
He is entitled to the reimburse ment of reasonable expenses.
Independent NonExecutive Directors Hussein Choucri James Patrick Nolan and Dan Olsson have been engaged by the Group as Independent NonExecutive Directors under letters of appointment.
They are each entitled to an annual fee of US 50000.
The Independent NonExecutive Directors are all entitled to the reimbursement of reason able expenses.
NonExecutive Directors Richard Henry Phillips has been engaged by the Group as a NonExecutive Director under letter of appointment.
He will not be entitled to receive any fee from the Group for this role.
The Non Executive Directors are all entitled to the reimbursement of reasonable expenses.
Hussein Choucri Chairman Remuneration Committee 20 March 2018 Hussein Choucri Chairman Remuneration Committee Corporate Governance IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 62 Figures in EGp Base salary fees 2017 Base salary fees 2016 Annual bonus Annual Bonus t otal 2017 t otal 2016 Executive Director
Hend El Sherbini 3973500 3898322 450000 450000 4423500 4348322 n onExecutive Directors Lord St John of Bletso 1325938 761565   1325938 Hussein Choucri 883958 507710   883958 507710 James Nolan 883958 507710   883958 507710 Dan Olsson 883958 507710   883958 507710 Richard Phillips There are no taxable benefits corporate pensions or longterm incentive plans for the Companys directors.
Dr.
Hend El Sherbini receives part of her annual bonus in the form of an annual award amounting to EGP 450000.
Mr.
Philips is the board representative of a major shareholder Actis and is therefore not remunerated Remuneration of Directors in 2017 all figures in EGP IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 63 Directors
Corporate Governance The statements and reviews on pages 02 to 47 comprise the Strategic Report which contains certain information that is incorporated into this Directors Report by refer ence including indications as to the Groups likely future business developments.
Directors
The Directors who held office at 31 December 2017 and up to the date of this report are set out on pages 50 and 51 along with their photographs and biographies.
The remuneration of the Directors including their respective shareholdings in the Group where applicable is set out in the Remuneration Report on pages 62 and 63.
Directors and Officers Liability Insurance and Indemnification of Directors Subject to the conditions set out in the Companies Jersey Law 1991 as amended the Group has arranged appropri ate Directors and Officers liability insurance to indem nify the Directors against liability in respect of proceedings brought by third parties.
Such provisions remain in force at the date of this report.
The Groups principal activity is the provision of medical diagnostics services.
An overview of the Groups principal activities is an integral component of the Strategic Review included in this Annual Report beginning on page 24.
Business Review and Future Developments A review of the development and performance of the Groups business forms an integral part of this Annual Report in sections including A Note from Our Chairman pages 1011 A Note from Our CEO pages 12 to 13 Strategic Report beginning page 02 and particularly the Financial Review beginning on page 40.
Financial state ments for 2017 appear in the Audited Financial Statements starting on page 68.
Results and Dividends The Groups Results for 2017 are set out in the Audited Financial Statements starting on page 68.
The Board of Directors has recommended that a dividend of US 0.16 sixteen US cents per share 2016 US 0.14 fourteen IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 64 Shareholder n umber of voting rights % of voting rights Hena Holdings Ltd.
38245589 25.50 Actis IDH B.
31500000 21.00 HSBC Global Asset Mgmt UK 12887084 8.59
Rowe Price 7670533 5.11 FIAM LLC 7340589 4.89 US cents should be paid to shareholders who appear on the register as at 18 May 2018 with an exdividend date of 17 May 2018.
The payment date for the dividend is 8 June 2018.
The principal risks and uncertainties that may affect IDHs business as well as their potential mitigants are outlined on pages 34 to 39 of this Annual Report.
Share Capital The Group has 150000000 ordinary shares each with a nominal value of US 1.00.
There are no other shares in is sue other than ordinary shares.
Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements on page 107 summarises the rights of the ordinary shares as well as the number issued during 2017.
An analysis of shareholdings is shown below.
Substantial share holdings As at 1 March 2018 the Company ascertained from its own analysis that the following held interests of 3% or more of the voting rights of its issued share capital The Directors certify that there are no issued securities that carry special rights with regard to control of the Company.
There are similarly no restrictions on voting rights.
Chief
Executive Officer Dr.
Hend ElSherbini jointly holds vot ing rights to shares held by Hena Holdings Ltd. mother Dr.
Moamena Kamel.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 65 Corporate Governance Committees of the Board The Board has established Audit Nominations and Re muneration Committees.
Details of these Committees including membership and their activities during 2017 are contained in the Corporate Governance section of this An nual Report and in the Remuneration Report.
Corporate Responsibility The Groups report on Corporate Responsibility is set out on pages 46 to 47.
Corporate Governance The Groups report on Corporate Governance is on pages Articles of Association The Companys Articles of Association set out the rights of shareholders including voting rights distribution rights attendance at general meetings powers of Directors pro ceedings of Directors as well as borrowing limits and other governance controls.
A copy of the Articles of Association can be requested from the Group Company Secretary.
The Articles of Association may be amended by members of the Company via special resolution at a General Meeting of the Company.
Rules on the Appointment and Replacement of
Rules on the appointment and replacement of Directors are set out in the Groups Articles of Association a copy of which may be requested from the Group Company
Agreements Related to Change of Control of the
No such agreements exist.
Conflicts of interest During the year no Director held any beneficial interest in any contract significant to the Groups business other than a contract of employment.
The Company has procedures set out in the Articles of Association for managing conflicts of interest.
Should a Director become aware that they or their connected parties have an interest in an existing or proposed transaction with the Group they are required to notify the Board as soon as reasonably practicable.
The Group made no political donations in 2017 2016 nil.
Financial Instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise cash balances balances with related parties trade receivables and payables and other payables and receivables that arise in the normal course of business.
The Groups financial in struments risk management objectives and policies are set out in Note 14 to the Financial Statements.
Employees
The Group has one 1 Executive Director namely Group Chief Executive Dr.
Hend El Sherbini as identified in the Corporate Governance section.
Her biographical informa tion appears on page 50 of this Annual Report and her compensation is reported in the Remuneration Committee Report on page 63.
IDH has service agreements with the Group Chief Executive and with the Group Chief Financial Officer Mr.
Omar Bedewy who is not a Company Direc tor.
Dr.
Hend El Sherbini leads the Companys Executive Committee which also includes all heads of departments and meets every second week to review and discuss per formance priorities and upcoming events in light of the Groups strategic plan.
In view of the Companys regional growth plans IDH is committed to building out its senior management team in preparation for a larger footprint.
The
Group and its subsidiaries had total of 4739 2016 4688 employees as of 31 December 2017 employed in Egypt Jordan and Sudan.
Creditor payment policy Individual subsidiaries of the Group are responsible for agreeing on the terms and conditions under which busi ness transactions with their suppliers are conducted.
It is the Groups policy that payments to suppliers are made in accordance with all relevant terms and conditions.
In a transaction that closed in January 2018 IDH formed a joint venture with Man Capital LLC Man Capital the Londonbased investment arm of the Mansour Group called Dynasty Holding Group Dynasty which is 51% owned and controlled by IDH.
In turn Dynasty has part nered with the International Finance Corporation IFC to invest in Eagle Eye EchoScan Limited EchoScan a leading medical diagnostics business based in Nigeria.
Going Concern Having made enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to meet its liabilities as they fall due for at least 12 months from the date of approval of these consolidated financial statements.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis in IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 66 preparing the financial information.
The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic Review on pages 02 to 45.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrow ing facilities are described in the financial statements and notes thereon on pages 68 to 113.
Statement of Directors Responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU IFRS as adopted by the EU interpretations from the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRIC and Companies Jersey Law 1991 as amended.
Jersey Law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Group for that year.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable comparable understandable and prudent ensure that the financial statements comply with IFRS as adopted by the EU and prepare the financial statements on the going con cern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for maintaining proper ac counting records that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and to enable them to ensure that the financial statements com ply with Jersey Law.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are also responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Groups website on the internet.
However information is accessible in many different countries where legislation governing the prepa ration and dissemination of financial statements may differ from that applicable in the United Kingdom and Jersey.
The Directors of the Group confirm that to the best of their knowledge that The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards including International Ac counting Standards and Interpretations adopted by the International Accounting Standards Board give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and The sections of this Report including the Chairmans Statement Strategic Report Financial Review and Principal Risks and Uncertainties which constitute the management report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the issuer and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
Disclosure of Information to the Auditor So far as each person who was a Director at the date of approving this report is aware there is no relevant audit information being information needed by the auditor in connection with preparing its report of which the audi tor is unaware.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors and the Groups auditors each Director has taken all the steps that heshe is obliged to take as a Director in order to have made himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information.
Annual General Meeting AGM The 2018 AGM will be held at the Hilton London Tower Bridge on 14 May 2018 at 1100 am BST London UK.
The Chairman of the Board and of each of the Boards Com mittees as well as all company Directors will be in attend ance at the AGM to answer questions from shareholders.
During the AGM all of the Groups Directors will retire and submit themselves for reelection.
Auditor
KPMG LLP has expressed its willingness to continue in of fice as auditor and separate resolutions will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM concerning their reappointment and to authorise the Board to agree their remuneration.
By order of the Board
Hend El Sherbini Executive Director 20 March 2018 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 67 Financial
Independent Auditors Report to the members of Integrated Diagnostics Holdings plc 70 Consolidated Statement Of Financial Position Consolidated Income Statement 75 Consolidated Statement Of Profit Or Loss And Other Comprehensive Income 76 Consolidated Statement Of Cash Flows 77 Consolidated Statement Of Changes In Equity 78 Integrated Diagnostics Holdings Plc  IDH and its Subsidiaries 79
Auditors Report
Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Integrated Diagnostics Holdings plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income the Consolidated Statement of Fi nancial Position the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 2.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with Interna tional Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union of the state of the Groups affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with Interna tional Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Company in accordance with UK ethical requirements including FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evi dence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Materiality
EGP25m 2016EGP20m group financial statements as a whole 4.5% 2016 5% of Profit before tax
99% 201699% of group profit before tax Risks of material misstatement Recurring risks
Financial Statements IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 70 2.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters were as follows unchanged from 2016 t he risk our response Recoverability of goodwill and indefinite life brand intangible assets EGP1640million 2016
Refer to page 58 Audit Committee Report page 86 accounting policy and page 100  financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation Each of the CGUs operate within a market subject to high degrees of competition price inflation and cost rises which provide market challenges.
Recoverability of the goodwill and brand names intangible asset is subject to judgement in terms of the assump tions used and inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting the future cash flows that are used in the Groups discounted cash flow models in particular in respect of revenue growth i. discount rate.
This is a key judgemental area that our audit is concentrated on.
Our procedures included Historical comparison assessing the reasonableness of the Groups forecasting by comparing actual performance for the year against forecasts for the same period in the prior year model Benchmarking assumptions evaluating the Groups assumptions included within the discounted cash flow forecasts by comparing key inputs such as projected growth cost inflation and discount rates to internally and externally derived data Sector expertise We used our own valuation specialist to assist us in evaluating the assumptions and methodology used in calculating the discount rate Sensitivity analysis performing sensitivity analysis on the assump tions noted above and Assessing transparency assessing whether the groups disclosures about the sensitivity of the outcome of the impairment assessment to changes in key assumptions reflected the risks inherent in the valuation of goodwill.
IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the group financial statements as a whole was set at EGP25m 2016 EGP 20m deter mined with reference to a benchmark of group profit before tax of which it represents 4.5% 2016 5%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any cor rected or uncorrected identified misstatements ex ceeding EGP1.2m 2016 EGP1m in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the groups 11 2016 11 reporting components we subjected 6 2016 6 to full scope audits for group reporting purposes and 3 2016 3 to specified riskfocused audit procedures.
The latter were not individually financially significant enough to require an full scope audit for group reporting purposes but did present specific individual risk that needed to be addressed.
For the residual 2 components we performed analysis at an aggregated group level to reexamine our assessment that there were no signifi cant risks of material misstatement within these.
The components within the scope of our work ac counted for the percentages illustrated opposite.
The Group team instructed the component auditors as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed above and the informa tion to be reported back.
The Group team approved component materialities which in the ranged from EGP2.2m to EGP8m 2016 EGP0.9m to EGP 7.5m having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components.
The work on 7 of the 9 components 2016 7 of the 9 components was performed by component auditors and the rest was performed by the Group team.
The Group team visited the 6 2016 6 components all in the same location in Egypt on multiple occa sions including to assess the audit risk and strategy and to attend a clearance meeting.
T elephone confer ence meetings were also held with this component auditor and with the component auditor in Jordan component that was not physically visited  At these visits and meetings the findings reported to the Group team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group team was then performed by the component auditor.
Group PBT Group materiality Full scope for group audit purposes 2017 Specified riskfocused audit procedures 2017 Full scope for group audit purposes 2016 Specified riskfocused audit procedures 2016 Residual components Group profit before taxEGP559m 2016 EGp397m Group revenue Group net assets Group profit before tax Group Materiality EGp25m 2016 EGp20m 99% 2016 96% 100% 2016 97% 100% 2016 100%
Whole financialstatements materiality2016 EGP20m
Range of materiality at 6 components EGP2.2mEGP8m 2016 EGP0.9m to EGP7.5m
Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016
Financial Statements IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 72 4.
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material un certainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the finan cial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or any form of assur ance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial state ments audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Jersey Law 1991 we are required to report to you if in our opinion proper accounting records have not been kept by the Company or proper returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Companys accounts are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or we have not received all the information and explana tions we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 67 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Groups ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to go ing concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditor s report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an au dit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if indi vidually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Article 113A of the Companies Jersey Law 1991.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those mat ters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
David Neale Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL 20 March 2018 IDH ANNUAl REPORT 2017 73 Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Financial Position As at 31 December 2017 Notes 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 11 473786 380374 Intangible assets and goodwill 12 1658252 1654362 Restricted cash 18 Deferred tax assets 9 Total noncurrent assets 2132038 2066296 Current assets Inventories 15 69935 51715 Trade and other receivables 16 202255 148375 Restricted cash 18 13226 Other investments 19 9149 95575 Cash and cash equivalents 17 685211 683721 Total current assets Total assets
Share capital 20 1072500 1072500 Share premium reserve 20 1027706 1027706 Capital reserves 20 314310 314310 Legal reserve 20 33383 30251 Put option reserve 20 93256 102082 Translation reserve 20 203709 207720 Retained earnings 315856 315518 Equity attributable to the owners of the Company 2245588 2237303 Noncontrolling interests 7 68502 62161 Total equity 2314090 2299464 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liabilities 9 158712 132627 Other provisions 22 14699 12202 Loans and borrowings 24 38425 Longterm financial obligations 25 100478 119638 Total noncurrent liabilities 312314 264467 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 23 333432 345776 Loans and borrowings 24 14575 Current tax liabilities 137403 135975 Total current liabilities 485410 481751 Total liabilities 797724 746218 Total equity and liabilities 3111814 3045682 The accompanying notes on pages 79  113 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
These consolidated financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors and signed on their behalf on 20 March 2018 by Chief Executive Officer Head of Audit Committee
Hend El Sherbini James Nolan Shareholder Number of voting rights % of voting rights Hena Holdings Ltd.
38245589 25.50 Actis IDH B.
31500000 21.00 HSBC Global Asset Mgmt UK 12887084 8.59
Rowe Price 7670533 5.11 FIAM LLC 7340589 4.89 IDH annual re Por t 2017 74 Consolidated Income Statement For the year ended 31 December 2017 Notes 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Revenue 3 1514257 1170621 Cost of sales 784701 542687 Gross profit 729556 627934
Administrative expenses 126517 105390 Other expenses 2825 3165 Operating profit 8 540371 466192 Finance costs 33005 99072 Finance income 51064 21418 Net finance cost 8.2 18059 77654 Profit before tax 558430 388538 Income tax expense 9 174701 121620 Profit for the year 383729 266918 Profit attributed to Owners of the Company 374023 260399 Noncontrolling interests 7 9706 6519 383729 266918 Earnings per share expressed in EGP 10 Basic and Diluted 2.49 1.74 The accompanying notes on pages 79  113 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 75 Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 Decembertel
EGP000
Net profit 383729 266918 Other comprehensive income Items that may be subsequently reclassified to profit or loss Currency translation differences on foreign currency subsidiaries 5577 228130 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 5577 228130 Total comprehensive income for the year 378152 495048 Attributable to Owners of the Company 370012 467664 Noncontrolling interests 8140 27384 378152 495048 The accompanying notes on pages 79  113 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 76 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 31 December 2017 Note 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Cash flows from operating activities Profit for the period before tax 558430 388538 Adjustments for Depreciation 11 57148 40224 Amortization 12 4774 4506 Impairment of Intangible assets LossGain on disposal of Property plant and equipment 77 60 Impairment in trade and other receivables 8 5561 4298 Reversal of impairment in trade and other receivables 16 1461 2768 Provisions made 22 3536 2224 Provisions reversed 22 1000 717 Interest expense 8.2 10391 9271 Interest income 8.2 51064 21418 Lossgain of foreign exchange 8.2 19940 88877 Net cash from operating activities before changes in working capital 606332 514944 Provision used 22 39 267 Change in inventory 18220 17388 Change in trade and other receivables 43575 30436 Change in trade and other payables 29652 39935 Cash generated from operating activities before income tax payment 514846 506788 Income tax paid during period 111771 108130 Net cash from operating activities 403075 398658 Cash flows from investing activities Interest received 36660 19753 Acquisition of Property plant and equipment 157349 48539 Proceeds from sale of property and equipment 343 90 Change in restricted Cash 18 27 Change in other investment 19 86426 Net cash flows used in investing activities 33893 137524 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from borrowings 53000 Interest paid 10096 10263 Acquisition noncontrolling interest Dividends paid 376744 88560 Financial lease 36984 8928 Net cash flows used in financing activities 370824 118201 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 1642 142933 Cash and cash equivalent at the beginning of the period 683721 387716 Effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash held 3132 153072 Cash and cash equivalent at the end of the period 18 685211 683721 The accompanying notes on pages 79  113 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 77 Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2017 All amounts in Egyptian Pounds
Share
Capital
Share premium
Legal reserve Put option reserve
Retained earnings
To t a l attributed to the owners of the
Non
Controlling interests Total Equity As at 1 January 2017 1072500 1027706 314310 30251 102082 207720 315518  2237303 62161 2299464 Profit for the period       374023  374023 9706 383729 Other comprehensive income for the period      4011   4011 1566 5577 T otal comprehensive income      4011 374023  370012 8140 378152 Transactions with owners of the Company Contributions and distributions Dividends       371875  371875 4869 376744 Reverse sharebased payment        .
Legal reserve formed during the period    3132   3132 Movement in put option liability in the year     8826    8826  8826 T otal contributions and distributions    3132 8826  375007  363049 4869 367918 Change in ownership interests Noncontrolling interests resulting from acquisition of subsidiary 1322  1322 3070 4392 At 31 December 2017 1072500 1027706 314310 33383 93256 203709 315856  2245588 68502 2314090 As at 1 January 2016 1072500 1027706 314310 28834 64069 1193 142712 1034 1895600 46873 1942473 Profit for the period       260399  260399 6519 266918 Other comprehensive income for the period      207265   207265 20865 228130 T otal comprehensive income      207265 260399  467664 27384 495048 Transactions with owners of the Company Contributions and distributions Dividends       79470  79470 9090 88560 Equity settled sharebased payment        1034 1034  1034 Legal reserve formed during the period    90   90 Movement in put option liability in the year     38013    38013  38013 T otal contributions and distributions    90 38013  79560 1034 118517 9090 127607 Change in ownership interests Noncontrolling interests resulting from acquisition of subsidiary 1327  738 8033  7444 3006 10450 At 31 December 2016 1072500 1027706 314310 30251 102082 207720 315518  2237303 62161 2299464 IDH annual re Por t 2017 78 Integrated Diagnostics Holdings plc  IDH and its subsidiaries Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Corporate information The consolidated financial statements of Integrated Diagnostics Holdings plc and its subsidiaries collectively the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorized for issue in accordance with a resolution of the directors on 20 March 2018.
Integrated Diagnostics Holdings plc IDH or the company has been established according to the provisions of the Companies Jersey law 1991 under No.
IDHs purpose is not restricted and the Group has full authority to do any activity as long as it is not banned by the Compa nies law unless amended from time to time or depending on the Companies Jersey law.
The Groups financial year starts on 1 January and ends on 31 December each year.
The Groups main activity is concen trated in the field of medical diagnostics.
Basis of preparation Statement of compliance The consolidated financial statements of the Group have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union adopted IFRS issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB and the Jersey Law 1991 an amendment to which means separate company financial statements are not required.
Basis of measurement The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis except where adopted IFRS mandates that fair value accounting is required.
Functional and presentation currency Each of the Groups entities is using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The Groups consolidated financial statements are presented in Egyptian Pounds being the report ing currency of the main Egyptian trading subsidiaries within the Group and the primary economic environment in which the Group operates.
For each entity the Group determines the functional currency and items included in the financial statements of each entity are measured using that functional currency.
The Group uses the direct method of consolidation and on disposal of a foreign operation the gain or loss that is reclassified to profit or loss reflects the amount that arises from using this method.
Going concern These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had net assets amounting to EGP 2314090.
The Group is profitable and cash generative and the Directors have considered the Groups cash forecasts for a period of 12 months from the signing of the balance sheet.
The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to meet its liabilities as they fall due for at least 12 months from the date of approval of these condensed consolidated annual financial statements.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial information.
2.1 Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of the Group and its subsidiaries as at 31 Decem ber 2017.
Control is achieved when the Group is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 79 Financial Statements i.
Subsidiaries
Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group.
The Group controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
In assessing control the Group takes into consideration potential voting rights that are currently exercisable.
The acquisition date is the date on which control is transferred to the acquirer.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Losses applicable to the noncontrolling interests in a subsidiary are allocated to the noncontrolling interests even if doing so causes the noncontrolling interests to have a deficit balance. ii.
Change in subsidiary ownership and loss of control Changes in the Groups interest in a subsidiary that do not result in a loss of control are accounted for as equity transac tions.
Where the group loses control of a subsidiary the assets and liabilities are derecognised along with any related NCI and other components of equity.
Any resulting gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss.
Any interest retained in the former subsidiary is measured at fair value when control is lost. iii.
Transactions eliminated on consolidation Intragroup balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated.
Unrealised gains arising from transactions with equityaccounted investees are eliminated against the invest ment to the extent of the Groups interest in the investee.
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
2.2 Significant accounting policies Except for the changes below the accounting policies set out below have been consistently applied to all the years pre sented in these consolidated financial statements.
The Group has adopted the following new standard including any inconsequential amendments to other standards with a date of initial application of 1 January 2017.
Annual Improvements to IFRSs  20142016 Cycle Disclosure initiative  amendment to IAS 7 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses  Amendments to IAS 12 This new standard had a nonmaterial impact on these consolidated financial statements.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the consideration transferred which is measured at acquisition date fair value and the amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree.
For each business combination the Group elects whether to measure the non controlling interests in the acquiree at fair value or at the proportionate share of the acquirees identifiable net assets.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred and included in administrative expenses.
When the Group acquires a business it assesses the financial assets and liabilities assumed for appropriate classifica tion and designation in accordance with the contractual terms economic circumstances and pertinent conditions as at the acquisition date.
This includes the separation of embedded derivatives in host contracts by the acquiree.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the acquirer will be recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Contingent consideration classified as an asset or liability that is a financial instrument and within the scope of IAS 39 Finan cial Instruments Recognition and Measurement is measured at fair value with the changes in fair value recognised in the statement of profit or loss.
And when it is classified as equity it should not be remeasured and accounted for within equity.
Goodwill is initially measured at cost being the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred and the amount IDH annual re Por t 2017 80 recognised for noncontrolling interests and any previous interest held over the net identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
If the fair value of the net assets acquired is in excess of the aggregate consideration transferred the Group reassesses whether it has correctly identified all of the assets acquired and all of the liabilities assumed and reviews the procedures used to measure the amounts to be recognised at the acquisition date.
If the reassessment still results in an excess of the fair value of net assets acquired over the aggregate consideration transferred then the gain is recognised in profit or loss.
After initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of impairment testing which it is done one an annual basis goodwill acquired in a business combination is from the acquisition date allocated to each of the Groups cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the combination irrespective of whether other assets or liabilities of the acquiree are assigned to those units.
Where goodwill has been allocated to a cashgenerating unit CGU and part of the operation within that unit is disposed of the goodwill associated with the disposed operation is included in the carrying amount of the operation when deter mining the gain or loss on disposal.
Goodwill disposed in these circumstances is measured based on the relative values of the disposed operation and the portion of the cashgenerating unit retained.
The Group measures financial instruments such as nonderivative financial instruments availableforsale financial assets and contingent consideration assumed in a business combination at fair value at each balance sheet date.
When measuring the fair value of an asset or a liability the Group uses observable market data as far as possible.
Fair value is categorised into different levels in a fair value hierarchy based on the inputs used in the valuation techniques as follows Level 1  Quoted unadjusted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2  Valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is directly or indirectly observable Level 3  Valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is unobservable For assets and liabilities that are recognised in the financial statements at fair value on a recurring basis the Group deter mines whether transfers have occurred between levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole at the end of each reporting period.
For the purpose of fair value disclosures the Group has determined classes of assets and liabilities on the basis of the nature characteristics and risks of the asset or liability and the level of the fair value hierarchy as explained above.
The fair value less any estimated credit adjustments for financial assets and liabilities with maturity dates less than one year is assumed to approximate their carrying value.
The fair value of financial liabilities for disclosure purposes is esti mated by discounting the future contracted cash flows at the current market interest rate that is available to the Group for similar transactions.
Revenue represents the value of medical diagnostic services rendered in the year and is stated net of discounts.
The Group has two types of customers Walkin patients and patients served under contract.
For patients under contract rates are agreed in advance on a pertest clientbyclient basis.
For both types of customers revenue is recognized on completion of the services rendered.
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured regardless of when the payment is received.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 81 Financial Statements Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable taking into account contractually defined terms of payment and excluding taxes or duty. i.
Determining whether an arrangement contains a lease At inception of an arrangement the Group determines whether the arrangement is or contains a lease.
At inception or on reassessment of an arrangement that contains a lease the Group separates out payments and other con sideration required by the arrangement into those for the lease and those for other elements on the basis of their relative fair values.
If the Group concludes for a finance lease that it is impractical to separate the payments reliably then an asset and a liability are recognized at an amount equal to the fair value of the underlying asset subsequently the liability is reduced as payments are made and an imputed finance cost on the liability is recognised using the Groups incremental borrowing rate. ii.
Leased assets Assets held by the Group under leases that transfer to the Group substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership are classified as finance leases.
The leased assets are measured initially at an amount equal to the lower of their fair value and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Subsequent to initial recognition the assets are accounted for in accordance with the accounting policy applicable to that asset.
Assets held under other leases are classified as operating leases and are not recognised in the Groups statement of financial position. iii.
Lease payments Payments made under operating leases are recognised in profit or loss on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Lease incentives received are recognised as an integral part of the total lease expense over the term of the lease.
Minimum lease payments made under finance leases are apportioned between the finance expense and the reduction of the out standing liability.
The finance expense is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity. i.
Current tax Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable income or loss for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years. ii.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is provided using the liability method on temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes at the reporting date.
Deferred tax is recognized on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carry ing amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
However deferred tax liabilities are not recognized if they arise from the initial recognition of goodwill deferred income tax is not accounted for if it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will probably not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences the carry forward of unused tax credits and any unused tax losses.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences and the carry forward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilised.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realized or the deferred income tax liability is settled.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 82 f Foreign currency Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded by the Groups entities at their respective functional currency spot rates at the date the transaction first qualifies for recognition.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the functional currency spot rates of exchange at the reporting date.
Differences arising on settlement or translation of monetary items are recognised in the income statement.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the dates of the initial transactions.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value is determined.
On consolidation the assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated into Egyptian Pounds at the rate of ex change prevailing at the reporting date and their statements of profit or loss are translated at average rate unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses are translated at the rate on the dates of the transactions.
The exchange differences arising on translation for consolidation are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the translation reserve or NCI as the case may be.
On disposal of a foreign operation the component of other comprehensive income relating to that particular foreign operation is recognised in profit or loss.
Any goodwill arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation and any fair value adjustments to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities arising on the acquisition are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operation and translated at the spot rate of exchange at the reporting date.
All property and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation.
Historical cost includes expendi ture that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount or recognized as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognised.
All other repairs and maintenance are charged to the consolidated statement of income during the financial period in which they are incurred.
Land is not depreciated.
Laboratory Equipment held to perform the Hub spoke at the Mega Lab and provided under finance lease arrangements are depreciated under a unit of production method as this most closely reflects the consumption of benefits from the equipment.
Depreciation on other assets is calculated using the straightline method to allocate their cost or revalued amounts to their residual value over their estimated useful lives as follows Buildings 50 years Medical electric and information systems equipment 410 years Leasehold improvements 45 years Fixtures fittings and vehicles 416 years The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
An assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognized within Other lossesgains  net in the consolidated statement of income.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 83 Financial Statements h Intangible assets Intangible assets acquired separately are measured on initial recognition at cost.
The cost of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is their fair value at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition intangible assets are carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Internally generated intangibles excluding capitalised development costs are not capitalised and the related expenditure is reflected in profit or loss in the period in which the expenditure is incurred.
The useful lives of intangible assets are assessed as either finite or indefinite.
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortised over the useful economic life and assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
The amortisation period and the amortisation method for an intangible asset with a finite useful life are reviewed at least at the end of each reporting period.
Changes in the expected useful life or the expected pattern of consumption of future economic benefits embodied in the asset are considered to modify the amortisation period or method as appropriate and are treated as changes in accounting estimates.
The amor tisation expense on intangible assets with finite lives is recognised in the statement of profit or loss in the expense category that is consistent with the function of the intangible assets.
The Group amortises intangible assets with finite lives using the straightline method over the following periods IT development and software 45 years Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortised but are tested for impairment annually either individually or at the cashgenerating unit level.
The assessment of indefinite life is reviewed annually to determine whether the indefi nite life continues to be supportable.
If not the change in useful life from indefinite to finite is made on a prospective basis.
Goodwill
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of subsidiaries and represents the excess of the consideration transferred over interest in net fair value of the net identifiable assetsliabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree and the fair value of the noncontrolling interest in the acquiree.
Goodwill is stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill ac quired in a business combination is allocated to each of the cashgenerating units CGUs or groups of CGUs that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Each unit or group of units to which the goodwill is allocated represents the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes. impairment assessment is done one an annual basis.
Brand
Brand names acquired in a business combination are recognized at fair value at the acquisition date and have an indefinite useful life. i.
Financial instruments  initial recognition and subsequent measurement A financial instrument is any contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a financial liability or equity instrument of another entity. i.
Financial assets Initial recognition and measurement Financial assets are classified at initial recognition as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss loans and re ceivables AFS financial assets as appropriate.
All financial assets are recognised initially at fair value plus in the case of financial assets not recorded at fair value through profit or loss transaction costs that are attributable to the acquisition of the financial asset.
Purchases or sales of financial assets that require delivery of assets within a time frame established by regulation or convention in the market place regular way trades are recognised on the trade date i.
Group commits to purchase or sell the asset.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 84 Subsequent measurement For purposes of subsequent measurement financial assets are classified in three categories Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Loans and receivables Available for sale  AFS financial assets The Group did not hold financial assets classified as financial assets at fair value through the profit or loss or AFS financial assets at 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
After initial measurement such financial assets are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method EIR less impairment.
Amortised cost is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the EIR.
The EIR amortisation is included in finance income in the statement of profit or loss.
The losses arising from impairment are recognised in the statement of profit or loss in finance costs for loans and in cost of sales or other operating expenses for receivables.
Derecognition
A financial asset or where applicable a part of a financial asset or part of a group of similar financial assets is primarily derecognised i.
The rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired
The Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from the asset or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full without material delay to a third party under a passthrough arrangement and either a the Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset or b the Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset but has transferred control of the asset.
When the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from an asset or has entered into a pass through arrange ment it evaluates if and to what extent it has retained the risks and rewards of ownership.
When it has neither transferred nor retained substantially all of the risks and rewards of the asset nor transferred control of the asset the Group continues to recognise the transferred asset to the extent of its continuing involvement.
In that case the Group also recognises an associated liability.
The transferred asset and the associated liability are measured on a basis that reflects the rights and obligations that the Group has retained.
Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee over the transferred asset is measured at the lower of the origi nal carrying amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration that the Group could be required to repay.
Impairment of financial assets Further disclosures relating to impairment of financial assets are also provided in the following notes Disclosures for significant estimates and assumptions Note 2.3 Financial assets Note 14 Trade receivables Note 16 The Group assesses at each reporting date whether there is objective evidence that a financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired.
An impairment exists if one or more events that has occurred since the initial recognition of the asset an incurred loss event has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or the group of financial assets that can be reliably estimated.
Evidence of impairment may include indications that the debtors or a group of debt ors is experiencing significant financial difficulty default or delinquency in interest or principal payments the probability that they will enter bankruptcy or other financial reorganisation and observable data indicating that there is a measurable decrease in the estimated future cash flows such as changes in arrears or economic conditions that correlate with defaults.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 85 Financial Statements ii.
Financial liabilities Initial recognition and measurement All financial liabilities are recognised initially at fair value and in the case of loans and borrowings and payables net of directly attributable transaction costs.
All of the Groups financial liabilities are classified as financial liabilities carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments or hedge account for any transactions.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the Groups financial liabilities are a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
The Groups financial liabilities include trade and other payables finance lease liabilities and loans and borrowings including bank overdrafts.
Derecognition
A financial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled or expires.
When an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified such an exchange or modification is treated as the derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability.
The difference in the respective carrying amounts is recognised in the statement of profit or loss. iii.
Offsetting of financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported in the consolidated statement of financial position if there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously.
Impairment of nonfinancial assets Further disclosures relating to impairment of nonfinancial assets are also provided in the following notes Disclosures for significant assumptions and estimates Note 2.3 Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives Note 13 The Group assesses at each reporting date whether there is an indication that an asset may be impaired.
If any indication exists or when annual impairment testing for an asset is required the Group estimates the assets recoverable amount.
An assets recoverable amount is the higher of an assets or CGUs fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use.
The recoverable amount is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets.
When the carrying amount of an asset or CGU exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In determining fair value less costs of disposal recent market transactions are taken into account.
If no such transactions can be identified an appropriate valuation model is used.
These calculations are corroborated by valuation multiples quoted share prices for publicly traded companies or other available fair value indicators.
The Group bases its impairment calculation on detailed budgets and forecast calculations which are prepared separately for each of the Groups CGUs to which the individual assets are allocated.
These budgets and forecast calculations generally cover a period of five years.
A longterm growth rate is calculated and applied to project future cash flows after the fifth year.
Impairment losses of continuing operations are recognised in the statement of profit or loss in expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset except for properties previously revalued with the revaluation taken to other comprehensive income OCI.
For such properties the impairment is recognised in OCI up to the amount of any previous revaluation.
For assets excluding goodwill an assessment is made at each reporting date to determine whether there is an indication that previously recognised impairment losses no longer exist or have decreased.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 86 If such indication exists the Group estimates the assets or CGUs recoverable amount.
A previously recognised impair ment loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the assumptions used to determine the assets recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised.
The reversal is limited so that the carrying amount of the asset does not exceed its recoverable amount nor exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
Such reversal is recognised in the statement of profit or loss unless the asset is carried at a revalued amount in which case the reversal is treated as a revaluation increase.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually as at 31 October and when circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
Impairment is determined for goodwill by assessing the recoverable amount of each CGU or group of CGUs to which the goodwill relates.
When the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than its carrying amount an impairment loss is recognised.
Impairment losses relating to goodwill cannot be reversed in future periods.
Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are tested for impairment annually as at 31 October at the CGU level as ap propriate and when circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are largely independent cash inflows CGU.
Prior impairments of nonfinancial assets other than goodwill are reviewed for possible reversal at each reporting date.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value.
Cost is determined using the weighted average method.
Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less estimated selling and distribution expenses.
Cash and shortterm deposits in the statement of financial position comprise cash at banks and on hand and shortterm deposits with a maturity of three months or less which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
For the purpose of the consolidated statement of cash flows cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and shortterm deposits as defined above net of outstanding bank overdrafts as they are considered an integral part of the Groups cash management.
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is prob able that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
When the Group expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed for exam ple under an insurance contract the reimbursement is recognised as a separate asset but only when the reimbursement is virtually certain.
The expense relating to a provision is presented in the statement of profit or loss net of any reimbursement.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are discounted using a current pretax rate that reflects when appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
When discounting is used the increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as a finance cost.
Provisions are measured at the present value of the expenditures expected to be required to settle the obligation using a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the obligation.
The increase in the provision due to passage of time is recognised as a finance cost.
Pensions and other postemployment benefits A defined contribution plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions into a separate entity.
The
Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient assets to pay all employees the benefits relating to employee service in the current and prior periods.
Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans are recognized as an expense in the income statement in the periods during which services are rendered by employees.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 87 Financial Statements o Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker.
The chief operating decisionmaker who is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the steering committee that makes strategic decisions.
2.3 Significant accounting judgments estimates and assumptions New and amended standards and interpretations not yet adopted The Group has not early adopted any other standard interpretation or amendments that have been issued but not yet effective for the year ended 31 December 2017.
None of these are expected to have a material effect on these consolidated financial statements of the Group except for the following which could change the classification and measurements of financial assets.
IFRS 9 Financial instruments expected effective date of January 2018.
IFRS 16 Leases effective date of January 2019 introduces an on balance sheet accounting model for operating leases.
The Group has significant operating lease commitments through the lease of branches and is anticipated to have a material effect when these arrangements are required to be brought on balance sheet.
Estimated impact of the adoption of IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 IFr S 15 The Group is required to adopt IFRS 15 Revenue From Contracts With Customers From 1 January 2018.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers sets out the principles for the measurement and recognition of revenue and will replace IAS 18.
The standard provides a five step model to determine when an entity should recognise revenue and at what amount by allocation of the transaction price to separate performance obligations.
The Group has two types of customer walkin patients and patients served under contract.
For patients served under contract rates are agreed in advance on a pertest clientbyclient basis.
For both types of customer revenue is recognized on completion of the services rendered.
The Groups services are provided a point in time rather than over a period of time and there are stand alone sales prices per test stipulated in the contracts that exist with selected customers.
The Group considers the current basis of revenue recognition to remain appropriate as the only performance obligation being completion of a test reflects the current policy.
Therefore the Group considers that the initial application IFRS 15 will have no impact on its consolidated financial statements based on the assessment undertaken to date however the Group may enter into contracts in the near future that would be accounted for differently under IFRS 15 than the existing standards.
IFr S9 The Group is required to adopt IFRS 9 Financial Instruments from 1 January 2018.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments sets out the requirements for recognizing classifying and measuring financial assets and financial liabilities and includes guidance in respect of general hedge accounting.
This standard replaces IAS 39 and sets out two key criteria for determining the classification and measurement of financial assets including the entitys business model for managing financial assets and the contractual cash flow characteristics.
IFRS 9 also sets out a single impairment model to ensure expected credit losses on financial instruments are always recognized as soon as they are forecast.
In relation to hedge accounting IFRS 9 adopts a principlesbased approach for testing hedge effectiveness instead of setting specific numerical thresholds.
The Group has made an initial assessment of the impact that the initial application of IFRS 9 will have on its consolidated Financial statement by considering the level of loss experienced from customers across the portfolio at a macro level.
The financial impact of this assessment is an adjustment net of tax to the opening balance of the Groups equity at 1 January 2018 of EGP 2.5 m due to the recognition of an impairment charge for the expected credit loss of trade receivables.
The final impact of adopting the standard at 1 January 2018 may change because the Group is in the process of undertaking an extensive exercise to assess the credit loss on a customer basis which has not been finalised.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 88 Additionally the testing and assessment of controls over new IT systems has not been complete.
It is not expected that the impact of the final assessment will be materially different.
The total estimated adjustment net of tax to the opening balance of the Groups equity at 1 January 2018 is EGP 2.5 m due to the recognition of an impairment charge for the expected credit loss of trade receivables.
The preparation of the Groups consolidated financial statements in conformity with adopted IFRSs requires management to make judgments estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues expenses assets and li abilities.
Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets or liabilities affected in future periods.
Other disclosures relating to the Groups exposure to risks and uncertainties includes Capital management Note 4 Financial instruments risk management and policies Note 14 Sensitivity analyses disclosures Notes 14
In preparing these consolidated financial statements management have made a material judgment that affect the ap plication of the Groups lease accounting policy and the reported amounts of assets liabilities and expenses.
Information
Estimates and assumptions The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are described below.
The Group based its assumptions and estimates on parameters available when the consolidated financial statements were prepared.
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments however may change due to market changes or circumstances arising that are beyond the control of the Group.
Such changes are reflected in the assumptions when they occur.
Impairment of intangible assets The Group tests annually whether goodwill and other intangibles with indefinite lives have suffered any impairment.
Im pairment exists when the carrying value of an asset or cash generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount which is the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use.
The recoverable amounts of cash generating units have been determined based on value in use.
The value in use calculation is based on a discounted cash flow DCF model.
The cash flows are derived from the budget for the next five years and do not include restructuring activities that the Group is not yet committed to or significant future investments that will enhance the assets performance of the CGU being tested.
The recoverable amount is sensitive to the discount rate used for the DCF model as well as the expected future cashinflows and the growth rate used for extrapolation purposes.
Impairment of trade and notes receivables The requirement for impairment of trade receivables is made through monitoring the debts aging and reviewing customers credit position and their ability to make payment as they fall due.
An impairment is recorded against receivables for the irrecoverable amount estimated by management.
At the year end the provision for impairment of trade receivables was EGP 21784K 31 December 2016 EGP 19154k.
Segment information The Group is viewed as a single operating segment as the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM reviews the internal management reports and KPIs of the Group as whole and not at a further aggregated level.
The Group operates in three geographic areas Egypt Sudan and Jordan.
Each area offers similar services and the KPIs of each are viewed to be the same and they are not viewed as individual operating segments.
The revenue split between the three regions is set out below.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 89 Financial Statements Revenue by geographic location For the year ended Egypt region
Sudan region
Jordan region
Total
EGP000
31 December 2017 1250584 45687 217986 1514257 31 December 2016 1024378 34103 112140 1170621 The operating segment profit measure reported to the CODM is EBITDA as follows
EGP000
Profit from operations 540371 466192 Property plant and equipment depreciation 57148 40224 Amortization of Intangible assets 4774 4506 EBITDA 602293 510922 The operating segment assets and liabilities measure reported to the CODM is in accordance with IFRS as shown in the Groups Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
4 Capital management The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The repatriation of a declared dividend from Egyptian group entities are subject to regulation by Egyptian authorities.
The outcome of an Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders declaring a dividend is first certified by the General Authority for Investment and Free Zones GAFI.
Approval is subsequently transmitted to Misr for Central Clearing Depository and Registry MCDR to distribute dividends to all shareholders regardless of their domicile following notification of shareholders via publication in one national newspapers.
The Group monitors capital on the basis of the net debt to equity ratio.
This ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total equity.
Net debt is calculated as total liabilities being total current liabilities plus longterm financial obligations less cash and cash equivalents.
As a provider of medical diagnostic services IDHs operations in Sudan are not subject to sanctions.
EGP000
EGP000
Total liabilities 624313 601389 Less cash and shortterm deposits Note 17 685211 683721 Net cashdebt 60898 82332 Total Equity 2314090 2299464 Net debt to equity ratio 2.6% 3.6% No changes were made in the objectives policies or processes for managing capital during the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 90 5.
Group information Information about subsidiaries The consolidated financial statements of the Group include Principal activities Country of Incorporation % equity interest 2017 2016 Al Borg Laboratory Company  AlBorg Medical diagnostics service Egypt 99.3% 99.3% Al Mokhtabar Company for Medical Labs  Al Mokhtabar Medical diagnostics service Egypt 99.9% 99.9% Molecular Diagnostic Center Medical diagnostics service Egypt 99.9% 99.9% Medical Genetic Center Medical diagnostics service Egypt 55.0% 55.0% Al Makhbariyoun Al Arab Group Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan Medical diagnostics service Jordan 60.0% 60.0% Golden Care for Medical Services Holding company of SAMA Egypt 100.0% 100.0% Integrated Medical Analysis Company
Medical diagnostics service Egypt 99.6% 99.6% SAMA Medical Laboratories Co.
Ul tralab medical laboratory Medical diagnostics service Sudan 80.0% 80.0% ALMokhtabar Sudanese Egyptian Co.
Medical diagnostics service Sudan 65.0% 65.0% Integrated Diagnostics Holdings Limited Intermediary holding company
Island
100.0% 100.0% Dynasty Group Holdings Limited Intermediary holding company
Island
51%.0 51.0% Molecular Diagnostic Center is no longer treated as a subsidiary with effect from 5 May 2016 following the start of liquidation proceedings as control has been passed to the liquidator  Abd EL Wahab Kamal under Egyptian Law.
Full details of the Group historical acquisitions can be found in the prospectus for the initial public offering by the Company dated 6 May 2015 and available at site Business combinations and acquisition of noncontrolling interests No change in business combinations and acquisition of noncontrolling interests during the year.
NonControlling interest Financial information of subsidiaries that have material noncontrolling interests is provided below Proportion of equity interest held by noncontrolling interests Country of incorporation 2017 2016 Medical Genetic Center Egypt 45.0% 45.0% Al Makhbariyoun Al Arab Group Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan Jordan 40.0% 40.0% SAMA Medical Laboratories Co.
Ultra lab medical laboratory  Sudan 20.0% 20.0% Al Borg Laboratory Company Egypt 0.7% 0.7% IDH annual re Por t 2017 91 Financial Statements The summarised financial information of these subsidiaries is provided below.
This information is based on amounts before intercompany eliminations.
Medical
Genetic
CenterEGP000
Al
Makhbariyoun
Al Arab Group
Kingdom of Jordan
SAMA Medical
Co.
Ultralab medical laboratory
Alborg
Laboratory
Company
EGP000
Other
EGP000
Intra
Groupelimina tions EGP000
EGP000
Summarised statement of profit or loss for 2017 Revenue 11454 218077 36959 589275 323786 Profit 1311 22253 1948 194660 61224 Other comprehensive income 4082 2341 Total comprehensive income 4082 2341 Profit allocated to noncontrolling interest 590 8901 390 1378 1200 353 9706 Other comprehensive income allocated to noncontrolling interest 1633 468 Summarised statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 Noncurrent assets 962 106439 2454 145751 118934 Current assets 6844 50562 18448 430089 159687 Noncurrent liabilities 42 6118 85427 Current liabilities 4154 60639 12004 132693 110905 Net assets 12002 217640 32906 714651 474953 Net assets attributable to noncontrolling interest 5403 87056 6581 5058 1981 33616 68502 IDH annual re Por t 2017 92 Medical
CenterEGP000
Al
Makhbariyoun
Al Arab Group
Kingdom of Jordan
SAMA Medical
Co.
Ultralab medical laboratory
Alborg
Laboratory
Company
EGP000
Other
EGP000
Intra
Groupelimina tions EGP000
EGP000
Summarised cash flow information for year ended 31 December 2017 Operating 625 40715 437 155451 41979 Investing 84 28326 756 45017 2199 Financing 1565 10933 69410 46577 Net increase decrease in cash and cash equivalents 856 1456 319 131058 6797 Summarised statement of profit or loss for 2016 Revenue 11881 112266 27160 482002 207452 Profit 1818 13850 1360 199827 57725 Other comprehensive income 52930 1115 Total comprehensive income 3016 850 Profit allocated to noncontrolling interest 818 5540 272 1414 916 610 6519 Other comprehensive income allocated to noncontrolling interest 21172 446
Genetic
CenterEGP000
Al
Makhbariyoun
Al Arab Group
Kingdom of Jordan
SAMA Medical
Co.
Ultralab medical laboratory
Alborg
Laboratory
Company
EGP000
Other
EGP000
Intra
Groupelimina tions EGP000
EGP000
Summarised statement of financial position as at 31 December 2016 Noncurrent assets 885 92168 3363 136938 136316 Current assets 7761 47090 20548 311085 306983 Noncurrent liabilities 9 773 Current liabilities 4518 42014 14657 120345 324452 Net assets 6121 40845 9009 194900 122583 Net assets attributable to noncontrolling interest 5930 72818 7714 4023 1327 26997 62161 Operating 2687 18034 1508 189193 73254 Investing 37 11955 410 55929 8326 Financing 3163 6848 52256 8928 Net increasede crease in cash and cash equivalents 513 769 1098 81008 56000 IDH annual re Por t 2017 93 Financial Statements Expenses and other income Included in profit and loss are the following
EGP000
Impairment on trade and other receivables 5561 4298 Impairment of goodwill Charge for increase in provisions 3536 2224 Operating lease payments buildings 51478 32234 Professional and advisory fees 22945 24907 Amortisation 4774 4506 Depreciation 57148 40224 Total 145442 110242 8.1 Auditors remuneration The group paid or accrued the following amounts to its auditor and its associates in respect of the audit of the financial statements and for other services provided to the group 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Groups annual financial statements 5459 2411 The audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 1593 1136 Tax compliance and advisory services 608 571 7660 4118 8.2 Net finance costs 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Finance charges payable under finance leases 10391 9271 Net foreign exchange loss 19940 88877 Bank Charges 2674 924 Total finance costs 33005 99072 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Interest income 51064 21418 Total finance income 51064 21418 Net finance cost income 18059 77654 IDH annual re Por t 2017 94 8.3 Employee numbers and costs The average number of persons employed by the Group including directors during the year and the aggregate payroll costs of these persons analysed by category were as follows 2017 2016 Medical Administration Total Medical Administration Total Average number of employees 4226 443 4669 4307 381 4688 2017 EGP000 2016 EGP000 Medical Administration Total Medical Administration Total Wages and salaries 219493 73604 293097 179626 59276 238902 Social security costs 15537 4091 19628 12086 2678 14764 Contributions to defined contribution plan 3168 479 3647 3131 511 3642 Total 238198 78174 316372 194843 62465 257308 Details of Directors and Key Management remuneration and share incentives are disclosed in the Remuneration Report and note 27.
Income tax a Amounts recognised in profit or loss 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Current tax Current year 117844 135727 Deferred tax Effect of reduction in tax rate to 22.5% Deferred tax arising on undistributed reserves in subsidiaries 19808 18876 Relating to origination and reversal of temporary differences 37049 32983 Total Deferred tax income  expense 56857 14107 Tax expense recognised in profit or loss 174701 121620 IDH annual re Por t 2017 95 Financial Statements b Reconciliation of effective tax rate The Company is treated as a tax resident of Jersey for the purpose of Jersey tax laws and is subject to a tax rate of 0%.
And the Company tax domicile in the UK.
As a holding company for the IDH group the Board concluded that the UK represents the most effective and efficient jurisdiction from which to manage the Company.
The current income tax charge for the Group represents tax charges on profits arising in Egypt Jordan and Sudan.
The significant profits arising within the Group subject to corporate income tax are generated from the Egyptian operations and subject to 22.5% 2016 22.5% tax rate.
The reconciliation of effective income tax rate has been performed using this rate.
2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Profit before tax 558430 388538 Profit before tax multiplied by rate of corporation tax in Egypt of 22.5% 2016 22.5% 125647 87421 Effect of tax rate in Jersey of 0% 2016 0% 9558 2210 Effect of tax rates in Jordan and Sudan of 20% and 15% respectively 2016 20% and 15% 609 452 Tax effect of Change in unrecognized deferred tax assets 703 303 Deferred tax arising on undistributed reserves 19808 18876 Reduction in tax rate on deferred tax balances 10240 8940 Nondeductible expenses for tax purposes  employee profit share Nondeductible expenses for tax purposes  other 9354 8742 Tax expense recognised in profit or loss 174701 121620 Deferred tax Deferred tax relates to the following 2017 2016 Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities EGP000 EGP000 EGP000 EGP000 Property plant and equipment  17159  9528 Intangible assets  106651  101661 Undistributed reserves from group subsidiaries 37532  30175 Provisions and finance lease liabilities 2630 27044 Deferred tax assets liabilities before setoff 2630 161342 27044 141364 Setoff of tax   8737 8737 Net deferred tax assets liabilities  158712 18307 132627 All movements in the deferred tax assetliability in the year have been recognised in the profit or loss account.
Deferred tax liabilities and assets have been calculated based on the enacted tax rate at 31 December 2017 for the country the liabilities and assets has arisen.
The enacted tax rate in Egypt is 22.5% 2016 22.5% Jordan 20% 2016 20% and Sudan 15% 2016 15%.
Undistributed reserves from group subsidiaries IDH annual re Por t 2017 96 The Groups dividend policy is to distribute any excess cash after taking into consideration all business cash requirements and potential acquisition considerations.
The expectation is to distribute profits held within subsidiaries of the Group in the near foreseeable future.
During 2015 the Egyptian Government imposed a tax on dividends at a rate of 5% of dividends distributed from Egyptian entities.
As a result a deferred tax liability has been recorded for the future tax expected to be incurred from undistributed reserves held within the Group which will be taxed under the new legislation imposed and were as follows
EGP000
Al Mokhtabar Company for Medical Labs 13517 11378 Alborg Laboratory Company 17507 11490 Integrated Medical Analysis Company 2582 2192 Molecular Diagnostic Center 317 1095 Golden Care for Medical Services  677 Medical Genetics Center 47 189 Al Makhbariyoun Al Arab Group 3562 3154 37532 30175 Unrecognized deferred tax assets The following deferred tax assets were not recognized due to the uncertainty that those items will have a future tax benefit 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Impairment of trade receivables Note 16 21784 19154 Impairment of other receivables Note 16 8069 8068 Provision for legal claims Note 22 2685 2191 32538 29413 Unrecognized deferred tax asset 7321 6618 Earnings per share EPS Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit for the year attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
There are no dilutive effects from ordinary share and no adjustment required to weightedaverage numbers of ordinary shares.
The following table reflects the income and share data used in the basic and diluted EPS computation
EGP000
Profit attributable to ordinary equity holders of the parent for basic earnings 374023 260399 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for basic and dilutive EPS 150000 150000 Basic and dilutive earnings per share expressed in EGP 2.49 1.74 There is no dilutive effect from equity.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 97 Financial Statements Property plant and equipment Land and
EGP000
Medical electric and electronic equipment
L ease h old improvements
Fixtures fittings and vehicles
Building and
EGP000
Total
EGP000
Cost
At 1 January 2016 167612 164382 76272 31949 3576 443791
18138 18050 2740 4570 43498 Disposals 648 1994 315 342 Exchange differences 6285 15937 23646 6095 2248 54211 Transfers  4114 1198  5312 At 31 December 2016 173249 200577 118851 40442 5082 538201 Additions 27700 41275 17788 5588 50765 143116 Disposals 2697 888 477  4062 Exchange differences 10825 1547 1037 503 80 7658 Transfers  12637 At 31 December 2017 211774 237608 147351 45050 43130 684913 Depreciation and impairment At 1 January 2016 19331 52690 31088 12463 Depreciation charge for the year 2757 22045 12947 2475
1497 306 248 Exchange differences 77 2060 1280 665 At 31 December 2016 22165 75298 45009 15355 Depreciation charge for the year 33446 17278 3567  57148
2594 663 385  3642 Exchange differences At 31 December 2017 25022 105996 61606 18503  211127 Net book value At 31 December 2017 186752 131612 85745 26547 43130 473786 At 31 December 2016 151084 125279 73842 25087 5082 380374 Additions include EGP 60.8m EGP 23.7m land EGP 29.3m building related to the Groups new Headquarter purchased in April 2017.
Included in this amount are capitalised borrowing costs related to the improvement of the building of EGP 7.8m.
Calculated using capitlisation rate of 20.75% note 24.
Leased equipment The Group leases medical and electric equipment under finance lease arrangements.
This equipment is supplied to service the Groups new stateoftheart Mega Lab.
The equipment secures lease obligations see note 26 for further details.
At 31 December 2017 the net carrying amount of leased equipment was EGP 47m Dec 2016 EGP 59m.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 98 12.
Intangible assets Goodwill Brand Name Software Total EGP000 EGP000 EGP000 EGP000
At 1 January 2016 1231199 375026 32371 1638596 Additions   5039 5039 Effect of movements in exchange rates 26153 13066 791 At 31 December 2016 1257352 388092 38201 1683645 Additions 4391  6386 10777 Effect of movements in exchange rates 1290 805 18 2113 At 31 December 2017 1260453 387287 44569 1692309 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January 2016   22713 22713 Impairment Loss 1849   1849 Amortisation   4506 4506 Effect of movements in exchange rates   215 215 At 31 December 2016 1849  27434 29283 Amortisation   4774 4774 Effect of movements in exchange rates At 31 December 2017 1849  32208 34057 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1258604 387287 12361 1658252 At 31 December 2016 1255503 388092 10767 1654362 IDH annual re Por t 2017 99 Financial Statements Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives Goodwill acquired through business combinations and intangible assets with indefinite lives are allocated to the Groups CGUs as follows
EGP000
Medical Genetics Center Goodwill 1755 1755 1755 1755 Al Makhbariyoun Al Arab Group Biolab Goodwill 52086 47953 Brand name 22746 23224 74832 71177 Golden Care for Medical Services Ultralab Goodwill 8386 9417 Brand name 1156 1484 9542 10901 Alborg Laboratory Company  AlBorg Goodwill 497275 497275 Brand name 142066 142066 639341 639341 Al Mokhtabar Company for Medical Labs  AlMokhtabar Goodwill 699102 699102 Brand name 221319 221319 920421 920421 Balance at 31 December 1645891 1643595 The Group performed its annual impairment test in October 2017.
The Group considers the relationship between its mar ket capitalisation and its book value among other factors when reviewing for indicators of impairment.
Key assumptions used in value in use calculations and sensitivity to changes in assumptions IDH instructed FinCorp Investment Holding referred to hereafter as Fincorp an independent financial advisor to pre pare an independent impairment assessment of the Groups CGUs.
The assessment was carried out based on business plans provided by IDH.
These plans have been prepared based on criteria set out below Ultra Lab Bio Lab AlMokhtabar AlBorg Average annual patient growth rate from 2018 2022 7% 5% 5% 3% Average annual price per test growth rate from 2018 2022 7% 0% 11% 12% Annual revenue growth rate from 2018 15% 5% 17% 15% Average gross margin from 2018 2022 41% 36% 52% 48% Terminal value growth rate from 1 January 2023 2% 2% 3.9% 3.9% Discount rate 25.8% 15.4% 19.58% 19.58% IDH annual re Por t 2017 100 Fincorp has prepared discounted cash flow projections using the key assumptions above so as to be able to calculate the net present value of the asset in use and determine the recoverable amount.
The projected cash flows from 2018 2022 have been based on detailed forecasts prepared by management for each CGU and a terminal value thereafter.
Management have used past experience and historic trends achieved in order to determine the key growth rate and margin assumptions set out above.
The terminal value growth rate applied is not considered to exceed the average growth rate for the industry and geographic locations of the CGUs.
This recoverable amount is then compared to the carrying value of the asset as recorded in the books and records of IDH plc.
The discount rate is the pretax rate taking into account the risks of each CGU.
These risks include country risk currency risk as well as the beta factor relating to the CGU and how it performs relative to the market.
Based on the sensitivity analysis A 1% change in the WACC would result in a 57% change in the valuation of the CGU.
The conclusions from the impairment review were that there was headroom within the forecasts and therefore no impair ment is required.
Financial assets and financial liabilities The fair values of all financial assets and financial liabilities by class shown in the balance sheet are as follows
EGP000
Heldtomaturity
Short term deposits  treasury bills 685211 683721 Cash and cash equivalent 9149 95575 Trade and other receivables 174902 120873 Total financial assets 869262 900169 Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Trade and other payables 215176 211533 Put option liability 93256 102082 Finance lease liabilities 117714 151799 Loans and borrowings 60763 Total financial liabilities 486909 465414 Total financial instruments 382353 434755 The fair values of all of the Groups financial instruments are the same as their carrying values.
All financial instruments are deemed Level 2.
Financial instruments risk management objectives and policies The Groups principal financial liabilities are trade and other payables put option liability and finance lease liabilities.
The
Groups principal financial assets include trade and other receivables and cash and shortterm deposits that derive directly from its operations.
The Group is exposed to market risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management program focuses on the unpredictability of markets and seeks to minimize potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
The
Groups senior management oversees the management of these risks.
The Board of Directors reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks which are summarised below.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 101 Financial Statements The board provides written principles for overall risk management as well as written policies covering specific areas such as foreign exchange risk interest rate risk and credit risk use of derivative financial instruments and nonderivative financial instruments and investment of excess liquidity.
Market risk Market risk is the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in market prices.
Market risk comprises three types of risk interest rate risk currency risk and other price risk such as equity price risk and commodity risk.
Financial instruments affected by market risk include loans and borrowings and deposits.
The sensitivity analyses in the following sections relate to the position as at 31 December in 2017 and 2016.
The sensitivity analyses have been prepared on the basis that the amount of net debt the ratio of fixed to floating interest rates of the debt and the proportion of financial instruments in foreign currencies are all constant.
The analyses exclude the impact of movements in market variables on the carrying values of pension and other post retirement obligations provisions and the nonfinancial assets and liabilities of foreign operations.
The sensitivity of the relevant statement of profit or loss item is the effect of the assumed changes in respective market risks.
This is based on the financial assets and financial liabilities held at 31 December 2017 and 2016.
The sensitivity of equity is calculated by considering the effect of any associated cash flow hedges and hedges of a net investment in a foreign subsidiary at 31 December 2017 for the effects of the assumed changes of the underlying risk.
Interest rate risk The Group adopts a policy of ensuring that between 50 and 55% of this interest rate risk exposure is at a fixed rate.
This is achieved partially by entering into fixedrate instrument and partly by borrowing at the floating rate.
Exposure to interest rate risk The interest rate profile of the Groups interestbearing financial instruments as reported to the management of the group is as follow
EGP000
Fixedrate instruments Finance lease liabilities note 26 117714 151799 Variablerate instruments 60763 Loan and borrowings note 24 The Group does not account for any fixedrate financial liabilities at FVTPL.
Therefore a change in interest rates at the reporting date would not affect profit or loss.
Cash flow sensitivity analysis for variablerate instruments A reasonable possible change of 100 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date would have increased decreased profit or loss by the amounts EGP 779K.
This analysis assumes that all other variables remain constant.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 102 Foreign currency risk Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of an exposure will fluctuate because of changes in foreign exchange rates.
The Group operates internationally and is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from various currency exposures primarily with respect to the US Dollar Sudanese Pound and the Jordanian Dinar.
Foreign exchange risk arises from to the Groups operating activities when revenue or expense is denominated in a foreign currency recognized assets and liabilities and net investments in foreign operations.
However the management aims to minimize open positions in foreign currencies to the extent that is necessary to conduct its activities.
Management has set up a policy to require group companies to manage their foreign exchange risk against their functional currency.
Foreign exchange risk arises when future commercial transactions or recognized assets or liabilities are denomi nated in a currency that is not the entitys functional currency.
At year end major financial assets  liabilities denominated in foreign currencies were as follows the amounts presented are shown in the foreign currencies 31Dec17 Assets Liabilities
Other
Total assets Put option
Trade payables and other liabilities
Net exposure US Dollars 11705 149 11854  7062 1660 8722 3132 Euros 66 GBP 4 JOD 216 1816 2032 3747 334 1228 5309 3277
12826 11722 24548 5316 5316 19232 31Dec16 Assets Liabilities
Other
Total assets Put option
Trade payables and other liabilities
Net exposure US Dollars 22652 203 22855 7866 2619 10485 12370 Euros 95 GBP 12 JOD 157 1692 1849 4017 1147 5164 3315 SDG 12652 7501 20153 4023 4023 16130 IDH annual re Por t 2017 103 Financial Statements The following is the exchange rates applied against EGP Average rate for the year ended US Dollar 17.68 10.15 Spot rate at the year ended 31Dec17 31Dec16 US Dollar 17.67 18.00 At 31 December 2017 if the Egyptian Pounds had weakened  strengthened by 10% against the US Dollar with all other vari ables held constant pretax profit for the year would have been increased  decreased by EGP 55m 2016 EGP 22.3m mainly as a result of foreign exchange gainslosses on translation of US dollardenominated financial assets and liabilities.
The effect on equity would have been an increasedecrease by EGP 67m due to the impact from translation of foreign subsidiaries.
At 31 December 2017 if the Egyptian Pounds had weakened  strengthened by 10% against the Jordanian Dinar with all other variables held constant pretax profit for the year would have been increased  decreased by EGP 8.2m 2016 EGP 8.4m mainly as a result of foreign exchange gainslosses on translation of JOD  denominated financial assets and liabilities.
The effect on equity would have been an increasedecrease by EGP 8m due to the impact from translation of foreign subsidiaries.
At 31 December 2017 if the Egyptian Pounds had weakened  strengthened by 10% against the Sudanese Pound with all other variables held constant pretax profit for the year would have been increased  decreased by EGP 1.7m 2016 EGP 1.8m mainly as a result of foreign exchange gainslosses on translation of SDG denominated financial assets and liabilities.
The effect on equity would have been an increasedecrease by EGP 1.1m due to the impact from translation of foreign subsidiaries.
Price risk The group does not have investments in equity securities or bonds and accordingly is not exposed to price risk related to the change in the fair value of the investments.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that a counterparty will not meet its obligations under a financial instrument or customer contract leading to a financial loss.
The Group is exposed to credit risk from its operating activities primarily trade receivables and from its financing activities including deposits with banks and financial institutions foreign exchange transactions and other financial instruments.
Credit risk is managed on a group basis except for credit risk relating to accounts receivable balances.
Each local entity is responsible for managing and analysing the credit risk for each of their new clients before standard payment and delivery terms and conditions are offered.
Credit risk arises from cash and cash equivalents derivative financial instruments and deposits with banks and financial institutions as well as credit exposures to customers including outstanding receivables and committed transactions.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 104 For banks and financial institutions the Group is only dealing with the banks which have a high independent rating and a good reputation.
Trade receivables Each business unit subject to the Groups established policy procedures and control relating to customer credit risk man agement manages customer credit risk.
Credit quality of a customer is assessed based on an individual credit limits are defined in accordance with this assessment.
Outstanding customer receivables are regularly monitored and the average general credit terms given to contract customers are 45 days.
An impairment analysis is performed at each reporting date on an individual basis for major clients.
In addition a large number of minor receivables are grouped into homogenous groups and assessed for impairment collectively.
The calcula tion is based on actual incurred historical data.
The Group does not hold collateral as security.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the carrying value of each class of financial assets disclosed in Note 16.
Cash and cash equivalents Credit risk from balances with banks and financial institutions is managed by the Groups treasury department in accord ance with the Groups policy.
Investments of surplus funds are made only with approved counterparties and within credit limits assigned to each counterparty.
Counterparty credit limits are reviewed by the Groups Board of Directors on an annual basis and may be updated throughout the year subject to approval of the Groups management.
The limits are set to minimise the concentration of risks and therefore mitigate financial loss through a counterpartys potential failure to make payments.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the carrying value of cash and cash equivalents disclosed in Note 17.
Liquidity risk The Groups objective is to maintain a balance between continuity of funding and flexibility through the use of finance leases and loans.
The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Group s financial liabilities based on contractual undiscounted payments Year ended 31 December 2017 1 year or less 1 to 5 years more than 5 years Total Obligations under finance leases 38275 128726 Put option liability 93256 Loans and borrowings 14575 38425 Trade and other payables 215176 361282 167151 Year ended 31 December 2016 1 year or less 1 to 5 years more than 5 years Total Obligations under finance leases 48373 152234 8438 Put option liability 102082 Loans and borrowings Trade and other payables 211533 361988 152234 8438 Cash flow forecasting is performed in the operating entities of the group and aggregated by group finance.
Group finance monitors rolling forecasts of the groups liquidity requirements to ensure it has sufficient cash to meet operational needs.
Such forecasting takes into consideration the groups compliance with internal financial position ratio targets and if ap plicable external regulatory or legal requirements  for example currency restrictions.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 105 Financial Statements The groups management retain cash balances in order to allow repayment of obligations in due dates without taking into account any unusual effects which it cannot be predicted such as natural disasters.
All suppliers and creditors will be repaid over a period not less 30 days from the date of the invoice or the date of the commitment.
Inventories
EGP000
EGP000
Chemicals and operating supplies 69935 51715 69935 51715 During 2017 EGP 306641k 2016 EGP 184087k was recognised as an expense for inventories carried at net realisable value.
This was recognised in cost of sales.
Trade and other receivables
EGP000
Trade receivables 139885 107193 Prepaid expenses 27353 27502 Receivables due from related parties 6441 4294 Other receivables 11000 6214 Accrued revenue 17576 3172 202255 148375 For terms and conditions relating to related party receivables refer to Note 27.
As at 31 December 2017 trade and other receivables with an initial carrying value of EGP 29852k 2016 EGP 27222k were impaired and fully provided for.
Below shows the movements in the provision for impairment of trade and other receivables 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 At 1 January 27222 25098 Charge for the year 5561 4298 Utilised 1331 Unused amounts reversed 1461 2768 Exchange differences 139 594 At 31 December 29852 27222 As at 31 December the ageing analysis of trade receivables is as follows
Total  30 days 3060 days 6190 days  90 days 2017 139885 99143 12111 6523 22109 2016 107193 54072 8450 19477 25194 IDH annual re Por t 2017 106 17.
Cash and cash equivalent
EGP000
Cash at banks and on hand 139974 426578 Shortterm deposits less than 3 months 545237 257143 685211 683721 Cash at banks earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates.
Shortterm deposits are made for varying periods of between one day and three months depending on the immediate cash requirements of the Group and earn interest at the respective shortterm deposit rates ranging from 15% 16% per annum.
Restricted cash 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Restricted cash 13226 13253 13226 13253 The cash balance related to Molecular Diagnostic Center and not available for use by the Group because the entity de consolidated starting May 2016 and control has been transferred to the liquidator.
The process of liquidation will end next year 2018 and once complete the total cash amount is expected to be returned to IDH.
Other investments 2017 2016 EGP000 EGP000 Fixed term deposits 9149 90000 Treasury bills  5575 9149 95575 The maturity date of the fixed term deposit between 912 months and the effective interest rate on the USD deposit is 2.25% 2016 on the EGP14.65%.
Fixed term deposits and treasury bills are classified as held to maturity Share capital and reserve The Companys ordinary share capital is 150000000 equivalent to EGP 1072500000.
All shares are authorised and fully paid and have a pair value of 1.
Ordinary shares Ordinary shares 31Dec17 31Dec16 In issue at beginning of the year 150000000 150000000 In issue at the end of the year 150000000 150000000 IDH annual re Por t 2017 107 Financial Statements Capital reserve The capital reserve was created when the Groups previous parent company Integrated Diagnostics Holdings LLC  IDH Caymans arranged its own acquisition by Integrated Diagnostics Holdings PLC a new legal parent.
The balances arising represent the difference between the value of the equity structure of the previous and new parent companies.
When the capital position of the parent company is rearranged the capital reserve is adjusted appropriately such that the equity balances presented in the Group accounts best reflect the underlying structure of the Groups capital base.
Legal reserves Legal reserve was formed based on the legal requirements of the Egyptian law governing the Egyptian subsidiaries.
Ac cording to the Egyptian subsidiaries article of association 5% at least of the annual net profit is set aside to from a legal reserve.
The transfer to legal reserve ceases once this reserve reaches 50% of the entitys issued capital.
If the reserve falls below the defined level then the entity is required to resume forming it by setting aside 5% of the annual net profits until it reaches 50% of the issued share capital.
Put option reserve Through acquisitions made within the Group put option arrangements have been entered into to purchase the remaining equity interests in subsidiaries from the vendors at a subsequent date.
At acquisition date an initial put option liability is recognised and a corresponding entry recognised within the put option reserve.
After initial recognition the accounting policy for put options is to recognise all changes in the carrying value of the liability within put option reserve.
When the put option is exercised by the vendors the amount recognised within the reserve will be reversed.
Translation reserve The foreign currency translation reserve is used to record exchange differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries including gains or losses arising on net investment hedges.
Distributions made and proposed
EGP000
Cash dividends on ordinary shares declared and paid US 0.14 per qualifying ordinary share 2016 US 0.06 371875 79470 371875 79470 After the balance sheet date the following dividends were proposed by the directors the dividends have not been provided for US0.16 per share 2016 0.14 per share 424080 371875 The proposed 2017 dividend on ordinary shares are subject to approval at the annual general meeting and is not recognised as a liability as at 31 December 2017.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 108 22.
Provision
Egyptian Government Training Fund for employees
Provision for legal claims
Total
EGP000
At 1 January 2017 10011 2191 12202 Provision made during the year 2003 1533 3536 Provision used during the year  39 39 Provision reversed during the year  1000 1000 At 31 December 2017 12014 2685 14699
Non Current 12014 2685 14699 Egyptian Government Training Fund for employees
Provision for legal claims
Total
EGP000
At 1 January 2016 7995 2967 10962 Provision made during the year 2016 208 2224 Provision used during the year  267 267 Provision reversed during the year  717 717 At 31 December 2016 10011 2191 12202
Non Current 10011 2191 12202 Employees training provision The provision for employees training fund have been provided for in accordance with the Egyptian law and regulations.
Legal claims provision The amount comprises the gross provision in respect of legal claims brought against the Group.
Managements opinion after taking appropriate legal advice is that the outcome of these legal claims will not give rise to any significant loss beyond the amounts provided as at 31 December 2017.
Trade and other payables
EGP000
Trade payables 126140 126069 Accrued expenses 73821 77646 Other payables 15215 7818 Put option liability 93256 102082 Accrued interest Finance lease liabilities 17237 32161 3334322 345776 The accounting policy for put options after initial recognition is to recognise all changes in the carring value of the put liability within equity.
Through the historic acquisitions of Makhbariyoun Al Arab the Group entered into separate put option arrangements to purchase the remaining equity interests from the vendors at a subsequent date.
At acquisition a put option liability has been recognised for the net present value for the exercise price of the option.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 109 Financial Statements The options are exercisable in whole from the fifth anniversary of completion of the original purchase agreement which fell due in June 2016.
The vendor has not exercised this right at 31 December 2017.
Loan and borrowings In April 2017 ALMokhtabar for medical lab one of IDH subsidiaries was granted a medium term loan amounting to EGP 110m from Commercial international bank CIB Egypt to finance the purchase of the new administrative building for the group.
As at 31 December 2017 only EGP 53m had been drawn down from the total facility available.
The loan contains the following financial covenants which if breached will mean the loan is repayable on demand The financial leverage shall not exceed the following percentages
Financial leverage total liabilities divided by net equity The debt service ratios DSR shall not be less than 1.
Debt service ratios cash operating profit after tax plus Depreciation for the financial year less annual mainte nance on machinery and equipment divided by total distributions plus accrued interest and loan instalments.
The current ratios shall not be less than 1.
Current ratios Current assets divided current liabilities.
The capital expansions in AL Mokhtabar company shall not exceed EGP 20m per year other than year 2017which includes in addition the value of the building financed by EGP 110m loan facility.
This condition is valid throughout the term of the loan.
The agreement includes other nonfinancial covenants which relate to the impact of material events on the Company and the consequential ability to repay the loan.
The terms and conditions of outstanding loans are as follows currency
Maturity 31 Dec 17 CIB  BANK EGP CBE corridor rate1% Apr22 53000 Amount held as Current liability 14575 Non current liability Longterm financial obligations
EGP000
Finance lease liabilities see note 26 100478 119638 100478 119638 IDH annual re Por t 2017 110 26.
Commitments and contingencies Operating lease commitments Noncancellable operating lease rentals are payable as follows
EGP000
Less than one year 50072 39805 Between one and five years 178938 139466 More than five years 101343 81868 330353 261139 The Group lease certain branches for the operation of the business.
During the year EGP 51478K was recognised as an expense in the income statement in respect of operating leases 2016 EGP 32234K.
Finance lease The Group has finance leases for various items of plant and machinery.
Future minimum lease payments under finance leases and hire purchase contracts together with the present value of the net minimum lease payments are as follows
EGP000
Finance lease liability  laboratory equipment 114727 74023 Finance lease liability  other 2987 461 117714 151799 Finance lease liabilities for the laboratory equipment are payable as follows Minimum lease payments Interest Principal At 31 December 2017
EGP000
EGP000
Less than one year 35549 19512 16037 Between one and five years 126938 28248 98690 More than five years 162487 47760 114727 Minimum lease payments Interest Principal At 31 December 2016
EGP000
EGP000
Less than one year 47834 16212 31622 Between one and five years 150971 38628 112343 More than five years 8438 2407 6031 207243 57247 149996 The Group entered into 2 significant agreements during the prior year ended 31 December 2015 to service the Groups new stateoftheart Mega Lab. term of the agreement.
The agreement periods are 5 and 8 years which is deemed to reflect the useful life of the equipment.
If the minimum annual commitment payments are met over the agreement period ownership of the equipment supplied will legally transfer to the IDH.
Management fully expect to be able to fulfil the minimum payments and the basis of treating the proportion of payments relating to the supply of equipment as a finance lease.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 111 Financial Statements Management have performed a fair value exercise in order to allocate payments between the different elements of the ar rangements and identify the implicit interest rate of the finance lease.
Due to the difficulty in reliably splitting the payments for the supply of medical equipment from the total payments made the finance asset and liability has been recognised at an amount equal to the fair value of the underlying equipment.
This is based on the current cost price of the equipment supplied provided by the suppliers of the agreement.
The implicit interest rate of both finance leases has been estimated to be 11.5%.
The equipment is being depreciated based on units of production method as this most closely reflects the consumption of the benefits from the equipment.
Both agreements have been judged to be US denominated due to the future minimum lease payments for the use of the equipment and corresponding finance lease liability being directly connected to the US.
Contingent liabilities There are no contingent liabilities relating to the groups transactions and commitment with banks.
Related party disclosures The significant transactions with related parties their nature volumes and balance during the period 31 December 2017 and 2016 are as follows 31Dec17 Related Party Nature of transaction Nature of relationship Transaction amount of the year
Amount due from
Life Scan S.
Expenses paid on b eh al f Affiliate 1 278 International Fertility IVF Expenses paid on behalf Affiliate 2240 6000
Hend Elshrbini Loan arrangement CEO 164483 Integrated Treatment for Kidney Diseases S.
Entity owned by Companys CEO Rental income 296 Medical Test analysis Total 6441 31Dec16 Related Party Nature of transaction Nature of relationship Transaction amount of the year
Amount due from
Life Scan S.
Expenses paid on b eh al f Affiliate  277 International Fertility IVF Expenses paid on behalf Affiliate 3760 3760 Integrated Treatment for Kidney Diseases S.
Entity owned by Companys CEO Rental income 274 Medical Test analysis Total 4090 Life Scan is a company whose shareholders include Dr.
Moamena Kamel  founder of IDH subsidiary AlMokhtabar Labs.
International Fertility IVF is a company whose shareholders include Dr.
Moamena Kamel  founder of IDH subsidiary AlMokhtabar Labs.
During the year 2017 Dr.
Hend C. granted 2 loans to IDH Cayman amounting to US 9m.
IDH Cayman for EGP 164m at the prevailing exchange rate of USEGP 18.35  17.82.
The loan was not interest bearing.
The transactions with related parties are conducted based on terms equivalent to those that prevail in arm s length transactions.
IDH annual re Por t 2017 112 Terms and conditions of transactions with related parties The transactions with the related parties are made on terms equivalent to those that prevail in arms length transactions.
Outstanding balances at the yearend are unsecured and interest free and settlement occurs in cash.
There have been no guarantees provided or received for any related party receivables or payables.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group has not recorded any impairment of receivables relating to amounts owed by related parties 2016 nil.
This assessment is undertaken each financial year through examining the financial position of the related party and the market in which the related party operates.
IDH commits up to 1% of the net aftertax profit of the subsidiaries Al Borg and Al Mokhtabar to the Moamena Kamel Foundation for Training and Skill Development.
Established in 2006 by Dr.
Moamena Kamel a Professor of Pathology at Cairo University and founder of IDH subsidiary AlMokhtabar Labs and mother to the CEO Dr.
Hend El Sherbini.
The
Foundation allocates this sum to organizations and groups in need of assistance.
The foundation deploys an integrated program and vision for the communities it helps that include economic social and healthcare development initiatives.
In
2017 EGP 3674K 2015 EGP 2740K was paid to the foundation by the IDH Group.
Compensation of key management personnel of the Group The amounts disclosed in the table are the amounts recognised as an expense during the reporting period related to key management personnel.
EGP000
EGP000
Shortterm employee benefits 32426 23085 Total compensation paid to key management personnel 32426 23085 Subsequent events Integrated Diagnostics Holdings IDH and Man Capital LLP Man Capital the investment arm of the Mansour Group jointly announced their first investment in Nigerias promising healthcare industry.
The investment will see Dynasty Group Dynasty a venture that is 51% owned by IDH partner with the International Finance Corporation IFC a member of the World Bank Group to invest in Eagle Eye EchoScan Services Limited EchoScan a leading medical diagnostics business based in Nigeria.
The transaction will see Dynasty acquire a majority stake in EchoScan and assume management control of the company while both Dynasty and the IFC will invest USD 20 million and USD 5 million respectively to expand Echo Scans na tionwide service offering footprint and quality standards.
Over the coming year Echo Scan will refurbish and upgrade existing locations as well as significantly augment its number of branches.
In February 2018 IDH transferred MUSD 2.69 to Dynasty.
Dynasty in its turn transferred MUSD 4.5 representing its con tribution in Eagle Eye Nigeria.
On 22 January 2018 the transaction completed but the accounting for the transaction has not been finalised and as such detailed the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired together with the Goodwill acquired is not available for disclosure at present.
The shareholders structure of the transaction Dynasty acquires 75.8% International Finance Corporation IFC 19.1% and 5.1% other founders.
